
°°°°Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

°°°°In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

°°°°"My cousin!"

°°°°"Yes, cousin."

°°°°"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

°°°°"Where you like."

°°°°"How do you feel?"

°°°°"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

°°°°This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

°°°°She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

°°°°That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

°°°°"What troubles you?" she said.

°°°°"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

°°°°Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

°°°°When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

°°°°"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

°°°°"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

°°°°Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

°°°°"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

°°°°"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

°°°°The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

°°°°"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

°°°°Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

°°°°"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

°°°°"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

°°°°*****

°°°°About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

°°°°VII

°°°°At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

°°°°The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

°°°°"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

°°°°"Certainly, nephew."

°°°°As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

°°°°He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

°°°°"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

°°°°"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

°°°°"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

°°°°"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

°°°°"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

°°°°"--is threatened with insolvency--"

°°°°"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

°°°°"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

°°°°"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

°°°°"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

°°°°"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

°°°°"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

°°°°"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

°°°°"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

°°°°"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

°°°°"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

°°°°Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

°°°°"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

°°°°"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

°°°°"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

°°°°"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Exactly so," said the president.

°°°°"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

°°°°"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

°°°°"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

°°°°"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

°°°°"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

°°°°"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

°°°°"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

°°°°"Bentham, an Englishman.'

°°°°"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

°°°°"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

°°°°"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

°°°°"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

°°°°"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

°°°°"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

°°°°"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

°°°°"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

°°°°"That's very true."

°°°°"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

°°°°"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

°°°°"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

°°°°"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

°°°°A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

°°°°"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

°°°°He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

°°°°"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

°°°°"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

°°°°These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

°°°°"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

°°°°"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

°°°°The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

°°°°"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

°°°°She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

°°°°"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

°°°°"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

°°°°"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

°°°°"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

°°°°"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

°°°°"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

°°°°"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

°°°°"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

°°°°"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

°°°°The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

°°°°"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

°°°°"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

°°°°"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

°°°°When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

°°°°"Are not they fuming, hein?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

°°°°"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

°°°°In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

°°°°When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

°°°°"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

°°°°So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

°°°°"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

°°°°Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

°°°°"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

°°°°"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

°°°°The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

°°°°"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

°°°°"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

°°°°"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

°°°°"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

°°°°"I didn't know where."

°°°°"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

°°°°"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

°°°°"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

°°°°"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

°°°°The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

°°°°VIII

°°°°"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

°°°°"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

°°°°"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

°°°°"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

°°°°These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

°°°°She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

°°°°"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

°°°°My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

°°°°great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

°°°°foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

°°°°fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

°°°°when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

°°°°yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

°°°°plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

°°°°If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

°°°°that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

°°°°fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

°°°°my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

°°°°me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

°°°°so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

°°°°the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

°°°°bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

°°°°killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

°°°°there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

°°°°ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

°°°°I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

°°°°last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

°°°°enterprise.

°°°°"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

°°°°She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

°°°°I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

°°°°hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

°°°°not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

°°°°even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

°°°°have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

°°°°to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

°°°°world like other men who have started young without a sou and

°°°°brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

°°°°faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

°°°°another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

°°°°so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

°°°°my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

°°°°life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

°°°°Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

°°°°young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

°°°°caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

°°°°family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

°°°°were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

°°°°Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

°°°°grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

°°°°with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

°°°°your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

°°°°expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

°°°°accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

°°°°Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

°°°°When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

°°°°ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

°°°°hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

°°°°your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

°°°°spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

°°°°cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

°°°°ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

°°°°depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

°°°°of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

°°°°poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

°°°°see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

°°°°life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

°°°°can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

°°°°necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

°°°°have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

°°°°face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

°°°°seems to me--

°°°°"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

°°°°Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

°°°°Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

°°°°"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

°°°°Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

°°°°Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

°°°°My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

°°°°friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

°°°°of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

°°°°settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

°°°°can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

°°°°have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

°°°°have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

°°°°and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

°°°°can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

°°°°horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

°°°°keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

°°°°the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

°°°°will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

°°°°these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

°°°°nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

°°°°give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

°°°°his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

°°°°travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

°°°°them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

°°°°do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

°°°°seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

°°°°British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

°°°°pay him--

°°°°"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

°°°°Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

°°°°"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

°°°°"I have read those letters."

°°°°Charles colored.

°°°°"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

°°°°"And what?" asked Charles.

°°°°"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

°°°°"My dear cousin--"

°°°°"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

°°°°Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

°°°°"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

°°°°Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

°°°°As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

°°°°"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

°°°°Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

°°°°"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

°°°°"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

°°°°"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

°°°°"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

°°°°Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

°°°°"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

°°°°"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

°°°°"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

°°°°"But he owns Froidfond."

°°°°"What is Froidfond worth?"

°°°°"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

°°°°"Nothing but a poor farm!"

°°°°"He has vineyards and fields."

°°°°"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

°°°°"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

°°°°Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

°°°°Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

°°°°It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

°°°°"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

°°°°"Nothing," answered the old man.

°°°°Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

°°°°"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

°°°°"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

°°°°"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

°°°°"Say /was/ worth--"

°°°°"Where the devil have they got any?"

°°°°"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

°°°°"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

°°°°"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

°°°°"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

°°°°"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

°°°°Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

°°°°"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

°°°°The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

°°°°"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

°°°°Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

°°°°"Dans les gardes francaises

°°°°J'avais un bon papa."

°°°°Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

°°°°"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

°°°°He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

°°°°"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

°°°°"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

°°°°"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

°°°°"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

°°°°IX

°°°°The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

°°°°For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

°°°°After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

°°°°Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

°°°°"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

°°°°"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

°°°°"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

°°°°"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

°°°°"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

°°°°"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

°°°°"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

°°°°"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

°°°°"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

°°°°"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

°°°°The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

°°°°"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

°°°°Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

°°°°"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

°°°°He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

°°°°"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

°°°°"I must," he said, bowing his head.

°°°°For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

°°°°"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

°°°°"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

°°°°When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

°°°°"Do you love me?" she said.

°°°°"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

°°°°"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

°°°°She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

°°°°"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

°°°°"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

°°°°The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

°°°°"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

°°°°"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

°°°°"Then my heart will be always there."

°°°°"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

°°°°No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

°°°°"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

°°°°At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

°°°°"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

°°°°"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

°°°°"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

°°°°Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

°°°°Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

°°°°"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

°°°°Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

°°°°In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

°°°°Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

°°°°In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

°°°°"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

°°°°Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

°°°°"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

°°°°"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

°°°°The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

°°°°But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

°°°°As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

°°°°"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

°°°°"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

°°°°"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

°°°°In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

°°°°*****

°°°°In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

°°°°"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

°°°°Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

°°°°"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

°°°°X

°°°°Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

°°°°"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

°°°°The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

°°°°"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

°°°°"Where could we have got the money?"

°°°°"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

°°°°"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

°°°°Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

°°°°"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

°°°°There was a moment's silence.

°°°°"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

°°°°"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

°°°°"I'm always gay,--

°°°°"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

°°°°Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

°°°°he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

°°°°Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

°°°°"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

°°°°The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

°°°°When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

°°°°"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

°°°°"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

°°°°"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

°°°°"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

°°°°"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

°°°°"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur."

°°°°"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

°°°°"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

°°°°Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

°°°°"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

°°°°"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

°°°°"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

°°°°"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

°°°°The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

°°°°"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

°°°°At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

°°°°"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

°°°°"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

°°°°The two women were dumb.

°°°°"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

°°°°Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

°°°°"I have not got /my/ gold."

°°°°"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

°°°°"No, I have not got it."

°°°°"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

°°°°"No."

°°°°"By the shears of my father!"

°°°°Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

°°°°"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

°°°°Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

°°°°"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

°°°°Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

°°°°"Yes, father."

°°°°She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

°°°°"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

°°°°"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

°°°°Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

°°°°"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

°°°°"What use?"

°°°°"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

°°°°"And this is mine."

°°°°"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

°°°°"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

°°°°"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

°°°°She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

°°°°"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

°°°°Eugenie was silent and impassive.

°°°°"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

°°°°"You are a child."

°°°°"Of age."

°°°°Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

°°°°He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

°°°°Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

°°°°"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

°°°°Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

°°°°"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

°°°°"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

°°°°"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

°°°°"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

°°°°Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

°°°°"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

°°°°"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

°°°°"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

°°°°"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

°°°°"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

°°°°"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

°°°°He looked fixedly at his wife.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

°°°°"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

°°°°"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

°°°°"I will ask God to punish only me."

°°°°"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

°°°°"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

°°°°"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

°°°°"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

°°°°*****

°°°°Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

°°°°"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

°°°°"It is grease I'm trying out."

°°°°"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

°°°°The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

°°°°"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

°°°°At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

°°°°"How is Madame Grandet?"

°°°°"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

°°°°"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

°°°°They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

°°°°"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

°°°°When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

°°°°"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

°°°°"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

°°°°XI

°°°°For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

°°°°"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

°°°°"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

°°°°Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

°°°°One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

°°°°"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

°°°°"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

°°°°"All" meant "him."

°°°°"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

°°°°"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

°°°°Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

°°°°"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

°°°°Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

°°°°When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

°°°°"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

°°°°At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

°°°°"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

°°°°"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

°°°°"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

°°°°On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

°°°°"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

°°°°"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

°°°°"What do you mean?"

°°°°"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

°°°°"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

°°°°These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

°°°°"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

°°°°"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

°°°°"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

°°°°"She has given away her gold!"

°°°°"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

°°°°"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

°°°°"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

°°°°"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

°°°°"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

°°°°"How much?"

°°°°"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

°°°°"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

°°°°After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

°°°°"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

°°°°"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

°°°°"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

°°°°"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

°°°°"She has not a month to live."

°°°°Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

°°°°"What can be done?"

°°°°"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

°°°°"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

°°°°"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

°°°°"The scoundrels!"

°°°°"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

°°°°"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

°°°°He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

°°°°"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

°°°°"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

°°°°But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

°°°°"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

°°°°He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

°°°°"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

°°°°"O God, have pity upon us!"

°°°°The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

°°°°"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

°°°°Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

°°°°"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

°°°°"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

°°°°"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

°°°°"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

°°°°"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

°°°°Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

°°°°"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

°°°°"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

°°°°The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

°°°°"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

°°°°"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

°°°°"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

°°°°Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

°°°°"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

°°°°Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

°°°°"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

°°°°"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

°°°°"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

°°°°"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

°°°°XII

°°°°On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

°°°°"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

°°°°"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

°°°°"Oh! father--"

°°°°"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

°°°°"What is it you wish me to do?"

°°°°"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

°°°°"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

°°°°"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

°°°°"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

°°°°"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

°°°°Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

°°°°"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

°°°°"I will do all you wish, father."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

°°°°"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

°°°°He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

°°°°"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

°°°°The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

°°°°"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

°°°°"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

°°°°"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

°°°°Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

°°°°*****

°°°°Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

°°°°At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

°°°°"Yes, my father," she would answer.

°°°°"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

°°°°Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

°°°°"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

°°°°When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

°°°°"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

°°°°"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

°°°°*****

°°°°Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

°°°°"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

°°°°The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

°°°°"Nanon, we are alone--"

°°°°"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

°°°°"The ocean is between us," she said.

°°°°While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

°°°°"Fast colors!" said the draper.

°°°°"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

°°°°"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

°°°°When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

°°°°At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

°°°°It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

°°°°"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

°°°°"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

°°°°"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

°°°°"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

°°°°Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

°°°°Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

°°°°"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

°°°°"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

°°°°XIII

°°°°While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

°°°°With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

°°°°Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

°°°°Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

°°°°"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

°°°°Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

°°°°Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

°°°°"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

°°°°*****

°°°°At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

°°°°"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

°°°°The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

°°°°"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

°°°°Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

°°°°"Read it, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

°°°°Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

°°°°My dear Cousin,--

°°°°"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

°°°°You--

°°°°"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

°°°°"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

°°°°"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

°°°°She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

°°°°My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

°°°°success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

°°°°rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

°°°°together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

°°°°des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

°°°°we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

°°°°Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

°°°°the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

°°°°be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

°°°°life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

°°°°To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

°°°°dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

°°°°realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

°°°°from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

°°°°forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

°°°°long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

°°°°Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

°°°°--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

°°°°forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

°°°°night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

°°°°to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

°°°°heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

°°°°Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

°°°°sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

°°°°deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

°°°°all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

°°°°present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

°°°°all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

°°°°Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

°°°°your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

°°°°will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

°°°°education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

°°°°with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

°°°°myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

°°°°to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

°°°°think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

°°°°be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

°°°°right to understand it and to judge it.

°°°°I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

°°°°francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

°°°°Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

°°°°me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

°°°°Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

°°°°dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

°°°°marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

°°°°advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

°°°°are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

°°°°my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

°°°°have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

°°°°year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

°°°°proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

°°°°You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

°°°°heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

°°°°years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

°°°°but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

°°°°remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

°°°°which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

°°°°and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

°°°°you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

°°°°convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

°°°°putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

°°°°of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

°°°°ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

°°°°simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

°°°°Your devoted cousin,

°°°°Charles.

°°°°"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

°°°°P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

°°°°thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

°°°°capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

°°°°am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

°°°°which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

°°°°gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

°°°°hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

°°°°"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

°°°°Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

°°°°"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

°°°°Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

°°°°This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

°°°°"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

°°°°"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

°°°°"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

°°°°"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

°°°°"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

°°°°At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

°°°°"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

°°°°"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

°°°°"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

°°°°"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

°°°°Eugenie read the following letter:--

°°°°My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

°°°°has been in Paris about a month--

°°°°"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

°°°°I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

°°°°Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

°°°°the banns are published--

°°°°"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

°°°°The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

°°°°will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

°°°°tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

°°°°business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

°°°°keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

°°°°fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

°°°°devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

°°°°/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

°°°°the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

°°°°francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

°°°°there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

°°°°creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

°°°°I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

°°°°Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

°°°°Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

°°°°for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

°°°°have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

°°°°happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

°°°°matter before you have spoken to her about it--

°°°°There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

°°°°"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

°°°°"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

°°°°"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

°°°°"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

°°°°"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

°°°°The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

°°°°"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

°°°°There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

°°°°"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

°°°°"A love game," said the notary.

°°°°Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

°°°°"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

°°°°"I am ready for all things," said the president.

°°°°"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

°°°°The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

°°°°"I will be your slave!" he said.

°°°°"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

°°°°The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

°°°°When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

°°°°The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

°°°°The president gave Charles the following letter:--

°°°°My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

°°°°place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

°°°°also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

°°°°sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

°°°°I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

°°°°Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

°°°°mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

°°°°I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

°°°°not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

°°°°according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

°°°°our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

°°°°your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

°°°°in your cousin

°°°°Eugenie.

°°°°The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

°°°°"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

°°°°"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

°°°°Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

°°°°"Seventeen mil--"

°°°°"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

°°°°"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

°°°°"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

°°°°"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

°°°°"In money?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

°°°°"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

°°°°"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

°°°°The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

°°°°"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

°°°°The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

°°°°"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

°°°°"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

°°°°Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

°°°°God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

°°°°The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

°°°°Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

°°°°End





°°°°Colonel Chabert

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage and Clara Bell

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Madame la Comtesse Ida de Bocarme nee du Chasteler.

°°°°COLONEL CHABERT

°°°°"HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!"

°°°°This exclamation was made by a lawyer's clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper--a messenger in fact--who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread with a hearty appetite. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

°°°°"Come, Simonnin, don't play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!" said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

°°°°The lawyer's messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and /billets-doux/ keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

°°°°"If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?" asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

°°°°And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

°°°°"What trick can we play that cove?" said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

°°°°Then he went on improvising:

°°°°"/But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth/--(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned-- you, as you engross it!)--/when he resumed the reins of Government, understood/--(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)--/the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!/--(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)--/and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents/--('numerous' is flattering, and ought to please the Bench)--/all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in/--Stop," said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, "that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.--Well," he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, "well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!"

°°°°And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating--"/given in/--Are you ready?"

°°°°"Yes," cried the three writers.

°°°°It all went all together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

°°°°"/Given in/--Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our /i/'s and cross our /t/'s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages."

°°°°"By Jingo!" repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

°°°°"What! have you written /by Jingo/?" cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

°°°°"Why, yes," said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor's copy, "he has written, '/We must dot our i's/' and spelt it /by Gingo/!"

°°°°All the clerks shouted with laughter.

°°°°"Why! Monsieur Hure, you take 'By Jingo' for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!" exclaimed Simonnin.

°°°°"Scratch it cleanly out," said the head clerk. "If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the 'Shoulder arms!' of the law."

°°°°"/Given in--in/?" asked Godeschal.--"Tell me when, Boucard."

°°°°"June 1814," replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

°°°°A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, "Come in!"

°°°°Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers--/broutilles/ (odds and ends) in French law jargon--and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

°°°°The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk's cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk's table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

°°°°The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,--all the glory of a lawyer's office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine --neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of /remainders/, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to /Chlet/)--a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

°°°°So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients--something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities--an attorney's office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

°°°°But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man's soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

°°°°"Where is my penknife?"

°°°°"I am eating my breakfast."

°°°°"You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen!"

°°°°These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

°°°°"Monsieur, is your master at home?"

°°°°The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, "I am deaf."

°°°°"What do you want, sir?" asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

°°°°"This is the fifth time I have called," replied the victim. "I wish to speak to M. Derville."

°°°°"On business?"

°°°°"Yes, but I can explain it to no one but--"

°°°°"M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to----"

°°°°The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers' clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the old man, "as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up."

°°°°Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

°°°°"It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning." The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in "parties," went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

°°°°"I will come again to-night," said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

°°°°The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

°°°°"What do you think of that for a cracked pot?" said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

°°°°"He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again," said a clerk.

°°°°"He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay," said the head clerk.

°°°°"No, he is a retired concierge," said Godeschal.

°°°°"I bet you he is a nobleman," cried Boucard.

°°°°"I bet you he has been a porter," retorted Godeschal. "Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body's. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch."

°°°°"He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch," cried Desroches. "It has been known!"

°°°°"No," Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, "I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic."

°°°°"I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Done with you," answered Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur! Monsieur!" shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

°°°°"What are you at now, Simonnin?" asked Boucard.

°°°°"I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know."

°°°°All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

°°°°"What can we say to him?" cried Godeschal.

°°°°"Leave it to me," replied Boucard.

°°°°The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Boucard, "will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know----"

°°°°"Chabert."

°°°°"The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?" asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

°°°°"The same, monsieur," replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

°°°°"Whew!"

°°°°"Done brown!"

°°°°"Poof!"

°°°°"Oh!"

°°°°"Ah!"

°°°°"Boum!"

°°°°"The old rogue!"

°°°°"Ting-a-ring-ting!"

°°°°"Sold again!"

°°°°"Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying," said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

°°°°There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopeia of the language would fail to represent.

°°°°"Which theatre shall we go to?"

°°°°"To the opera," cried the head clerk.

°°°°"In the first place," said Godeschal, "I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui."

°°°°"Madame Saqui is not the play."

°°°°"What is a play?" replied Godeschal. "First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen--"

°°°°"But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!" cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

°°°°"To be seen for money," Godeschal added.

°°°°"But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective," said Desroches.

°°°°"But do listen to me!"

°°°°"You are talking nonsense, my dear boy," said Boucard.

°°°°"Is Curtius' a play?" said Godeschal.

°°°°"No," said the head clerk, "it is a collection of figures--but it is a spectacle."

°°°°"I bet you a hundred francs to a sou," Godeschal resumed, "that Curtius' Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy."

°°°°"And so on, and so forth!" said Simonnin.

°°°°"You mind I don't box your ears!" said Godeschal.

°°°°The clerk shrugged their shoulders.

°°°°"Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us," he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. "On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients."

°°°°"Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow," said Boucard. "To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!"

°°°°"If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?" said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal's.

°°°°"Since nothing is settled," said Boucard, "let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in 'Nero.' Simonnin may go to the pit."

°°°°And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

°°°°"/Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen/ (in words)," said Godeschal. "Ready?"

°°°°"Yes," replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

°°°°"/And we hope that my lords on the Bench/," the extemporizing clerk went on. "Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself."

°°°°"Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines," said Boucard.

°°°°"/We hope/," Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, "/that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth/----"

°°°°"Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn't you like a glass of water?" said the little messenger.

°°°°"That imp of a boy!" said Boucard. "Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides."

°°°°"/Here set forth/," Godeschal went on. "Add /in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse/ (at full length) /de Grandlieu/."

°°°°"What!" cried the chief, "are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor--a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of 'inasmuch,' and go to the Courts myself."

°°°°This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, "Those were good times."

°°°°At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maitre Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

°°°°Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at finding the head clerk busily arranging in a convenient order on his master's dining-room table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take a seat, which the client did.

°°°°"On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you named such an hour for an interview," said the old man, with the forced mirth of a ruined man, who does his best to smile.

°°°°"The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too," replied the man, going on with his work. "M. Derville chooses this hour for studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect is freer at this hour--the only time when he can have the silence and quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case, read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business, then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money."

°°°°As he listened to this explanation, the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an expression so bereft of intelligence, that the clerk, after looking at him, thought no more about him.

°°°°A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers. The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius' collection to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This quiescence would not have been a subject for astonishment if it had not completed the supernatural aspect of the man's whole person. The old soldier was dry and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, if I may use such a vulgar expression, was as the face of the dead. Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

°°°°Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head was due to some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by Rembrandt, without a frame. The brim of the hat which covered the old man's brow cast a black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This grotesque effect, though natural, threw into relief by contrast the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a certain look of melancholy madness, and the deteriorating symptoms characteristic of senility, giving the face an indescribably ill- starred look which no human words could render.

°°°°But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had worn into this face, as drops of water from the sky falling on fine marble at last destroy its beauty. A physician, an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama at the sight of its sublime horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques which artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of the lithographic stone while chatting with a friend.

°°°°On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful reverie in silence and at night. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow to the young man; the leather lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was, "His intelligence must have escaped through that cut."

°°°°"If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!" thought Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Derville, "to whom have I the honor of speaking?"

°°°°"To Colonel Chabert."

°°°°"Which?"

°°°°"He who was killed at Eylau," replied the old man.

°°°°On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each other, as much as to say, "He is mad."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Colonel went on, "I wish to confide to you the secret of my position."

°°°°A thing worthy of note is the natural intrepidity of lawyers. Whether from the habit of receiving a great many persons, or from the deep sense of the protection conferred on them by the law, or from confidence in their missions, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing, like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

°°°°"During the day, sir," said the attorney, "I am not so miserly of my time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise. Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I may consider necessary. Speak."

°°°°Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he turned over the bundles of papers.

°°°°"You know, perhaps," said the dead man, "that I commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat's famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is a historical fact, recorded in /Victoires et Conquetes/, where it is related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor, after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the enemy's cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers, perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse. Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men, fifteen hundred of them--there might have been more! My death was announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution --for he was fond of me, was the master--wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and bring me into Hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, for he was very busy, 'Go and see whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.' These rascally saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse, and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was probably made out in accordance with the rules of military jurisprudence."

°°°°As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and relate a story so probable though so strange, the young lawyer ceased fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

°°°°"Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud," he said, interrupting the speaker, "Colonel Chabert's widow?"

°°°°"My wife--yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the custom in time of the war, and thrown into the common grave by the men ordered to bury the dead?

°°°°"Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded. Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a ball.

°°°°"When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. the little air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room. I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die. This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard--or I thought I heard, I will assert nothing--groans from the world of dead among whom I was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very indistinct, in spite of my impressions of far more acute suffering I was fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

°°°°"But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such as I have never known elsewhere--literally, the silence of the grave. At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would seem that, thanks to the carelessness and the haste with which we had been pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules! A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unhoped-for help, I must have perished. But with a fury you may imagine, I began to work my way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which had no doubt been thrown over us--I say us, as if there had been others living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms. This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw daylight, but through snow!

°°°°"At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse, who knows, had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow. However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole, where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the moment for saying, 'Respect courage in misfortune!' In short, monsieur, after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy, of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them they got me to their poor hovel.

°°°°"It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy--allow me to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which, from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

°°°°"You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave as naked as I came from my mother's; so that six months afterwards, when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert, and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man, named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

°°°°"Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence, nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond, begging my bread, treated as a madman when I have told my story, without ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert. For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample reason for shutting a man up.

°°°°"At the end of two years' detention, which I was compelled to submit to, after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, 'Here is a poor man who thinks he is Colonel Chabert' to people who would reply, 'Poor fellow!' I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh, monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I----"

°°°°Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study, which Derville respected.

°°°°"One fine day," his visitor resumed, "one spring day, they gave me the key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me. If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name, no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field- Marshal in Austria or Russia. Who knows?"

°°°°"Monsieur," said the attorney, "you have upset all my ideas. I feel as if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you."

°°°°"You are the only person," said the Colonel, with a melancholy look, "who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary documents to begin my lawsuit--"

°°°°"What lawsuit?" said the attorney, who had forgotten his client's painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

°°°°"Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a son. When I tell lawyers these things--men of sense; when I propose-- I, a beggar--to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I--a dead man--bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold politeness, which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler or a madman--it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts, under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!"

°°°°"Pray resume your narrative," said Derville.

°°°°" 'Pray resume it!' " cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer's hand. "That is the first polite word I have heard since----"

°°°°The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing and unutterable eloquence that lies in the eyes, in a gesture, even in silence, entirely convinced Derville, and touched him deeply.

°°°°"Listen, monsieur," said he; "I have this evening won three hundred francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his fortune to make. Proceed."

°°°°The Colonel, as he called himself, sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps it was in obedience to the inexplicable feeling, the latent germ in every man's heart, to which we owe the experiments of alchemists, the passion for glory, the discoveries of astronomy and of physics, everything which prompts man to expand his being by multiplying himself through deeds or ideas. In his mind the /Ego/ was now but a secondary object, just as the vanity of success or the pleasures of winning become dearer to the gambler than the object he has at stake. The young lawyer's words were as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer's office the ten gold pieces which had so long been refused him by so many people, and in so many ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured. There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us, it is like a thunderbolt; they burn us. The poor man's gratitude was too great to find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found his voice.

°°°°"Where was I?" said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier, and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in France.

°°°°"At Stuttgart. You were out of prison," said Derville.

°°°°"You know my wife?" asked the Colonel.

°°°°"Yes," said Derville, with a bow.

°°°°"What is she like?"

°°°°"Still quite charming."

°°°°The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation that is characteristic of men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, with a sort of cheerfulness--for he breathed again, the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave; he had just melted a covering of snow less easily thawed than that which had once before frozen his head; and he drew a deep breath, as if he had just escaped from a dungeon--"Monsieur, if I had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a /sans-culotte/. I was more like an Esquimaux than a Frenchman--I, who had formerly been considered one of the smartest of fops in 1799!--I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

°°°°"Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier's name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; but though I recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin's mouth opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known. It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was, then, unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former friends!

°°°°"I had once saved Boutin's life, but it was only the repayment of a debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but, like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I recalled them to his mind his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me, were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered triumphantly.

°°°°"He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon's first abdication. That news was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

°°°°"We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland, Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies. Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert. That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage, whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose only protector is the Almighty.--Nay, I am wrong! I had a father--the Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see /his Chabert/, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my wife's silence!

°°°°"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar. Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me. I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

°°°°"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu. There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me! Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

°°°°"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur, knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury, "when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

°°°°"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness; well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not know what will become of me!"

°°°°With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

°°°°"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg, it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

°°°°"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I fail, I can die--but not alone."

°°°°The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy, lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

°°°°"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

°°°°"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

°°°°"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to recover; you are rich."

°°°°This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

°°°°"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

°°°°The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville, and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

°°°°"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

°°°°The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs, and held a light for him.

°°°°"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the day."

°°°°When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

°°°°"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.

°°°°About three months after this interview, at night, in Derville's room, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville's account to his eccentric client, came to consult the attorney on a serious matter, and began by begging him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

°°°°"Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?" said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought up the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

°°°°"I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair," replied Derville. "My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty- five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism."

°°°°As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers his head clerk had laid out for him. His eye was struck by the appearance of the stamps--long, square, and triangular, in red and blue ink, which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

°°°°"Ah ha!" said he with a laugh, "here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!"

°°°°He took up the letter and opened it; but he could not read it; it was written in German.

°°°°"Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately," said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

°°°°The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, all perfectly regular and duly witnessed, and legally stamped to serve as evidence in law. He also informed him that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

°°°°"This looks like business," cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. "But look here, my boy," he went on, addressing the notary, "I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?"

°°°°"We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin," interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

°°°°"Well, was it not that ill-used man who has just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients' money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert's estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud."

°°°°"Yes," said Crottat. "It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollections, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at the time of his decease, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury."

°°°°"So that Comte Chabert's personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?"

°°°°"Consequently so it was, old fellow!" said Crottat. "You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other."

°°°°Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint- Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were rather too deep for cab wheels. Looking about him on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, "Vergniaud, dairyman." To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, all painted in white. The gate was open, and no doubt remained open all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels built in the neighborhood of Paris, which are like nothing else, not even the most wretched dwellings in the country, of which they have all the poverty without their poetry.

°°°°Indeed, in the midst of the fields, even a hovel may have a certain grace derived from the pure air, the verdure, the open country--a hill, a serpentine road, vineyards, quickset hedges, moss-grown thatch and rural implements; but poverty in Paris gains dignity only by horror. Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found a legitimate use; they had been collected from the various demolitions which are going on every day in Paris. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, "Fancy Goods." The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed to be the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil, and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall of this frail construction, which seemed rather more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred their numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes, the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough deal boards nailed so as to overlap, and shabbily thatched with rushes.

°°°°Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of the necessity for being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags that were used to clean them, fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat was munching the shoots of a starved and dusty vine that clung to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, was licking them over. The fowls, scared by Derville's approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

°°°°"And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!" said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the general effect of the squalid scene.

°°°°The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, in the hope that they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole thing tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither of them replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity, if I may combine those two words. Derville repeated his questions, but without success. Provoked by the saucy cunning of these three imps, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry which young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

°°°°The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold of his doorway with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely- colored pipe--a technical phrase to a smoker--a humble, short clay pipe of the kind called "/brule-queule/." He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join his benefactor the sooner, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

°°°°"Silence in the ranks!"

°°°°The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

°°°°"Why did you not write to me?" he said to Derville. "Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there," he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer's hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

°°°°Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; and, in fact, Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel's bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread two or three of those old fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating salt-petre, green with mould, and full of cracks, were so excessively damp that on the side where the Colonel's bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the /Bulletins de la Grande Armee/, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel's reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit to Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived in them traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

°°°°"Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?" he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

°°°°"But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!"

°°°°The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the deplorable experience which they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

°°°°"Here," said he to himself, "is a man who has of course spent my money in satisfying a trooper's three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!"

°°°°"To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----" And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--"I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace."

°°°°Derville reflected that there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums of money he had advanced, so he merely said:

°°°°"But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, but where you would have been better lodged?"

°°°°"Why," replied the Colonel, "the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me /gratis/ for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old /Egyptian/--"

°°°°"An Egyptian!"

°°°°"We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read."

°°°°"He might have lodged you better for your money," said Derville.

°°°°"Bah!" said the Colonel, "his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune . . . However, it does very well."

°°°°"Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!"

°°°°"Curse the money! To think I haven't got any!" he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

°°°°Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

°°°°"Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business," said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

°°°°"To me," said the soldier, "it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau."

°°°°"Things are not done so in the legal world," said Derville. "Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing that justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

°°°°"In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets."

°°°°"And my fortune?"

°°°°"Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?"

°°°°"Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?"

°°°°"My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs."

°°°°"And you call that justice!" said the Colonel, in dismay.

°°°°"Why, certainly--"

°°°°"A pretty kind of justice!"

°°°°"So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, that what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor."

°°°°"But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----"

°°°°"I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to."

°°°°"That would be to sell my wife!"

°°°°"With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in the position in which you are, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice."

°°°°"Let us go together."

°°°°"What, just as you are?" said the lawyer. "No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot."

°°°°"Can I possibly gain it?"

°°°°"On every count," replied Derville. "But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor."

°°°°"To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that," said he simply.

°°°°"Well, until then," Derville went on, "will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it."

°°°°Large tears gathered in the poor veteran's faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

°°°°"I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!" he cried. "I will call out: 'I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!'--The statue--he--he will know me."

°°°°"And you will find yourself in Charenton."

°°°°At this terrible name the soldier's transports collapsed.

°°°°"And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?"

°°°°"The war office!" said Derville. "Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire."

°°°°The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

°°°°His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements, which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

°°°°Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

°°°°"Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests."

°°°°"Do what you will," said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death."

°°°°"Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?"

°°°°"That is not my view of it," said the lawyer. "We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud's intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension."

°°°°"Well, proceed then," said Chabert. "I put myself entirely in your hands."

°°°°"I will send you a power of attorney to sign," said Derville. "Good- bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me."

°°°°Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer's hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him excepting with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

°°°°During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer's; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir," said he, taking Derville by the arm, "if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General's."

°°°°"And what then?" replied Derville. "What concern have you with him?-- But who are you?" said the cautious lawyer.

°°°°"I am Louis Vergniaud," he replied at once. "I have a few words to say to you."

°°°°"So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?"

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think? --Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it's neighbors' fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings."

°°°°"He?"

°°°°"Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, 'Really, General----' 'Bah!' says he, 'I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.'--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados-- Do you know him, sir?"

°°°°"But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you."

°°°°"He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it's just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----"

°°°°Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

°°°°"On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!" thought he.

°°°°"All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure."

°°°°"And will that be soon?"

°°°°"Why, yes."

°°°°"Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!" and the cowkeeper's tanned face seemed to expand.

°°°°"Now," said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, "let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but . . ."

°°°°And he set to work to study the Countess' position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves up when concocting their own plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

°°°°But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer's cleverness.

°°°°Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old /Parlement/ of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon's blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor's advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised the restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

°°°°The Emperor fell.

°°°°At the time of Comte Chabert's death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband's fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving of this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband's will; but Napoleon's hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count's marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

°°°°Then came the Restoration. The Count's political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the "Gulf of Revolution should be closed"--for this phrase of the King's, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer's preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

°°°°Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master's influence, and he made the Count's fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness of which most women have a share more or less, understood the man's motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well, that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

°°°°The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess' abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress' capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on the housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess' greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

°°°°At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert's widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

°°°°A speech he made, /a propos/ of Talleyrand's marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess' heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband's return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

°°°°"There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud's position," said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. "How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the /pairie/ by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the /Parlement/ is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King's great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess," thought he as he went up the steps.

°°°°Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

°°°°She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, while playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert's wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

°°°°"The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them."

°°°°A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

°°°°"Good-morning, Monsieur Derville," said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

°°°°"Madame," said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. "I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter."

°°°°"I am so /grieved/, M. le Comte is away--"

°°°°"I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count."

°°°°"Then I will send for Delbecq," said she.

°°°°"He would be of no use to you, clever as he is," replied Derville. "Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!"

°°°°"Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?" said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

°°°°"Madame," he said with cold and piercing solemnity, "you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point."

°°°°"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

°°°°"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

°°°°"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come."

°°°°"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

°°°°"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--"

°°°°"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

°°°°"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----"

°°°°The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's attorney, be so good as to--"

°°°°"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening."

°°°°"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

°°°°"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

°°°°"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

°°°°"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you."

°°°°"And who is he?"

°°°°"Comte Ferraud."

°°°°"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--"

°°°°"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--"

°°°°"He would defend me, monsieur."

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

°°°°"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

°°°°The Countess turned pale.

°°°°"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

°°°°"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?"

°°°°"Compromise!" said Derville.

°°°°"Does he still love me?" she said.

°°°°"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

°°°°The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

°°°°"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.

°°°°A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and seemed to have acquired youth and /impasto/, to borrow a picturesque word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture and a book.

°°°°When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville's office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off, when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a dress which, though simple, was cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was. She wore a pretty drawn bonnet lined with pink, which framed her face to perfection, softening its outlines and making it look younger.

°°°°If the clients were rejuvenescent, the office was unaltered, and presented the same picture as that described at the beginning of this story. Simonnin was eating his breakfast, his shoulder leaning against the window, which was then open, and he was staring up at the blue sky in the opening of the courtyard enclosed by four gloomy houses.

°°°°"Ah, ha!" cried the little clerk, "who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?"

°°°°"The chief is a great magician," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Then there is no trick to play on him this time?" asked Desroches.

°°°°"His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud," said Boucard.

°°°°"What next?" said Godeschal. "Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?"

°°°°"Here she is," answered Simonnin.

°°°°"So you are not deaf, you young rogue!" said Chabert, taking the gutter-jumper by the ear and twisting it, to the delight of the other clerks, who began to laugh, looking at the Colonel with the curious attention due to so singular a personage.

°°°°Comte Chabert was in Derville's private room at the moment when his wife came in by the door of the office.

°°°°"I say, Boucard, there is going to be a queer scene in the chief's room! There is a woman who can spend her days alternately, the odd with Comte Ferraud, and the even with Comte Chabert."

°°°°"And in leap year," said Godeschal, "they must settle the /count/ between them."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen, you can be heard!" said Boucard severely. "I never was in an office where there was so much jesting as there is here over the clients."

°°°°Derville had made the Colonel retire to the bedroom when the Countess was admitted.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert, I have placed you apart. If, however, you should wish it--"

°°°°"It is an attention for which I am obliged to you."

°°°°"I have drawn up the memorandum of an agreement of which you and M. Chabert can discuss the conditions, here, and now. I will go alternately to him and to you, and explain your views respectively."

°°°°"Let me see, monsieur," said the Countess impatiently.

°°°°Derville read aloud:

°°°°" 'Between the undersigned:

°°°°" 'M. Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, Marechal de Camp, and Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, living in Paris, Rue du Petit-Banquier, on the one part;

°°°°" 'And Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the aforesaid M. le Comte Chabert, /nee/--' "

°°°°"Pass over the preliminaries," said she. "Come to the conditions."

°°°°"Madame," said the lawyer, "the preamble briefly sets forth the position in which you stand to each other. Then, by the first clause, you acknowledge, in the presence of three witnesses, of whom two shall be notaries, and one the dairyman with whom your husband has been lodging, to all of whom your secret is known, and who will be absolutely silent--you acknowledge, I say, that the individual designated in the documents subjoined to the deed, and whose identity is to be further proved by an act of recognition prepared by your notary, Alexandre Crottat, is your first husband, Comte Chabert. By the second clause Comte Chabert, to secure your happiness, will undertake to assert his rights only under certain circumstances set forth in the deed.--And these," said Derville, in a parenthesis, "are none other than a failure to carry out the conditions of this secret agreement.--M. Chabert, on his part, agrees to accept judgment on a friendly suit, by which his certificate of death shall be annulled, and his marriage dissolved."

°°°°"That will not suit me in the least," said the Countess with surprise. "I will be a party to no suit; you know why."

°°°°"By the third clause," Derville went on, with imperturbable coolness, "you pledge yourself to secure to Hyacinthe Comte Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock held in his name, to revert to you at his death--"

°°°°"But it is much too dear!" exclaimed the Countess.

°°°°"Can you compromise the matter cheaper?"

°°°°"Possibly."

°°°°"But what do you want, madame?"

°°°°"I want--I will not have a lawsuit. I want--"

°°°°"You want him to remain dead?" said Derville, interrupting her hastily.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, "if twenty-four thousand francs a year are necessary, we will go to law--"

°°°°"Yes, we will go to law," said the Colonel in a deep voice, as he opened the door and stood before his wife, with one hand in his waistcoat and the other hanging by his side--an attitude to which the recollection of his adventure gave horrible significance.

°°°°"It is he," said the Countess to herself.

°°°°"Too dear!" the old soldier exclaimed. "I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you--you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved--"

°°°°"But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!" cried the Countess, in feigned amazement.

°°°°"Indeed!" said the old man, in a tone of intense irony. "Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais Royal----"

°°°°The Countess turned pale. Seeing her grow white under her rouge, the old soldier paused, touched by the acute suffering he was inflicting on the woman he had once so ardently loved; but she shot such a venomous glance at him that he abruptly went on:

°°°°"You were with La--"

°°°°"Allow me, Monsieur Derville," said the Countess to the lawyer. "You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things."

°°°°She rose and went out. Derville rushed after her; but the Countess had taken wings, and seemed to have flown from the place.

°°°°On returning to his private room, he found the Colonel in a towering rage, striding up and down.

°°°°"In those times a man took his wife where he chose," said he. "But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted to appearances. She has no heart."

°°°°"Well, Colonel, was I not right to beg you not to come?--I am now positive of your identity; when you came in, the Countess gave a little start, of which the meaning was unequivocal. But you have lost your chances. Your wife knows that you are unrecognizable."

°°°°"I will kill her!"

°°°°"Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch. Besides you might miss! That would be unpardonable. A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife.--Let me set things straight; you are only a big child. Go now. Take care of yourself; she is capable of setting some trap for you and shutting you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you against a surprise."

°°°°The unhappy Colonel obeyed his young benefactor, and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly went down the dark staircase, lost in gloomy thoughts, and crushed perhaps by the blow just dealt him--the most cruel he could feel, the thrust that could most deeply pierce his heart--when he heard the rustle of a woman's dress on the lowest landing, and his wife stood before him.

°°°°"Come, monsieur," said she, taking his arm with a gesture like those familiar to him of old. Her action and the accent of her voice, which had recovered its graciousness, were enough to allay the Colonel's wrath, and he allowed himself to be led to the carriage.

°°°°"Well, get in!" said she, when the footman had let down the step.

°°°°And as if by magic, he found himself sitting by his wife in the brougham.

°°°°"Where to?" asked the servant.

°°°°"To Groslay," said she.

°°°°The horses started at once, and carried them all across Paris.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, in a tone of voice which betrayed one of those emotions which are rare in our lives, and which agitate every part of our being. At such moments the heart, fibres, nerves, countenance, soul, and body, everything, every pore even, feels a thrill. Life no longer seems to be within us; it flows out, springs forth, is communicated as if by contagion, transmitted by a look, a tone of voice, a gesture, impressing our will on others. The old soldier started on hearing this single word, this first, terrible "monsieur!" But still it was at once a reproach and a pardon, a hope and a despair, a question and an answer. This word included them all; none but an actress could have thrown so much eloquence, so many feelings into a single word. Truth is less complete in its utterance; it does not put everything on the outside; it allows us to see what is within. The Colonel was filled with remorse for his suspicions, his demands, and his anger; he looked down not to betray his agitation.

°°°°"Monsieur," repeated she, after an imperceptible pause, "I knew you at once."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old soldier, "those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes."

°°°°Two large tears rolled hot on to his wife's hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

°°°°"Monsieur," she went on, "could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false as mine now is? If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in the privacy of my family. Ought not such a secret to remain buried in our hearts? You will forgive me, I hope, for my apparent indifference to the woes of a Chabert in whose existence I could not possibly believe. I received your letters," she hastily added, seeing in his face the objection it expressed, "but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing was unrecognizable; and after obtaining Napoleon's signature to my second marriage contract, I could not help believing that some clever swindler wanted to make a fool of me. Therefore, to avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud's peace of mind, and disturbing family ties, I was obliged to take precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right, I ask you?"

°°°°"Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot, the owl, the dolt, not to have calculated better what the consequences of such a position might be.--But where are we going?" he asked, seeing that they had reached the barrier of La Chapelle.

°°°°"To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There, monsieur, we will consider the steps to be taken. I know my duties. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? We need not inform the public of a situation, which for me has its ridiculous side, and let us preserve our dignity. You still love me," she said, with a sad, sweet gaze at the Colonel, "but have not I been authorized to form other ties? In so strange a position, a secret voice bids me trust to your kindness, which is so well known to me. Can I be wrong in taking you as the sole arbiter of my fate? Be at once judge and party to the suit. I trust in your noble character; you will be generous enough to forgive me for the consequences of faults committed in innocence. I may then confess to you: I love M. Ferraud. I believed that I had a right to love him. I do not blush to make this confession to you; even if it offends you, it does not disgrace us. I cannot conceal the facts. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother."

°°°°The Colonel with a wave of his hand bid his wife be silent, and for a mile and a half they sat without speaking a single word. Chabert could fancy he saw the two little ones before him.

°°°°"Rosine."

°°°°"Monsieur?"

°°°°"The dead are very wrong to come to life again."

°°°°"Oh, monsieur, no, no! Do not think me ungrateful. Only, you find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old man in a softened tone, "I no longer feel any resentment against you. We will forget anything," he added, with one of those smiles which always reflect a noble soul; "I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me."

°°°°The Countess gave him a flashing look full of such deep gratitude that poor Chabert would have been glad to sink again into his grave at Eylau. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion, of which the whole reward consists in the assurance that they have made the person they love happy.

°°°°"My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested," said the Countess.

°°°°The conversation turned to other subjects, for it was impossible to dwell very long on this one. Though the couple came back again and again to their singular position, either by some allusion or of serious purpose, they had a delightful drive, recalling the events of their former life together and the times of the Empire. The Countess knew how to lend peculiar charm to her reminiscences, and gave the conversation the tinge of melancholy that was needed to keep it serious. She revived his love without awakening his desires, and allowed her first husband to discern the mental wealth she had acquired while trying to accustom him to moderate his pleasure to that which a father may feel in the society of a favorite daughter.

°°°°The Colonel had known the Countess of the Empire; he found her a Countess of the Restoration.

°°°°At last, by a cross-road, they arrived at the entrance to a large park lying in the little valley which divides the heights of Margency from the pretty village of Groslay. The Countess had there a delightful house, where the Colonel on arriving found everything in readiness for his stay there, as well as for his wife's. Misfortune is a kind of talisman whose virtue consists in its power to confirm our original nature; in some men it increases their distrust and malignancy, just as it improves the goodness of those who have a kind heart.

°°°°Sorrow had made the Colonel even more helpful and good than he had always been, and he could understand some secrets of womanly distress which are unrevealed to most men. Nevertheless, in spite of his loyal trustfulness, he could not help saying to his wife:

°°°°"Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?"

°°°°"Yes," replied she, "if I found Colonel Chabert in Derville's client."

°°°°The appearance of truth she contrived to give to this answer dissipated the slight suspicions which the Colonel was ashamed to have felt. For three days the Countess was quite charming to her first husband. By tender attentions and unfailing sweetness she seemed anxious to wipe out the memory of the sufferings he had endured, and to earn forgiveness for the woes which, as she confessed, she had innocently caused him. She delighted in displaying for him the charms she knew he took pleasure in, while at the same time she assumed a kind of melancholy; for men are more especially accessible to certain ways, certain graces of the heart or of the mind which they cannot resist. She aimed at interesting him in her position, and appealing to his feelings so far as to take possession of his mind and control him despotically.

°°°°Ready for anything to attain her ends, she did not yet know what she was to do with this man; but at any rate she meant to annihilate him socially. On the evening of the third day she felt that in spite of her efforts she could not conceal her uneasiness as to the results of her manoeuvres. To give herself a minute's reprieve she went up to her room, sat down before her writing-table, and laid aside the mask of composure which she wore in Chabert's presence, like an actress who, returning to her dressing-room after a fatiguing fifth act, drops half dead, leaving with the audience an image of herself which she no longer resembles. She proceeded to finish a letter she had begun to Delbecq, whom she desired to go in her name and demand of Derville the deeds relating to Colonel Chabert, to copy them, and to come to her at once to Groslay. She had hardly finished when she heard the Colonel's step in the passage; uneasy at her absence, he had come to look for her.

°°°°"Alas!" she exclaimed, "I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable . . ."

°°°°"Why, what is the matter?" asked the good man.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing!" she replied.

°°°°She rose, left the Colonel, and went down to speak privately to her maid, whom she sent off to Paris, impressing on her that she was herself to deliver to Delbecq the letter just written, and to bring it back to the writer as soon as he had read it. Then the Countess went out to sit on a bench sufficiently in sight for the Colonel to join her as soon as he might choose. The Colonel, who was looking for her, hastened up and sat down by her.

°°°°"Rosine," said he, "what is the matter with you?"

°°°°She did not answer.

°°°°It was one of those glorious, calm evenings in the month of June, whose secret harmonies infuse such sweetness into the sunset. The air was clear, the stillness perfect, so that far away in the park they could hear the voices of some children, which added a kind of melody to the sublimity of the scene.

°°°°"You do not answer me?" the Colonel said to his wife.

°°°°"My husband----" said the Countess, who broke off, started a little, and with a blush stopped to ask him, "What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?"

°°°°"Call him your husband, my poor child," replied the Colonel, in a kind voice. "Is he not the father of your children?"

°°°°"Well, then," she said, "if he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out that I came here, alone, with a stranger, what am I to say to him? Listen, monsieur," she went on, assuming a dignified attitude, "decide my fate, I am resigned to anything--"

°°°°"My dear," said the Colonel, taking possession of his wife's hands, "I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness--"

°°°°"That is impossible!" she exclaimed, with a sudden spasmodic movement. "Remember that you would have to renounce your identity, and in an authenticated form."

°°°°"What?" said the Colonel. "Is not my word enough for you?"

°°°°The word "authenticated" fell on the old man's heart, and roused involuntary distrust. He looked at his wife in a way that made her color, she cast down her eyes, and he feared that he might find himself compelled to despise her. The Countess was afraid lest she had scared the shy modesty, the stern honesty, of a man whose generous temper and primitive virtues were known to her. Though these feelings had brought the clouds to her brow, they immediately recovered their harmony. This was the way of it. A child's cry was heard in the distance.

°°°°"Jules, leave your sister in peace," the Countess called out.

°°°°"What, are your children here?" said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but I told them not to trouble you."

°°°°The old soldier understood the delicacy, the womanly tact of so gracious a precaution, and took the Countess' hand to kiss it.

°°°°"But let them come," said he.

°°°°The little girl ran up to complain of her brother.

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"It was Jules--"

°°°°"It was her--"

°°°°Their little hands were held out to their mother, and the two childish voices mingled; it was an unexpected and charming picture.

°°°°"Poor little things!" cried the Countess, no longer restraining her tears, "I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother's heart cannot be divided; I want them, I want them."

°°°°"Are you making mamma cry?" said Jules, looking fiercely at the Colonel.

°°°°"Silence, Jules!" said the mother in a decided tone.

°°°°The two children stood speechless, examining their mother and the stranger with a curiosity which it is impossible to express in words.

°°°°"Oh yes!" she cried. "If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything . . ."

°°°°This was the decisive speech which gained all that she had hoped from it.

°°°°"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, as if he were ending a sentence already begun in his mind, "I must return underground again. I had told myself so already."

°°°°"Can I accept such a sacrifice?" replied his wife. "If some men have died to save a mistress' honor, they gave their life but once. But in this case you would be giving your life every day. No, no. It is impossible. If it were only your life, it would be nothing; but to sign a declaration that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to sacrifice your honor, and live a lie every hour of the day! Human devotion cannot go so far. Only think!--No. But for my poor children I would have fled with you by this time to the other end of the world."

°°°°"But," said Chabert, "cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn out as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but a little tobacco and the /Constitutionnel/."

°°°°The Countess melted into tears. There was a contest of generosity between the Comtesse Ferraud and Colonel Chabert, and the soldier came out victorious. One evening, seeing this mother with her children, the soldier was bewitched by the touching grace of a family picture in the country, in the shade and the silence; he made a resolution to remain dead, and, frightened no longer at the authentication of a deed, he asked what he could do to secure beyond all risk the happiness of this family.

°°°°"Do exactly as you like," said the Countess. "I declare to you that I will have nothing to do with this affair. I ought not."

°°°°Delbecq had arrived some days before, and in obedience to the Countess' verbal instructions, the intendant had succeeded in gaining the old soldier's confidence. So on the following morning Colonel Chabert went with the erewhile attorney to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had caused the notary to draw up an affidavit in such terms that, after hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

°°°°"Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!" he exclaimed.

°°°°"Indeed, monsieur," said Delbecq, "I should advise you not to sign in haste. In your place I would get at least thirty thousand francs a year out of the bargain. Madame would pay them."

°°°°After annihilating this scoundrel /emeritus/ by the lightning look of an honest man insulted, the Colonel rushed off, carried away by a thousand contrary emotions. He was suspicious, indignant, and calm again by turns.

°°°°Finally he made his way back into the park of Groslay by a gap in a fence, and slowly walked on to sit down and rest, and meditate at his ease, in a little room under a gazebo, from which the road to Saint- Leu could be seen. The path being strewn with the yellowish sand which is used instead of river-gravel, the Countess, who was sitting in the upper room of this little summer-house, did not hear the Colonel's approach, for she was too much preoccupied with the success of her business to pay the smallest attention to the slight noise made by her husband. Nor did the old man notice that his wife was in the room over him.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur Delbecq, has he signed?" the Countess asked her secretary, whom she saw alone on the road beyond the hedge of a haha.

°°°°"No, madame. I do not even know what has become of our man. The old horse reared."

°°°°"Then we shall be obliged to put him into Charenton," said she, "since we have got him."

°°°°The Colonel, who recovered the elasticity of youth to leap the haha, in the twinkling of an eye was standing in front of Delbecq, on whom he bestowed the two finest slaps that ever a scoundrel's cheeks received.

°°°°"And you may add that old horses can kick!" said he.

°°°°His rage spent, the Colonel no longer felt vigorous enough to leap the ditch. He had seen the truth in all its nakedness. The Countess' speech and Delbecq's reply had revealed the conspiracy of which he was to be the victim. The care taken of him was but a bait to entrap him in a snare. That speech was like a drop of subtle poison, bringing on in the old soldier a return of all his sufferings, physical and moral. He came back to the summer-house through the park gate, walking slowly like a broken man.

°°°°Then for him there was to be neither peace nor truce. From this moment he must begin the odious warfare with this woman of which Derville had spoken, enter on a life of litigation, feed on gall, drink every morning of the cup of bitterness. And then--fearful thought!--where was he to find the money needful to pay the cost of the first proceedings? He felt such disgust of life, that if there had been any water at hand he would have thrown himself into it; that if he had had a pistol, he would have blown out his brains. Then he relapsed into the indecision of mind which, since his conversation with Derville at the dairyman's had changed his character.

°°°°At last, having reached the kiosque, he went up to the gazebo, where little rose-windows afforded a view over each lovely landscape of the valley, and where he found his wife seated on a chair. The Countess was gazing at the distance, and preserved a calm countenance, showing that impenetrable face which women can assume when resolved to do their worst. She wiped her eyes as if she had been weeping, and played absently with the pink ribbons of her sash. Nevertheless, in spite of her apparent assurance, she could not help shuddering slightly when she saw before her her venerable benefactor, standing with folded arms, his face pale, his brow stern.

°°°°"Madame," he said, after gazing at her fixedly for a moment and compelling her to blush, "Madame, I do not curse you--I scorn you. I can now thank the chance that has divided us. I do not feel even a desire for revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on the strength of my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps have made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of the sunshine.--Farewell!"

°°°°The Countess threw herself at his feet; she would have detained him by taking his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust, saying:

°°°°"Do not touch me!"

°°°°The Countess' expression when she heard her husband's retreating steps is quite indescribable. Then, with the deep perspicacity given only by utter villainy, or by fierce worldly selfishness, she knew that she might live in peace on the word and the contempt of this loyal veteran.

°°°°Chabert, in fact, disappeared. The dairyman failed in business, and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel, perhaps, took up some similar industry for a time. Perhaps, like a stone flung into a chasm, he went falling from ledge to ledge, to be lost in the mire of rags that seethes through the streets of Paris.

°°°°Six months after this event, Derville, hearing no more of Colonel Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed that they had no doubt come to a compromise, which the Countess, out of revenge, had had arranged by some other lawyer. So one morning he added up the sums he had advanced to the said Chabert with the costs, and begged the Comtesse Ferraud to claim from M. le Comte Chabert the amount of the bill, assuming that she would know where to find her first husband.

°°°°The very next day Comte Ferraud's man of business, lately appointed President of the County Court in a town of some importance, wrote this distressing note to Derville:

°°°°"MONSIEUR,--

°°°°"Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your   client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the   individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he   came forward under false pretences. "Yours, etc.,                DELBECQ."

°°°°"One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half," cried Derville. "They don't deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand- franc notes!"

°°°°Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader to whom he wished to speak, and who was employed in the Police Court. As chance would have it, Derville went into Court Number 6 at the moment when the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months' imprisonment as a vagabond, and subsequently to be taken to the Mendicity House of Detention, a sentence which, by magistrates' law, is equivalent to perpetual imprisonment. On hearing the name of Hyacinthe, Derville looked at the deliquent, sitting between two /gendarmes/ on the bench for the accused, and recognized in the condemned man his false Colonel Chabert.

°°°°The old soldier was placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In spite of his rags, in spite of the misery stamped on his countenance, it gave evidence of noble pride. His eye had a stoical expression which no magistrate ought to have misunderstood; but as soon as a man has fallen into the hands of justice, he is no more than a moral entity, a matter of law or of fact, just as to statists he has become a zero.

°°°°When the veteran was taken back to the lock-up, to be removed later with the batch of vagabonds at that moment at the bar, Derville availed himself of the privilege accorded to lawyers of going wherever they please in the Courts, and followed him to the lock-up, where he stood scrutinizing him for some minutes, as well as the curious crew of beggars among whom he found himself. The passage to the lock-up at that moment afforded one of those spectacles which, unfortunately, neither legislators, nor philanthropists, nor painters, nor writers come to study. Like all the laboratories of the law, this ante-room is a dark and malodorous place; along the walls runs a wooden seat, blackened by the constant presence there of the wretches who come to this meeting-place of every form of social squalor, where not one of them is missing.

°°°°A poet might say that the day was ashamed to light up this dreadful sewer through which so much misery flows! There is not a spot on that plank where some crime has not sat, in embryo or matured; not a corner where a man has never stood who, driven to despair by the blight which justice has set upon him after his first fault, has not there begun a career, at the end of which looms the guillotine or the pistol-snap of the suicide. All who fall on the pavement of Paris rebound against these yellow-gray walls, on which a philanthropist who was not a speculator might read a justification of the numerous suicides complained of by hypocritical writers who are incapable of taking a step to prevent them--for that justification is written in that ante- room, like a preface to the dramas of the Morgue, or to those enacted on the Place de la Greve.

°°°°At this moment Colonel Chabert was sitting among these men--men with coarse faces, clothed in the horrible livery of misery, and silent at intervals, or talking in a low tone, for three gendarmes on duty paced to and fro, their sabres clattering on the floor.

°°°°"Do you recognize me?" said Derville to the old man, standing in front of him.

°°°°"Yes, sir," said Chabert, rising.

°°°°"If you are an honest man," Derville went on in an undertone, "how could you remain in my debt?"

°°°°The old soldier blushed as a young girl might when accused by her mother of a clandestine love affair.

°°°°"What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?" cried he in a loud voice.

°°°°"Paid me?" said Derville. "She wrote to me that you were a swindler."

°°°°The Colonel cast up his eyes in a sublime impulse of horror and imprecation, as if to call heaven to witness to this fresh subterfuge.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, in a voice that was calm by sheer huskiness, "get the gendarmes to allow me to go into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored."

°°°°At a word from Derville to the sergeant he was allowed to take his client into the room, where Hyacinthe wrote a few lines, and addressed them to the Comtesse Ferraud.

°°°°"Send her that," said the soldier, "and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is not the less there," and he laid his hand on his heart. "Yes, it is there, deep and sincere. But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all."

°°°°"What!" said Derville. "Did you not stipulate for an allowance?"

°°°°"Do not speak of it!" cried the old man. "You cannot conceive how deep my contempt is for the outside life to which most men cling. I was suddenly attacked by a sickness--disgust of humanity. When I think that Napoleon is at Saint-Helena, everything on earth is a matter of indifference to me. I can no longer be a soldier; that is my only real grief. After all," he added with a gesture of childish simplicity, "it is better to enjoy luxury of feeling than of dress. For my part, I fear nobody's contempt."

°°°°And the Colonel sat down on his bench again.

°°°°Derville went away. On returning to his office, he sent Godeschal, at that time his second clerk, to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert's lawyer.

°°°°In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now himself an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, to whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal's staff among beggars by living on at Bicetre as poor women live on at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures who are lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners, which consists in drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords to its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

°°°°"I say, Derville," said Godeschal to his traveling companion, "look at that old fellow. Isn't he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy."

°°°°Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

°°°°"That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?"

°°°°"Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious," said Godeschal.

°°°°"That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger's glare she shot at him at that moment."

°°°°This opening having excited Godeschal's curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

°°°°Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

°°°°"Good-morning, Colonel Chabert," said Derville.

°°°°"Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe," replied the veteran. "I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7," he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--"Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?" he asked after a moment's silence. "He is not married! He is very lucky!"

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Godeschal. "Would you like something to buy snuff?"

°°°°With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

°°°°"Brave troopers!"

°°°°He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

°°°°"Fire! both arms! /Vive Napoleon/!" And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

°°°°"The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish," said Derville.

°°°°"Childish! he?" said another old pauper, who was looking on. "Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, 'Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.'--'I was too young to be there,' said Hyacinthe. 'But I was at Jena.' And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions."

°°°°"What a destiny!" exclaimed Derville. "Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow," Derville went on after a pause, "there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

°°°°"How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris."

°°°°"I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches' office," replied Godeschal.

°°°°PARIS, February-March 1832.

°°°°End



°°°°Father Goriot

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage

°°°°To the great and illustrious Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a token of admiration for his works and genius. DE BALZAC.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans) is an elderly person, who for the past forty years has kept a lodging-house in the Rue Nueve- Sainte-Genevieve, in the district that lies between the Latin Quarter and the Faubourg Saint-Marcel. Her house (known in the neighborhood as the Maison Vauquer) receives men and women, old and young, and no word has ever been breathed against her respectable establishment; but, at the same time, it must be said that as a matter of fact no young woman has been under her roof for thirty years, and that if a young man stays there for any length of time it is a sure sign that his allowance must be of the slenderest. In 1819, however, the time when this drama opens, there was an almost penniless young girl among Mme. Vauquer's boarders.

°°°°That word drama has been somewhat discredited of late; it has been overworked and twisted to strange uses in these days of dolorous literature; but it must do service again here, not because this story is dramatic in the restricted sense of the word, but because some tears may perhaps be shed intra et extra muros before it is over.

°°°°Will any one without the walls of Paris understand it? It is open to doubt. The only audience who could appreciate the results of close observation, the careful reproduction of minute detail and local color, are dwellers between the heights of Montrouge and Montmartre, in a vale of crumbling stucco watered by streams of black mud, a vale of sorrows which are real and joys too often hollow; but this audience is so accustomed to terrible sensations, that only some unimaginable and well-neigh impossible woe could produce any lasting impression there. Now and again there are tragedies so awful and so grand by reason of the complication of virtues and vices that bring them about, that egotism and selfishness are forced to pause and are moved to pity; but the impression that they receive is like a luscious fruit, soon consumed. Civilization, like the car of Juggernaut, is scarcely stayed perceptibly in its progress by a heart less easy to break than the others that lie in its course; this also is broken, and Civilization continues on her course triumphant. And you, too, will do the like; you who with this book in your white hand will sink back among the cushions of your armchair, and say to yourself, "Perhaps this may amuse me." You will read the story of Father Goriot's secret woes, and, dining thereafter with an unspoiled appetite, will lay the blame of your insensibility upon the writer, and accuse him of exaggeration, of writing romances. Ah! once for all, this drama is neither a fiction nor a romance! ALL IS TRUE,--so true, that every one can discern the elements of the tragedy in his own house, perhaps in his own heart.

°°°°The lodging-house is Mme. Vauquer's own property. It is still standing in the lower end of the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, just where the road slopes so sharply down to the Rue de l'Arbalete, that wheeled traffic seldom passes that way, because it is so stony and steep. This position is sufficient to account for the silence prevalent in the streets shut in between the dome of the Pantheon and the dome of the Val-de-Grace, two conspicuous public buildings which give a yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies beneath the shadow of their leaden- hued cupolas.

°°°°In that district the pavements are clean and dry, there is neither mud nor water in the gutters, grass grows in the chinks of the walls. The most heedless passer-by feels the depressing influences of a place where the sound of wheels creates a sensation; there is a grim look about the houses, a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls. A Parisian straying into a suburb apparently composed of lodging-houses and public institutions would see poverty and dullness, old age lying down to die, and joyous youth condemned to drudgery. It is the ugliest quarter of Paris, and, it may be added, the least known. But, before all things, the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve is like a bronze frame for a picture for which the mind cannot be too well prepared by the contemplation of sad hues and sober images. Even so, step by step the daylight decreases, and the cicerone's droning voice grows hollower as the traveler descends into the Catacombs. The comparison holds good! Who shall say which is more ghastly, the sight of the bleached skulls or of dried-up human hearts?

°°°°The front of the lodging-house is at right angles to the road, and looks out upon a little garden, so that you see the side of the house in section, as it were, from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. Beneath the wall of the house front there lies a channel, a fathom wide, paved with cobble-stones, and beside it runs a graveled walk bordered by geraniums and oleanders and pomegranates set in great blue and white glazed earthenware pots. Access into the graveled walk is afforded by a door, above which the words MAISON VAUQUER may be read, and beneath, in rather smaller letters, "Lodgings for both sexes, etc."

°°°°During the day a glimpse into the garden is easily obtained through a wicket to which a bell is attached. On the opposite wall, at the further end of the graveled walk, a green marble arch was painted once upon a time by a local artist, and in this semblance of a shrine a statue representing Cupid is installed; a Parisian Cupid, so blistered and disfigured that he looks like a candidate for one of the adjacent hospitals, and might suggest an allegory to lovers of symbolism. The half-obliterated inscription on the pedestal beneath determines the date of this work of art, for it bears witness to the widespread enthusiasm felt for Voltaire on his return to Paris in 1777:

°°°°"Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;   He is, or was, or ought to be."

°°°°At night the wicket gate is replaced by a solid door. The little garden is no wider than the front of the house; it is shut in between the wall of the street and the partition wall of the neighboring house. A mantle of ivy conceals the bricks and attracts the eyes of passers-by to an effect which is picturesque in Paris, for each of the walls is covered with trellised vines that yield a scanty dusty crop of fruit, and furnish besides a subject of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her lodgers; every year the widow trembles for her vintage.

°°°°A straight path beneath the walls on either side of the garden leads to a clump of lime-trees at the further end of it; LINE- trees, as Mme. Vauquer persists in calling them, in spite of the fact that she was a de Conflans, and regardless of repeated corrections from her lodgers.

°°°°The central space between the walls is filled with artichokes and rows of pyramid fruit-trees, and surrounded by a border of lettuce, pot-herbs, and parsley. Under the lime-trees there are a few green-painted garden seats and a wooden table, and hither, during the dog-days, such of the lodgers as are rich enough to indulge in a cup of coffee come to take their pleasure, though it is hot enough to roast eggs even in the shade.

°°°°The house itself is three stories high, without counting the attics under the roof. It is built of rough stone, and covered with the yellowish stucco that gives a mean appearance to almost every house in Paris. There are five windows in each story in the front of the house; all the blinds visible through the small square panes are drawn up awry, so that the lines are all at cross purposes. At the side of the house there are but two windows on each floor, and the lowest of all are adorned with a heavy iron grating.

°°°°Behind the house a yard extends for some twenty feet, a space inhabited by a happy family of pigs, poultry, and rabbits; the wood-shed is situated on the further side, and on the wall between the wood-shed and the kitchen window hangs the meat-safe, just above the place where the sink discharges its greasy streams. The cook sweeps all the refuse out through a little door into the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, and frequently cleanses the yard with copious supplies of water, under pain of pestilence.

°°°°The house might have been built on purpose for its present uses. Access is given by a French window to the first room on the ground floor, a sitting-room which looks out upon the street through the two barred windows already mentioned. Another door opens out of it into the dining-room, which is separated from the kitchen by the well of the staircase, the steps being constructed partly of wood, partly of tiles, which are colored and beeswaxed. Nothing can be more depressing than the sight of that sitting- room. The furniture is covered with horse hair woven in alternate dull and glossy stripes. There is a round table in the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from Telemaque are depicted, the various classical personages being colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

°°°°The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the language, and which should be called the odeur de pension. The damp atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy, musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet, in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining dining- room.

°°°°The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which the lodgers' table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine, are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long table is so greasy that a waggish externe will write his name on the surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky, worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one- eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire, parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet, its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

°°°°This apartment is in all its glory at seven o'clock in the morning, when Mme. Vauquer's cat appears, announcing the near approach of his mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated countenance, and a nose like a parrot's beak set in the middle of it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn; there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and interpretation of her lodging- house, as surely as her lodging-house implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital. The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room, and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its mistress.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who "have seen a deal of trouble." She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still, "she is a good woman at bottom," said the lodgers who believed that the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

°°°°What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head. How had she lost her money? "Through trouble," was her answer. He had treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody, because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every possible misfortune.

°°°°Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress' shuffling footsteps, hastened to serve the lodgers' breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these externes usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty francs a month.

°°°°At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme. Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary- general in the service of the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred francs a year.

°°°°The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on the third floor were also let-- one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle. Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli, Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as "Father Goriot." The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of passage, to impecunious students, who like "Father Goriot" and Mlle. Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of better.

°°°°At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him. Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that their parents' hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as by those who had brought it to pass.

°°°°Above the third story there was a garret where the linen was hung to dry, and a couple of attics. Christophe, the man-of-all-work, slept in one, and Sylvie, the stout cook, in the other. Beside the seven inmates thus enumerated, taking one year with another, some eight law or medical students dined in the house, as well as two or three regular comers who lived in the neighborhood. There were usually eighteen people at dinner, and there was room, if need be, for twenty at Mme. Vauquer's table; at breakfast, however, only the seven lodgers appeared. It was almost like a family party. Every one came down in dressing-gown and slippers, and the conversation usually turned on anything that had happened the evening before; comments on the dress or appearance of the dinner contingent were exchanged in friendly confidence.

°°°°These seven lodgers were Mme. Vauquer's spoiled children. Among them she distributed, with astronomical precision, the exact proportion of respect and attention due to the varying amounts they paid for their board. One single consideration influenced all these human beings thrown together by chance. The two second- floor lodgers only paid seventy-two francs a month. Such prices as these are confined to the Faubourg Saint-Marcel and the district between La Bourbe and the Salpetriere; and, as might be expected, poverty, more or less apparent, weighed upon them all, Mme. Couture being the sole exception to the rule.

°°°°The dreary surroundings were reflected in the costumes of the inmates of the house; all were alike threadbare. The color of the men's coats were problematical; such shoes, in more fashionable quarters, are only to be seen lying in the gutter; the cuffs and collars were worn and frayed at the edges; every limp article of clothing looked like the ghost of its former self. The women's dresses were faded, old-fashioned, dyed and re-dyed; they wore gloves that were glazed with hard wear, much-mended lace, dingy ruffles, crumpled muslin fichus. So much for their clothing; but, for the most part, their frames were solid enough; their constitutions had weathered the storms of life; their cold, hard faces were worn like coins that have been withdrawn from circulation, but there were greedy teeth behind the withered lips. Dramas brought to a close or still in progress are foreshadowed by the sight of such actors as these, not the dramas that are played before the footlights and against a background of painted canvas, but dumb dramas of life, frost-bound dramas that sere hearts like fire, dramas that do not end with the actors' lives.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau, that elderly young lady, screened her weak eyes from the daylight by a soiled green silk shade with a rim of brass, an object fit to scare away the Angel of Pity himself. Her shawl, with its scanty, draggled fringe, might have covered a skeleton, so meagre and angular was the form beneath it. Yet she must have been pretty and shapely once. What corrosive had destroyed the feminine outlines? Was it trouble, or vice, or greed? Had she loved too well? Had she been a second-hand clothes dealer, a frequenter of the backstairs of great houses, or had she been merely a courtesan? Was she expiating the flaunting triumphs of a youth overcrowded with pleasures by an old age in which she was shunned by every passer-by? Her vacant gaze sent a chill through you; her shriveled face seemed like a menace. Her voice was like the shrill, thin note of the grasshopper sounding from the thicket when winter is at hand. She said that she had nursed an old gentleman, ill of catarrh of the bladder, and left to die by his children, who thought that he had nothing left. His bequest to her, a life annuity of a thousand francs, was periodically disputed by his heirs, who mingled slander with their persecutions. In spite of the ravages of conflicting passions, her face retained some traces of its former fairness and fineness of tissue, some vestiges of the physical charms of her youth still survived.

°°°°M. Poiret was a sort of automaton. He might be seen any day sailing like a gray shadow along the walks of the Jardin des Plantes, on his head a shabby cap, a cane with an old yellow ivory handle in the tips of his thin fingers; the outspread skirts of his threadbare overcoat failed to conceal his meagre figure; his breeches hung loosely on his shrunken limbs; the thin, blue-stockinged legs trembled like those of a drunken man; there was a notable breach of continuity between the dingy white waistcoat and crumpled shirt frills and the cravat twisted about a throat like a turkey gobbler's; altogether, his appearance set people wondering whether this outlandish ghost belonged to the audacious race of the sons of Japhet who flutter about on the Boulevard Italien. What devouring kind of toil could have so shriveled him? What devouring passions had darkened that bulbous countenance, which would have seemed outrageous as a caricature? What had he been? Well, perhaps he had been part of the machinery of justice, a clerk in the office to which the executioner sends in his accounts,--so much for providing black veils for parricides, so much for sawdust, so much for pulleys and cord for the knife. Or he might have been a receiver at the door of a public slaughter-house, or a sub-inspector of nuisances. Indeed, the man appeared to have been one of the beasts of burden in our great social mill; one of those Parisian Ratons whom their Bertrands do not even know by sight; a pivot in the obscure machinery that disposes of misery and things unclean; one of those men, in short, at sight of whom we are prompted to remark that, "After all, we cannot do without them."

°°°°Stately Paris ignores the existence of these faces bleached by moral or physical suffering; but, then, Paris is in truth an ocean that no line can plumb. You may survey its surface and describe it; but no matter how numerous and painstaking the toilers in this sea, there will always be lonely and unexplored regions in its depths, caverns unknown, flowers and pearls and monsters of the deep overlooked or forgotten by the divers of literature. The Maison Vauquer is one of these curious monstrosities.

°°°°Two, however, of Mme. Vauquer's boarders formed a striking contrast to the rest. There was a sickly pallor, such as is often seen in anaemic girls, in Mlle. Victorine Taillefer's face; and her unvarying expression of sadness, like her embarrassed manner and pinched look, was in keeping with the general wretchedness of the establishment in the Rue Nueve-Saint-Genevieve, which forms a background to this picture; but her face was young, there was youthfulness in her voice and elasticity in her movements. This young misfortune was not unlike a shrub, newly planted in an uncongenial soil, where its leaves have already begun to wither. The outlines of her figure, revealed by her dress of the simplest and cheapest materials, were also youthful. There was the same kind of charm about her too slender form, her faintly colored face and light-brown hair, that modern poets find in mediaeval statuettes; and a sweet expression, a look of Christian resignation in the dark gray eyes. She was pretty by force of contrast; if she had been happy, she would have been charming. Happiness is the poetry of woman, as the toilette is her tinsel. If the delightful excitement of a ball had made the pale face glow with color; if the delights of a luxurious life had brought the color to the wan cheeks that were slightly hollowed already; if love had put light into the sad eyes, then Victorine might have ranked among the fairest; but she lacked the two things which create woman a second time--pretty dresses and love- letters.

°°°°A book might have been made of her story. Her father was persuaded that he had sufficient reason for declining to acknowledge her, and allowed her a bare six hundred francs a year; he had further taken measures to disinherit his daughter, and had converted all his real estate into personalty, that he might leave it undivided to his son. Victorine's mother had died broken-hearted in Mme. Couture's house; and the latter, who was a near relation, had taken charge of the little orphan. Unluckily, the widow of the commissary-general to the armies of the Republic had nothing in the world but her jointure and her widow's pension, and some day she might be obliged to leave the helpless, inexperienced girl to the mercy of the world. The good soul, therefore, took Victorine to mass every Sunday, and to confession once a fortnight, thinking that, in any case, she would bring up her ward to be devout. She was right; religion offered a solution of the problem of the young girl's future. The poor child loved the father who refused to acknowledge her. Once every year she tried to see him to deliver her mother's message of forgiveness, but every year hitherto she had knocked at that door in vain; her father was inexorable. Her brother, her only means of communication, had not come to see her for four years, and had sent her no assistance; yet she prayed to God to unseal her father's eyes and to soften her brother's heart, and no accusations mingled with her prayers. Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exhausted the vocabulary of abuse, and failed to find words that did justice to the banker's iniquitous conduct; but while they heaped execrations on the millionaire, Victorine's words were as gentle as the moan of the wounded dove, and affection found expression even in the cry drawn from her by pain.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac was a thoroughly southern type; he had a fair complexion, blue eyes, black hair. In his figure, manner, and his whole bearing it was easy to see that he had either come of a noble family, or that, from his earliest childhood, he had been gently bred. If he was careful of his wardrobe, only taking last year's clothes into daily wear, still upon occasion he could issue forth as a young man of fashion. Ordinarily he wore a shabby coat and waistcoat, the limp black cravat, untidily knotted, that students affect, trousers that matched the rest of his costume, and boots that had been resoled.

°°°°Vautrin (the man of forty with the dyed whiskers) marked a transition stage between these two young people and the others. He was the kind of man that calls forth the remark: "He looks a jovial sort!" He had broad shoulders, a well-developed chest, muscular arms, and strong square-fisted hands; the joints of his fingers were covered with tufts of fiery red hair. His face was furrowed by premature wrinkles; there was a certain hardness about it in spite of his bland and insinuating manner. His bass voice was by no means unpleasant, and was in keeping with his boisterous laughter. He was always obliging, always in good spirits; if anything went wrong with one of the locks, he would soon unscrew it, take it to pieces, file it, oil and clean and set it in order, and put it back in its place again; "I am an old hand at it," he used to say. Not only so, he knew all about ships, the sea, France, foreign countries, men, business, law, great houses and prisons,--there was nothing that he did not know. If any one complained rather more than usual, he would offer his services at once. He had several times lent money to Mme. Vauquer, or to the boarders; but, somehow, those whom he obliged felt that they would sooner face death than fail to repay him; a certain resolute look, sometimes seen on his face, inspired fear of him, for all his appearance of easy good-nature. In the way he spat there was an imperturbable coolness which seemed to indicate that this was a man who would not stick at a crime to extricate himself from a false position. His eyes, like those of a pitiless judge, seemed to go to the very bottom of all questions, to read all natures, all feelings and thoughts. His habit of life was very regular; he usually went out after breakfast, returning in time for dinner, and disappeared for the rest of the evening, letting himself in about midnight with a latch key, a privilege that Mme. Vauquer accorded to no other boarder. But then he was on very good terms with the widow; he used to call her "mamma," and put his arm round her waist, a piece of flattery perhaps not appreciated to the full! The worthy woman might imagine this to be an easy feat; but, as a matter of fact, no arm but Vautrin's was long enough to encircle her.

°°°°It was a characteristic trait of his generously to pay fifteen francs a month for the cup of coffee with a dash of brandy in it, which he took after dinner. Less superficial observers than young men engulfed by the whirlpool of Parisian life, or old men, who took no interest in anything that did not directly concern them, would not have stopped short at the vaguely unsatisfactory impression that Vautrin made upon them. He knew or guessed the concerns of every one about him; but none of them had been able to penetrate his thoughts, or to discover his occupation. He had deliberately made his apparent good-nature, his unfailing readiness to oblige, and his high spirits into a barrier between himself and the rest of them, but not seldom he gave glimpses of appalling depths of character. He seemed to delight in scourging the upper classes of society with the lash of his tongue, to take pleasure in convicting it of inconsistency, in mocking at law and order with some grim jest worthy of Juvenal, as if some grudge against the social system rankled in him, as if there were some mystery carefully hidden away in his life.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer felt attracted, perhaps unconsciously, by the strength of the one man, and the good looks of the other; her stolen glances and secret thoughts were divided between them; but neither of them seemed to take any notice of her, although some day a chance might alter her position, and she would be a wealthy heiress. For that matter, there was not a soul in the house who took any trouble to investigate the various chronicles of misfortunes, real or imaginary, related by the rest. Each one regarded the others with indifference, tempered by suspicion; it was a natural result of their relative positions. Practical assistance not one could give, this they all knew, and they had long since exhausted their stock of condolence over previous discussions of their grievances. They were in something the same position as an elderly couple who have nothing left to say to each other. The routine of existence kept them in contact, but they were parts of a mechanism which wanted oil. There was not one of them but would have passed a blind man begging in the street, not one that felt moved to pity by a tale of misfortune, not one who did not see in death the solution of the all- absorbing problem of misery which left them cold to the most terrible anguish in others.

°°°°The happiest of these hapless beings was certainly Mme. Vauquer, who reigned supreme over this hospital supported by voluntary contributions. For her, the little garden, which silence, and cold, and rain, and drought combined to make as dreary as an Asian steppe, was a pleasant shaded nook; the gaunt yellow house, the musty odors of a back shop had charms for her, and for her alone. Those cells belonged to her. She fed those convicts condemned to penal servitude for life, and her authority was recognized among them. Where else in Paris would they have found wholesome food in sufficient quantity at the prices she charged them, and rooms which they were at liberty to make, if not exactly elegant or comfortable, at any rate clean and healthy? If she had committed some flagrant act of injustice, the victim would have borne it in silence.

°°°°Such a gathering contained, as might have been expected, the elements out of which a complete society might be constructed. And, as in a school, as in the world itself, there was among the eighteen men and women who met round the dinner table a poor creature, despised by all the others, condemned to be the butt of all their jokes. At the beginning of Eugene de Rastignac's second twelvemonth, this figure suddenly started out into bold relief against the background of human forms and faces among which the law student was yet to live for another two years to come. This laughing-stock was the retired vermicelli-merchant, Father Goriot, upon whose face a painter, like the historian, would have concentrated all the light in his picture.

°°°°How had it come about that the boarders regarded him with a half- malignant contempt? Why did they subject the oldest among their number to a kind of persecution, in which there was mingled some pity, but no respect for his misfortunes? Had he brought it on himself by some eccentricity or absurdity, which is less easily forgiven or forgotten than more serious defects? The question strikes at the root of many a social injustice. Perhaps it is only human nature to inflict suffering on anything that will endure suffering, whether by reason of its genuine humility, or indifference, or sheer helplessness. Do we not, one and all, like to feel our strength even at the expense of some one or of something? The poorest sample of humanity, the street arab, will pull the bell handle at every street door in bitter weather, and scramble up to write his name on the unsullied marble of a monument.

°°°°In the year 1813, at the age of sixty-nine or thereabouts, "Father Goriot" had sold his business and retired--to Mme. Vauquer's boarding house. When he first came there he had taken the rooms now occupied by Mme. Couture; he had paid twelve hundred francs a year like a man to whom five louis more or less was a mere trifle. For him Mme. Vauquer had made various improvements in the three rooms destined for his use, in consideration of a certain sum paid in advance, so it was said, for the miserable furniture, that is to say, for some yellow cotton curtains, a few chairs of stained wood covered with Utrecht velvet, several wretched colored prints in frames, and wall papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained. Possibly it was the careless generosity with which Father Goriot allowed himself to be overreached at this period of his life (they called him Monsieur Goriot very respectfully then) that gave Mme. Vauquer the meanest opinion of his business abilities; she looked on him as an imbecile where money was concerned.

°°°°Goriot had brought with him a considerable wardrobe, the gorgeous outfit of a retired tradesman who denies himself nothing. Mme. Vauquer's astonished eyes beheld no less than eighteen cambric- fronted shirts, the splendor of their fineness being enhanced by a pair of pins each bearing a large diamond, and connected by a short chain, an ornament which adorned the vermicelli-maker's shirt front. He usually wore a coat of corn-flower blue; his rotund and portly person was still further set off by a clean white waistcoat, and a gold chain and seals which dangled over that broad expanse. When his hostess accused him of being "a bit of a beau," he smiled with the vanity of a citizen whose foible is gratified. His cupboards (ormoires, as he called them in the popular dialect) were filled with a quantity of plate that he brought with him. The widow's eyes gleamed as she obligingly helped him to unpack the soup ladles, table-spoons, forks, cruet- stands, tureens, dishes, and breakfast services--all of silver, which were duly arranged upon shelves, besides a few more or less handsome pieces of plate, all weighing no inconsiderable number of ounces; he could not bring himself to part with these gifts that reminded him of past domestic festivals.

°°°°"This was my wife's present to me on the first anniversary of our wedding day," he said to Mme. Vauquer, as he put away a little silver posset dish, with two turtle-doves billing on the cover. "Poor dear! she spent on it all the money she had saved before we were married. Do you know, I would sooner scratch the earth with my nails for a living, madame, than part with that. But I shall be able to take my coffee out of it every morning for the rest of my days, thank the Lord! I am not to be pitied. There's not much fear of my starving for some time to come."

°°°°Finally, Mme. Vauquer's magpie's eye had discovered and read certain entries in the list of shareholders in the funds, and, after a rough calculation, was disposed to credit Goriot (worthy man) with something like ten thousand francs a year. From that day forward Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans), who, as a matter of fact, had seen forty-eight summers, though she would only own to thirty-nine of them--Mme. Vauquer had her own ideas. Though Goriot's eyes seemed to have shrunk in their sockets, though they were weak and watery, owing to some glandular affection which compelled him to wipe them continually, she considered him to be a very gentlemanly and pleasant-looking man. Moreover, the widow saw favorable indications of character in the well-developed calves of his legs and in his square-shaped nose, indications still further borne out by the worthy man's full-moon countenance and look of stupid good-nature. This, in all probability, was a strongly-build animal, whose brains mostly consisted in a capacity for affection. His hair, worn in ailes de pigeon, and duly powdered every morning by the barber from the Ecole Polytechnique, described five points on his low forehead, and made an elegant setting to his face. Though his manners were somewhat boorish, he was always as neat as a new pin and he took his snuff in a lordly way, like a man who knows that his snuff- box is always likely to be filled with maccaboy, so that when Mme. Vauquer lay down to rest on the day of M. Goriot's installation, her heart, like a larded partridge, sweltered before the fire of a burning desire to shake off the shroud of Vauquer and rise again as Goriot. She would marry again, sell her boarding-house, give her hand to this fine flower of citizenship, become a lady of consequence in the quarter, and ask for subscriptions for charitable purposes; she would make little Sunday excursions to Choisy, Soissy, Gentilly; she would have a box at the theatre when she liked, instead of waiting for the author's tickets that one of her boarders sometimes gave her, in July; the whole Eldorado of a little Parisian household rose up before Mme. Vauquer in her dreams. Nobody knew that she herself possessed forty thousand francs, accumulated sou by sou, that was her secret; surely as far as money was concerned she was a very tolerable match. "And in other respects, I am quite his equal," she said to herself, turning as if to assure herself of the charms of a form that the portly Sylvie found moulded in down feathers every morning.

°°°°For three months from that day Mme. Veuve Vauquer availed herself of the services of M. Goriot's coiffeur, and went to some expense over her toilette, expense justifiable on the ground that she owed it to herself and her establishment to pay some attention to appearances when such highly-respectable persons honored her house with their presence. She expended no small amount of ingenuity in a sort of weeding process of her lodgers, announcing her intention of receiving henceforward none but people who were in every way select. If a stranger presented himself, she let him know that M. Goriot, one of the best known and most highly- respected merchants in Paris, had singled out her boarding-house for a residence. She drew up a prospectus headed MAISON VAUQUER, in which it was asserted that hers was "one of the oldest and most highly recommended boarding-houses in the Latin Quarter." "From the windows of the house," thus ran the prospectus, "there is a charming view of the Vallee des Gobelins (so there is--from the third floor), and a BEAUTIFUL garden, EXTENDING down to AN AVENUE OF LINDENS at the further end." Mention was made of the bracing air of the place and its quiet situation.

°°°°It was this prospectus that attracted Mme. la Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil, a widow of six and thirty, who was awaiting the final settlement of her husband's affairs, and of another matter regarding a pension due to her as the wife of a general who had died "on the field of battle." On this Mme. Vauquer saw to her table, lighted a fire daily in the sitting-room for nearly six months, and kept the promise of her prospectus, even going to some expense to do so. And the Countess, on her side, addressed Mme. Vauquer as "my dear," and promised her two more boarders, the Baronne de Vaumerland and the widow of a colonel, the late Comte de Picquoisie, who were about to leave a boarding-house in the Marais, where the terms were higher than at the Maison Vauquer. Both these ladies, moreover, would be very well to do when the people at the War Office had come to an end of their formalities. "But Government departments are always so dilatory," the lady added.

°°°°After dinner the two widows went together up to Mme. Vauquer's room, and had a snug little chat over some cordial and various delicacies reserved for the mistress of the house. Mme. Vauquer's ideas as to Goriot were cordially approved by Mme. de l'Ambermesnil; it was a capital notion, which for that matter she had guessed from the very first; in her opinion the vermicelli maker was an excellent man.

°°°°"Ah! my dear lady, such a well-preserved man of his age, as sound as my eyesight--a man who might make a woman happy!" said the widow.

°°°°The good-natured Countess turned to the subject of Mme. Vauquer's dress, which was not in harmony with her projects. "You must put yourself on a war footing," said she.

°°°°After much serious consideration the two widows went shopping together--they purchased a hat adorned with ostrich feathers and a cap at the Palais Royal, and the Countess took her friend to the Magasin de la Petite Jeannette, where they chose a dress and a scarf. Thus equipped for the campaign, the widow looked exactly like the prize animal hung out for a sign above an a la mode beef shop; but she herself was so much pleased with the improvement, as she considered it, in her appearance, that she felt that she lay under some obligation to the Countess; and, though by no means open-handed, she begged that lady to accept a hat that cost twenty francs. The fact was that she needed the Countess' services on the delicate mission of sounding Goriot; the countess must sing her praises in his ears. Mme. de l'Ambermesnil lent herself very good-naturedly to this manoeuvre, began her operations, and succeeded in obtaining a private interview; but the overtures that she made, with a view to securing him for herself, were received with embarrassment, not to say a repulse. She left him, revolted by his coarseness.

°°°°"My angel," said she to her dear friend, "you will make nothing of that man yonder. He is absurdly suspicious, and he is a mean curmudgeon, an idiot, a fool; you would never be happy with him."

°°°°After what had passed between M. Goriot and Mme. de l'Ambermesnil, the Countess would no longer live under the same roof. She left the next day, forgot to pay for six months' board, and left behind her wardrobe, cast-off clothing to the value of five francs. Eagerly and persistently as Mme. Vauquer sought her quondam lodger, the Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil was never heard of again in Paris. The widow often talked of this deplorable business, and regretted her own too confiding disposition. As a matter of fact, she was as suspicious as a cat; but she was like many other people, who cannot trust their own kin and put themselves at the mercy of the next chance comer--an odd but common phenomenon, whose causes may readily be traced to the depths of the human heart.

°°°°Perhaps there are people who know that they have nothing more to look for from those with whom they live; they have shown the emptiness of their hearts to their housemates, and in their secret selves they are conscious that they are severely judged, and that they deserve to be judged severely; but still they feel an unconquerable craving for praises that they do not hear, or they are consumed by a desire to appear to possess, in the eyes of a new audience, the qualities which they have not, hoping to win the admiration or affection of strangers at the risk of forfeiting it again some day. Or, once more, there are other mercenary natures who never do a kindness to a friend or a relation simply because these have a claim upon them, while a service done to a stranger brings its reward to self-love. Such natures feel but little affection for those who are nearest to them; they keep their kindness for remoter circles of acquaintance, and show most to those who dwell on its utmost limits. Mme. Vauquer belonged to both these essentially mean, false, and execrable classes.

°°°°"If I had been there at the time," Vautrin would say at the end of the story, I would have shown her up, and that misfortune would not have befallen you. I know that kind of phiz!"

°°°°Like all narrow natures, Mme. Vauquer was wont to confine her attention to events, and did not go very deeply into the causes that brought them about; she likewise preferred to throw the blame of her own mistakes on other people, so she chose to consider that the honest vermicelli maker was responsible for her misfortune. It had opened her eyes, so she said, with regard to him. As soon as she saw that her blandishments were in vain, and that her outlay on her toilette was money thrown away, she was not slow to discover the reason of his indifference. It became plain to her at once that there was SOME OTHER ATTRACTION, to use her own expression. In short, it was evident that the hope she had so fondly cherished was a baseless delusion, and that she would "never make anything out of that man yonder," in the Countess' forcible phrase. The Countess seemed to have been a judge of character. Mme. Vauquer's aversion was naturally more energetic than her friendship, for her hatred was not in proportion to her love, but to her disappointed expectations. The human heart may find here and there a resting-place short of the highest height of affection, but we seldom stop in the steep, downward slope of hatred. Still, M. Goriot was a lodger, and the widow's wounded self-love could not vent itself in an explosion of wrath; like a monk harassed by the prior of his convent, she was forced to stifle her sighs of disappointment, and to gulp down her craving for revenge. Little minds find gratification for their feelings, benevolent or otherwise, by a constant exercise of petty ingenuity. The widow employed her woman's malice to devise a system of covert persecution. She began by a course of retrenchment--various luxuries which had found their way to the table appeared there no more.

°°°°"No more gherkins, no more anchovies; they have made a fool of me!" she said to Sylvie one morning, and they returned to the old bill of fare.

°°°°The thrifty frugality necessary to those who mean to make their way in the world had become an inveterate habit of life with M. Goriot. Soup, boiled beef, and a dish of vegetables had been, and always would be, the dinner he liked best, so Mme. Vauquer found it very difficult to annoy a boarder whose tastes were so simple. He was proof against her malice, and in desperation she spoke to him and of him slightingly before the other lodgers, who began to amuse themselves at his expense, and so gratified her desire for revenge.

°°°°Towards the end of the first year the widow's suspicions had reached such a pitch that she began to wonder how it was that a retired merchant with a secure income of seven or eight thousand livres, the owner of such magnificent plate and jewelry handsome enough for a kept mistress, should be living in her house. Why should he devote so small a proportion of his money to his expenses? Until the first year was nearly at an end, Goriot had dined out once or twice every week, but these occasions came less frequently, and at last he was scarcely absent from the dinner- table twice a month. It was hardly expected that Mme. Vauquer should regard the increased regularity of her boarder's habits with complacency, when those little excursions of his had been so much to her interest. She attributed the change not so much to a gradual diminution of fortune as to a spiteful wish to annoy his hostess. It is one of the most detestable habits of a Liliputian mind to credit other people with its own malignant pettiness.

°°°°Unluckily, towards the end of the second year, M. Goriot's conduct gave some color to the idle talk about him. He asked Mme. Vauquer to give him a room on the second floor, and to make a corresponding reduction in her charges. Apparently, such strict economy was called for, that he did without a fire all through the winter. Mme. Vauquer asked to be paid in advance, an arrangement to which M. Goriot consented, and thenceforward she spoke of him as "Father Goriot."

°°°°What had brought about this decline and fall? Conjecture was keen, but investigation was difficult. Father Goriot was not communicative; in the sham countess' phrase he was "a curmudgeon." Empty-headed people who babble about their own affairs because they have nothing else to occupy them, naturally conclude that if people say nothing of their doings it is because their doings will not bear being talked about; so the highly respectable merchant became a scoundrel, and the late beau was an old rogue. Opinion fluctuated. Sometimes, according to Vautrin, who came about this time to live in the Maison Vauquer, Father Goriot was a man who went on 'Change and DABBLED (to use the sufficiently expressive language of the Stock Exchange) in stocks and shares after he had ruined himself by heavy speculation. Sometimes it was held that he was one of those petty gamblers who nightly play for small stakes until they win a few francs. A theory that he was a detective in the employ of the Home Office found favor at one time, but Vautrin urged that "Goriot was not sharp enough for one of that sort." There were yet other solutions; Father Goriot was a skinflint, a shark of a money- lender, a man who lived by selling lottery tickets. He was by turns all the most mysterious brood of vice and shame and misery; yet, however vile his life might be, the feeling of repulsion which he aroused in others was not so strong that he must be banished from their society--he paid his way. Besides, Goriot had his uses, every one vented his spleen or sharpened his wit on him; he was pelted with jokes and belabored with hard words. The general consensus of opinion was in favor of a theory which seemed the most likely; this was Mme. Vauquer's view. According to her, the man so well preserved at his time of life, as sound as her eyesight, with whom a woman might be very happy, was a libertine who had strange tastes. These are the facts upon which Mme. Vauquer's slanders were based.

°°°°Early one morning, some few months after the departure of the unlucky Countess who had managed to live for six months at the widow's expense, Mme. Vauquer (not yet dressed) heard the rustle of a silk dress and a young woman's light footstep on the stair; some one was going to Goriot's room. He seemed to expect the visit, for his door stood ajar. The portly Sylvie presently came up to tell her mistress that a girl too pretty to be honest, "dressed like a goddess," and not a speck of mud on her laced cashmere boots, had glided in from the street like a snake, had found the kitchen, and asked for M. Goriot's room. Mme. Vauquer and the cook, listening, overheard several words affectionately spoken during the visit, which lasted for some time. When M. Goriot went downstairs with the lady, the stout Sylvie forthwith took her basket and followed the lover-like couple, under pretext of going to do her marketing.

°°°°"M. Goriot must be awfully rich, all the same, madame," she reported on her return, "to keep her in such style. Just imagine it! There was a splendid carriage waiting at the corner of the Place de l'Estrapade, and SHE got into it."

°°°°While they were at dinner that evening, Mme. Vauquer went to the window and drew the curtain, as the sun was shining into Goriot's eyes.

°°°°"You are beloved of fair ladies, M. Goriot--the sun seeks you out," she said, alluding to his visitor. "Peste! you have good taste; she was very pretty."

°°°°"That was my daughter," he said, with a kind of pride in his voice, and the rest chose to consider this as the fatuity of an old man who wishes to save appearances.

°°°°A month after this visit M. Goriot received another. The same daughter who had come to see him that morning came again after dinner, this time in evening dress. The boarders, in deep discussion in the dining-room, caught a glimpse of a lovely, fair-haired woman, slender, graceful, and much too distinguished- looking to be a daughter of Father Goriot's.

°°°°"Two of them!" cried the portly Sylvie, who did not recognize the lady of the first visit.

°°°°A few days later, and another young lady--a tall, well-moulded brunette, with dark hair and bright eyes--came to ask for M. Goriot.

°°°°"Three of them!" said Sylvie.

°°°°Then the second daughter, who had first come in the morning to see her father, came shortly afterwards in the evening. She wore a ball dress, and came in a carriage.

°°°°"Four of them!" commented Mme. Vauquer and her plump handmaid. Sylvie saw not a trace of resemblance between this great lady and the girl in her simple morning dress who had entered her kitchen on the occasion of her first visit.

°°°°At that time Goriot was paying twelve hundred francs a year to his landlady, and Mme. Vauquer saw nothing out of the common in the fact that a rich man had four or five mistresses; nay, she thought it very knowing of him to pass them off as his daughters. She was not at all inclined to draw a hard-and-fast line, or to take umbrage at his sending for them to the Maison Vauquer; yet, inasmuch as these visits explained her boarder's indifference to her, she went so far (at the end of the second year) as to speak of him as an "ugly old wretch." When at length her boarder declined to nine hundred francs a year, she asked him very insolently what he took her house to be, after meeting one of these ladies on he stairs. Father Goriot answered that the lady was his eldest daughter.

°°°°"So you have two or three dozen daughters, have you?" said Mme. Vauquer sharply.

°°°°"I have only two," her boarder answered meekly, like a ruined man who is broken in to all the cruel usage of misfortune.

°°°°Towards the end of the third year Father Goriot reduced his expenses still further; he went up to the third story, and now paid forty-five francs a month. He did without snuff, told his hairdresser that he no longer required his services, and gave up wearing powder. When Goriot appeared for the first time in this condition, an exclamation of astonishment broke from his hostess at the color of his hair--a dingy olive gray. He had grown sadder day by day under the influence of some hidden trouble; among all the faces round the table, his was the most woe-begone. There was no longer any doubt. Goriot was an elderly libertine, whose eyes had only been preserved by the skill of the physician from the malign influence of the remedies necessitated by the state of his health. The disgusting color of his hair was a result of his excesses and of the drugs which he had taken that he might continue his career. The poor old man's mental and physical condition afforded some grounds for the absurd rubbish talked about him. When his outfit was worn out, he replaced the fine linen by calico at fourteen sous the ell. His diamonds, his gold snuff-box, watch-chain and trinkets, disappeared one by one. He had left off wearing the corn-flower blue coat, and was sumptuously arrayed, summer as well as winter, in a coarse chestnut-brown coat, a plush waistcoat, and doeskin breeches. He grew thinner and thinner; his legs were shrunken, his cheeks, once so puffed out by contented bourgeois prosperity, were covered with wrinkles, and the outlines of the jawbones were distinctly visible; there were deep furrows in his forehead. In the fourth year of his residence in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve he was no longer like his former self. The hale vermicelli manufacturer, sixty-two years of age, who had looked scarce forty, the stout, comfortable, prosperous tradesman, with an almost bucolic air, and such a brisk demeanor that it did you good to look at him; the man with something boyish in his smile, had suddenly sunk into his dotage, and had become a feeble, vacillating septuagenarian.

°°°°The keen, bright blue eyes had grown dull, and faded to a steel- gray color; the red inflamed rims looked as though they had shed tears of blood. He excited feelings of repulsion in some, and of pity in others. The young medical students who came to the house noticed the drooping of his lower lip and the conformation of the facial angle; and, after teasing him for some time to no purpose, they declared that cretinism was setting in.

°°°°One evening after dinner Mme. Vauquer said half banteringly to him, "So those daughters of yours don't come to see you any more, eh?" meaning to imply her doubts as to his paternity; but Father Goriot shrank as if his hostess had touched him with a sword- point.

°°°°"They come sometimes," he said in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Aha! you still see them sometimes?" cried the students. "Bravo, Father Goriot!"

°°°°The old man scarcely seemed to hear the witticisms at his expense that followed on the words; he had relapsed into the dreamy state of mind that these superficial observers took for senile torpor, due to his lack of intelligence. If they had only known, they might have been deeply interested by the problem of his condition; but few problems were more obscure. It was easy, of course, to find out whether Goriot had really been a vermicelli manufacturer; the amount of his fortune was readily discoverable; but the old people, who were most inquisitive as to his concerns, never went beyond the limits of the Quarter, and lived in the lodging-house much as oysters cling to a rock. As for the rest, the current of life in Paris daily awaited them, and swept them away with it; so soon as they left the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, they forgot the existence of the old man, their butt at dinner. For those narrow souls, or for careless youth, the misery in Father Goriot's withered face and its dull apathy were quite incompatible with wealth or any sort of intelligence. As for the creatures whom he called his daughters, all Mme. Vauquer's boarders were of her opinion. With the faculty for severe logic sedulously cultivated by elderly women during long evenings of gossip till they can always find an hypothesis to fit all circumstances, she was wont to reason thus:

°°°°"If Father Goriot had daughters of his own as rich as those ladies who came here seemed to be, he would not be lodging in my house, on the third floor, at forty-five francs a month; and he would not go about dressed like a poor man."

°°°°No objection could be raised to these inferences. So by the end of the month of November 1819, at the time when the curtain rises on this drama, every one in the house had come to have a very decided opinion as to the poor old man. He had never had either wife or daughter; excesses had reduced him to this sluggish condition; he was a sort of human mollusk who should be classed among the capulidoe, so one of the dinner contingent, an employe at the Museum, who had a pretty wit of his own. Poiret was an eagle, a gentleman, compared with Goriot. Poiret would join the talk, argue, answer when he was spoken to; as a matter of fact, his talk, arguments, and responses contributed nothing to the conversation, for Poiret had a habit of repeating what the others said in different words; still, he did join in the talk; he was alive, and seemed capable of feeling; while Father Goriot (to quote the Museum official again) was invariably at zero--Reaumur.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac had just returned to Paris in a state of mind not unknown to young men who are conscious of unusual powers, and to those whose faculties are so stimulated by a difficult position, that for the time being they rise above the ordinary level.

°°°°Rastignac's first year of study for the preliminary examinations in law had left him free to see the sights of Paris and to enjoy some of its amusements. A student has not much time on his hands if he sets himself to learn the repertory of every theatre, and to study the ins and outs of the labyrinth of Paris. To know its customs; to learn the language, and become familiar with the amusements of the capital, he must explore its recesses, good and bad, follow the studies that please him best, and form some idea of the treasures contained in galleries and museums.

°°°°At this stage of his career a student grows eager and excited about all sorts of follies that seem to him to be of immense importance. He has his hero, his great man, a professor at the College de France, paid to talk down to the level of his audience. He adjusts his cravat, and strikes various attitudes for the benefit of the women in the first galleries at the Opera- Comique. As he passes through all these successive initiations, and breaks out of his sheath, the horizons of life widen around him, and at length he grasps the plan of society with the different human strata of which it is composed.

°°°°If he begins by admiring the procession of carriages on sunny afternoons in the Champs-Elysees, he soon reaches the further stage of envying their owners. Unconsciously, Eugene had served his apprenticeship before he went back to Angouleme for the long vacation after taking his degrees as bachelor of arts and bachelor of law. The illusions of childhood had vanished, so also had the ideas he brought with him from the provinces; he had returned thither with an intelligence developed, with loftier ambitions, and saw things as they were at home in the old manor house. His father and mother, his two brothers and two sisters, with an aged aunt, whose whole fortune consisted in annuities, lived on the little estate of Rastignac. The whole property brought in about three thousand francs; and though the amount varied with the season (as must always be the case in a vine- growing district), they were obliged to spare an unvarying twelve hundred francs out of their income for him. He saw how constantly the poverty, which they had generously hidden from him, weighed upon them; he could not help comparing the sisters, who had seemed so beautiful to his boyish eyes, with women in Paris, who had realized the beauty of his dreams. The uncertain future of the whole family depended upon him. It did not escape his eyes that not a crumb was wasted in the house, nor that the wine they drank was made from the second pressing; a multitude of small things, which it is useless to speak of in detail here, made him burn to distinguish himself, and his ambition to succeed increased tenfold.

°°°°He meant, like all great souls, that his success should be owing entirely to his merits; but his was pre-eminently a southern temperament, the execution of his plans was sure to be marred by the vertigo that seizes on youth when youth sees itself alone in a wide sea, uncertain how to spend its energies, whither to steer its course, how to adapt its sails to the winds. At first he determined to fling himself heart and soul into his work, but he was diverted from this purpose by the need of society and connections; then he saw how great an influence women exert in social life, and suddenly made up his mind to go out into this world to seek a protectress there. Surely a clever and high- spirited young man, whose wit and courage were set off to advantage by a graceful figure and the vigorous kind of beauty that readily strikes a woman's imagination, need not despair of finding a protectress. These ideas occurred to him in his country walks with his sisters, whom he had once joined so gaily. The girls thought him very much changed.

°°°°His aunt, Mme. de Marcillac, had been presented at court, and had moved among the brightest heights of that lofty region. Suddenly the young man's ambition discerned in those recollections of hers, which had been like nursery fairy tales to her nephews and nieces, the elements of a social success at least as important as the success which he had achieved at the Ecole de Droit. He began to ask his aunt about those relations; some of the old ties might still hold good. After much shaking of the branches of the family tree, the old lady came to the conclusion that of all persons who could be useful to her nephew among the selfish genus of rich relations, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was the least likely to refuse. To this lady, therefore, she wrote in the old-fashioned style, recommending Eugene to her; pointing out to her nephew that if he succeeded in pleasing Mme. de Beauseant, the Vicomtesse would introduce him to other relations. A few days after his return to Paris, therefore, Rastignac sent his aunt's letter to Mme. de Beauseant. The Vicomtesse replied by an invitation to a ball for the following evening. This was the position of affairs at the Maison Vauquer at the end of November 1819.

°°°°A few days later, after Mme. de Beauseant's ball, Eugene came in at two o'clock in the morning. The persevering student meant to make up for the lost time by working until daylight. It was the first time that he had attempted to spend the night in this way in that silent quarter. The spell of a factitious energy was upon him; he had beheld the pomp and splendor of the world. He had not dined at the Maison Vauquer; the boarders probably would think that he would walk home at daybreak from the dance, as he had done sometimes on former occasions, after a fete at the Prado, or a ball at the Odeon, splashing his silk stockings thereby, and ruining his pumps.

°°°°It so happened that Christophe took a look into the street before drawing the bolts of the door; and Rastignac, coming in at that moment, could go up to his room without making any noise, followed by Christophe, who made a great deal. Eugene exchanged his dress suit for a shabby overcoat and slippers, kindled a fire with some blocks of patent fuel, and prepared for his night's work in such a sort that the faint sounds he made were drowned by Christophe's heavy tramp on the stairs.

°°°°Eugene sat absorbed in thought for a few moments before plunging into his law books. He had just become aware of the fact that the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was one of the queens of fashion, that her house was thought to be the pleasantest in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. And not only so, she was, by right of her fortune, and the name she bore, one of the most conspicuous figures in that aristocratic world. Thanks to the aunt, thanks to Mme. de Marcillac's letter of introduction, the poor student had been kindly received in that house before he knew the extent of the favor thus shown to him. It was almost like a patent of nobility to be admitted to those gilded salons; he had appeared in the most exclusive circle in Paris, and now all doors were open for him. Eugene had been dazzled at first by the brilliant assembly, and had scarcely exchanged a few words with the Vicomtesse; he had been content to single out a goddess among this throng of Parisian divinities, one of those women who are sure to attract a young man's fancy.

°°°°The Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud was tall and gracefully made; she had one of the prettiest figures in Paris. Imagine a pair of great dark eyes, a magnificently moulded hand, a shapely foot. There was a fiery energy in her movements; the Marquis de Ronquerolles had called her "a thoroughbred," "a pure pedigree," these figures of speech have replaced the "heavenly angel" and Ossianic nomenclature; the old mythology of love is extinct, doomed to perish by modern dandyism. But for Rastignac, Mme. Anastasie de Restaud was the woman for whom he had sighed. He had contrived to write his name twice upon the list of partners upon her fan, and had snatched a few words with her during the first quadrille.

°°°°"Where shall I meet you again, Madame?" he asked abruptly, and the tones of his voice were full of the vehement energy that women like so well.

°°°°"Oh, everywhere!" said she, "in the Bois, at the Bouffons, in my own house."

°°°°With the impetuosity of his adventurous southern temper, he did all he could to cultivate an acquaintance with this lovely countess, making the best of his opportunities in the quadrille and during a waltz that she gave him. When he told her that he was a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's, the Countess, whom he took for a great lady, asked him to call at her house, and after her parting smile, Rastignac felt convinced that he must make this visit. He was so lucky as to light upon some one who did not laugh at his ignorance, a fatal defect among the gilded and insolent youth of that period; the coterie of Maulincourts, Maximes de Trailles, de Marsays, Ronquerolles, Ajuda-Pintos, and Vandenesses who shone there in all the glory of coxcombry among the best-dressed women of fashion in Paris--Lady Brandon, the Duchesse de Langeais, the Comtesse de Kergarouet, Mme. de Serizy, the Duchesse de Carigliano, the Comtesse Ferraud, Mme. de Lanty, the Marquise d'Aiglemont, Mme. Firmiani, the Marquise de Listomere and the Marquise d'Espard, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and the Grandlieus. Luckily, therefore, for him, the novice happened upon the Marquis de Montriveau, the lover of the Duchesse de Langeais, a general as simple as a child; from him Rastignac learned that the Comtesse lived in the Rue du Helder.

°°°°Ah, what it is to be young, eager to see the world, greedily on the watch for any chance that brings you nearer the woman of your dreams, and behold two houses open their doors to you! To set foot in the Vicomtesse de Beauseant's house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; to fall on your knees before a Comtesse de Restaud in the Chaussee d'Antin; to look at one glance across a vista of Paris drawing-rooms, conscious that, possessing sufficient good looks, you may hope to find aid and protection there in a feminine heart! To feel ambitious enough to spurn the tight-rope on which you must walk with the steady head of an acrobat for whom a fall is impossible, and to find in a charming woman the best of all balancing poles.

°°°°He sat there with his thoughts for a while, Law on the one hand, and Poverty on the other, beholding a radiant vision of a woman rise above the dull, smouldering fire. Who would not have paused and questioned the future as Eugene was doing? who would not have pictured it full of success? His wondering thoughts took wings; he was transported out of the present into that blissful future; he was sitting by Mme. de Restaud's side, when a sort of sigh, like the grunt of an overburdened St. Joseph, broke the silence of the night. It vibrated through the student, who took the sound for a death groan. He opened his door noiselessly, went out upon the landing, and saw a thin streak of light under Father Goriot's door. Eugene feared that his neighbor had been taken ill; he went over and looked through the keyhole; the old man was busily engaged in an occupation so singular and so suspicious that Rastignac thought he was only doing a piece of necessary service to society to watch the self-styled vermicelli maker's nocturnal industries.

°°°°The table was upturned, and Goriot had doubtless in some way secured a silver plate and cup to the bar before knotting a thick rope round them; he was pulling at this rope with such enormous force that they were being crushed and twisted out of shape; to all appearance he meant to convert the richly wrought metal into ingots.

°°°°"Peste! what a man!" said Rastignac, as he watched Goriot's muscular arms; there was not a sound in the room while the old man, with the aid of the rope, was kneading the silver like dough. "Was he then, indeed, a thief, or a receiver of stolen goods, who affected imbecility and decrepitude, and lived like a beggar that he might carry on his pursuits the more securely?" Eugene stood for a moment revolving these questions, then he looked again through the keyhole.

°°°°Father Goriot had unwound his coil of rope; he had covered the table with a blanket, and was now employed in rolling the flattened mass of silver into a bar, an operation which he performed with marvelous dexterity.

°°°°"Why, he must be as strong as Augustus, King of Poland!" said Eugene to himself when the bar was nearly finished.

°°°°Father Goriot looked sadly at his handiwork, tears fell from his eyes, he blew out the dip which had served him for a light while he manipulated the silver, and Eugene heard him sigh as he lay down again.

°°°°"He is mad," thought the student.

°°°°"Poor child!" Father Goriot said aloud. Rastignac, hearing those words, concluded to keep silence; he would not hastily condemn his neighbor. He was just in the doorway of his room when a strange sound from the staircase below reached his ears; it might have been made by two men coming up in list slippers. Eugene listened; two men there certainly were, he could hear their breathing. Yet there had been no sound of opening the street door, no footsteps in the passage. Suddenly, too, he saw a faint gleam of light on the second story; it came from M. Vautrin's room.

°°°°"There are a good many mysteries here for a lodging-house!" he said to himself.

°°°°He went part of the way downstairs and listened again. The rattle of gold reached his ears. In another moment the light was put out, and again he distinctly heard the breathing of two men, but no sound of a door being opened or shut. The two men went downstairs, the faint sounds growing fainter as they went.

°°°°"Who is there?" cried Mme. Vauquer out of her bedroom window.

°°°°"I, Mme. Vauquer," answered Vautrin's deep bass voice. "I am coming in."

°°°°"That is odd! Christophe drew the bolts," said Eugene, going back to his room. "You have to sit up at night, it seems, if you really mean to know all that is going on about you in Paris."

°°°°These incidents turned his thought from his ambitious dreams; he betook himself to his work, but his thought wandered back to Father Goriot's suspicious occupation; Mme. de Restaud's face swam again and again before his eyes like a vision of a brilliant future; and at last he lay down and slept with clenched fists. When a young man makes up his mind that he will work all night, the chances are that seven times out of ten he will sleep till morning. Such vigils do not begin before we are turned twenty.

°°°°The next morning Paris was wrapped in one of the dense fogs that throw the most punctual people out in their calculations as to the time; even the most business-like folk fail to keep their appointments in such weather, and ordinary mortals wake up at noon and fancy it is eight o'clock. On this morning it was half- past nine, and Mme. Vauquer still lay abed. Christophe was late, Sylvie was late, but the two sat comfortably taking their coffee as usual. It was Sylvie's custom to take the cream off the milk destined for the boarders' breakfast for her own, and to boil the remainder for some time, so that madame should not discover this illegal exaction.

°°°°"Sylvie," said Christophe, as he dipped a piece of toast into the coffee, "M. Vautrin, who is not such a bad sort, all the same, had two people come to see him again last night. If madame says anything, mind you say nothing about it."

°°°°"Has he given you something?"

°°°°"He gave me a five-franc piece this month, which is as good as saying, 'Hold your tongue.' "

°°°°"Except him and Mme. Couture, who doesn't look twice at every penny, there's no one in the house that doesn't try to get back with the left hand all that they give with the right at New Year," said Sylvie.

°°°°"And, after all," said Christophe, "what do they give you? A miserable five-franc piece. There is Father Goriot, who has cleaned his shoes himself these two years past. There is that old beggar Poiret, who goes without blacking altogether; he would sooner drink it than put it on his boots. Then there is that whipper-snapper of a student, who gives me a couple of francs, Two francs will not pay for my brushes, and he sells his old clothes, and gets more for them than they are worth. Oh! they're a shabby lot!"

°°°°"Pooh!" said Sylvie, sipping her coffee, "our places are the best in the Quarter, that I know. But about that great big chap Vautrin, Christophe; has any one told you anything about him?"

°°°°"Yes. I met a gentleman in the street a few days ago; he said to me, 'There's a gentleman in your place, isn't there? a tall man that dyes his whiskers?' I told him, 'No, sir; they aren't dyed. A gay fellow like him hasn't the time to do it.' And when I told M. Vautrin about it afterwards, he said, 'Quite right, my boy. That is the way to answer them. There is nothing more unpleasant than to have your little weaknesses known; it might spoil many a match.' "

°°°°"Well, and for my part," said Sylvie, "a man tried to humbug me at the market wanting to know if I had seen him put on his shirt. Such bosh! There," she cried, interrupting herself, "that's a quarter to ten striking at the Val-de-Grace, and not a soul stirring!"

°°°°"Pooh! they are all gone out. Mme. Couture and the girl went out at eight o'clock to take the wafer at Saint-Etienne. Father Goriot started off somewhere with a parcel, and the student won't be back from his lecture till ten o'clock. I saw them go while I was sweeping the stairs; Father Goriot knocked up against me, and his parcel was as hard as iron. What is the old fellow up to, I wonder? He is as good as a plaything for the rest of them; they can never let him alone; but he is a good man, all the same, and worth more than all of them put together. He doesn't give you much himself, but he sometimes sends you with a message to ladies who fork out famous tips; they are dressed grandly, too."

°°°°"His daughters, as he calls them, eh? There are a dozen of them."

°°°°"I have never been to more than two--the two who came here."

°°°°"There is madame moving overhead; I shall have to go, or she will raise a fine racket. Just keep an eye on the milk, Christophe; don't let the cat get at it."

°°°°Sylvie went up to her mistress' room.

°°°°"Sylvie! How is this? It's nearly ten o'clock, and you let me sleep like a dormouse! Such a thing has never happened before."

°°°°"It's the fog; it is that thick, you could cut it with a knife."

°°°°"But how about breakfast?"

°°°°"Bah! the boarders are possessed, I'm sure. They all cleared out before there was a wink of daylight."

°°°°"Do speak properly, Sylvie," Mme. Vauquer retorted; "say a blink of daylight."

°°°°"Ah, well, madame, whichever you please. Anyhow, you can have breakfast at ten o'clock. La Michonnette and Poiret have neither of them stirred. There are only those two upstairs, and they are sleeping like the logs they are."

°°°°"But, Sylvie, you put their names together as if----"

°°°°"As if what?" said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. "The two of them make a pair."

°°°°"It is a strange thing, isn't it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last night after Christophe had bolted the door?"

°°°°"Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?"

°°°°"Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears on the table, those at five a penny."

°°°°A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all haste.

°°°°"Mistigris!" she cried.

°°°°The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

°°°°"Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!" she said. "Sylvie! Sylvie!"

°°°°"Yes, madame; what is it?"

°°°°"Just see what the cat has done!"

°°°°"It is all that stupid Christophe's fault. I told him to stop and lay the table. What has become of him? Don't you worry, madame; Father Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won't know the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats."

°°°°"I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?" said Mme. Vauquer, setting the plates round the table.

°°°°"Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"I have overslept myself," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same."

°°°°The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the sitting-room, singing loudly:

°°°°" 'Tis the same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance . .

°°°°"Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!" he cried at the sight of his hostess, and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

°°°°"There! have done----"

°°°°" 'Impertinence!' Say it!" he answered. "Come, say it! Now, isn't that what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah! I am a nice man, am I not?

°°°°"For the locks of brown and the golden hair   A sighing lover . . .

°°°°"Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

°°°°. . . . led by chance."

°°°°"What?" asked the widow.

°°°°"Father Goriot in the goldsmith's shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there, and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that's not used to the trade."

°°°°"Really? You don't say so?"

°°°°"Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair. He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went into a money-lender's house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father's bones, a Turk, a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob HIM, for he puts all his coin into the Bank."

°°°°"Then what was Father Goriot doing there?"

°°°°"Doing?" said Vautrin. "Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----"

°°°°"There he is!" cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Christophe," cried Father Goriot's voice, "come upstairs with me."

°°°°Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

°°°°"Where are you going?" Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

°°°°"Out on an errand for M. Goriot."

°°°°"What may that be?" said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe's hand. "Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud," he read. "Where are you going with it?" he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

°°°°"To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands myself."

°°°°"What is there inside it?" said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the light. "A banknote? No." He peered into the envelope. "A receipted account!" he cried. "My word! 'tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you, old chap," he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe's head, and spinning the man round like a thimble; "you will have a famous tip."

°°°°By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme. Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

°°°°"The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance."

°°°°When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

°°°°"Where have you been this morning, fair lady?" said Mme. Vauquer, turning to Mme. Couture.

°°°°"We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She is trembling like a leaf," Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

°°°°"Warm yourself, Victorine," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften your father's heart," said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the orphan girl; "but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl needs a dowry nowadays."

°°°°"Poor child!" said Mme. Vauquer. "Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself."

°°°°Victorine's eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

°°°°"If we could only see him!" said the Commissary-General's widow; "if I could speak to him myself and give him his wife's last letter! I have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my handwriting----"

°°°°" 'Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!' " exclaimed Vautrin, breaking in upon her. "So that is how you are, is it? In a few days' time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall see."

°°°°"Oh! sir," said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin, who showed no sign of being touched by it, "if you know of any way of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his affection and my mother's honor are more to me than all the money in the world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----"

°°°°"The same old story everywhere," sang Vautrin, with a satirical intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven people thus assembled bade each other good- morning, and took their places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student's footstep was heard outside.

°°°°"Ah! here you are, M. Eugene," said Sylvie; "every one is breakfasting at home to-day."

°°°°The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside Goriot.

°°°°"I have just met with a queer adventure," he said, as he helped himself abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer's eyes gauged as usual.

°°°°"An adventure?" queried Poiret.

°°°°"Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?" Vautrin asked of Poiret. "M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing."

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

°°°°"Tell us about your adventure!" demanded M. Vautrin.

°°°°"Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a king---"

°°°°"Fisher," put in Vautrin, interrupting.

°°°°"What do you mean, sir?" said Eugene sharply.

°°°°"I said 'fisher,' because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than kings."

°°°°"Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a king," said Poiret the ditto-ist, "because----"

°°°°"In fact"--the law-student cut him short--"I danced with one of the handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this divine countess about nine o'clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how my heart beat! I began to think----"

°°°°"That she was coming here," said Vautrin, with a keen look at the student. "I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman's heart, you will find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder."

°°°°The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

°°°°"Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!" cried Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

°°°°"It is just as I guessed," said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme. Vauquer's ear.

°°°°Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own thoughts than he did at that moment.

°°°°"Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! there you are!" answered Vautrin. "Old Father Goriot there knew it quite well! and why should I not know it too?"

°°°°"M. Goriot?" the student cried.

°°°°"What is it?" asked the old man. "So she was very beautiful, was she, yesterday night?"

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"Look at the old wretch," said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; "how his eyes light up!"

°°°°"Then does he really keep her?" said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to the student.

°°°°"Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty," Eugene answered. Father Goriot watched him with eager eyes. "If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there, my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list, and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a galloping horse, or a woman dancing."

°°°°"So the wheel turns," said Vautrin; "yesterday night at a duchess' ball, this morning in a money-lender's office, on the lowest rung of the ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers' hearts to find something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside down. Just a Parisienne through and through!"

°°°°Father Goriot's face, which had shone at the student's words like the sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of Vautrin's.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. Vauquer, "but where is your adventure? Did you speak to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?"

°°°°"She did not see me," said Eugene. "But only think of meeting one of the prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o'clock! She could not have reached home after the ball till two o'clock this morning. Wasn't it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of adventures."

°°°°"Pshaw! much funnier things than THAT happen here!" exclaimed Vautrin.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

°°°°"Well, did you see?" said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest of the circle. "He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain."

°°°°"Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de Restaud is anything to Father Goriot," cried the student.

°°°°"Well, and if you don't," broke in Vautrin, "we are not set on convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed to be like the sound of a trumpet to a trooper's horse. "Aha!" said Vautrin, stopping in his speech to give her a searching glance, "so we have had our little experiences, have we?"

°°°°The old maid lowered her eyes like a nun who sees a statue.

°°°°"Well," he went on, "when folk of that kind get a notion into their heads, they cannot drop it. They must drink the water from some particular spring--it is stagnant as often as not; but they will sell their wives and families, they will sell their own souls to the devil to get it. For some this spring is play, or the stock-exchange, or music, or a collection of pictures or insects; for others it is some woman who can give them the dainties they like. You might offer these last all the women on earth--they would turn up their noses; they will have the only one who can gratify their passion. It often happens that the woman does not care for them at all, and treats them cruelly; they buy their morsels of satisfaction very dear; but no matter, the fools are never tired of it; they will take their last blanket to the pawnbroker's to give their last five-franc piece to her. Father Goriot here is one of that sort. He is discreet, so the Countess exploits him--just the way of the gay world. The poor old fellow thinks of her and of nothing else. In all other respects you see he is a stupid animal; but get him on that subject, and his eyes sparkle like diamonds. That secret is not difficult to guess. He took some plate himself this morning to the melting-pot, and I saw him at Daddy Gobseck's in the Rue des Gres. And now, mark what follows--he came back here, and gave a letter for the Comtesse de Restaud to that noodle of a Christophe, who showed us the address; there was a receipted bill inside it. It is clear that it was an urgent matter if the Countess also went herself to the old money lender. Father Goriot has financed her handsomely. There is no need to tack a tale together; the thing is self-evident. So that shows you, sir student, that all the time your Countess was smiling, dancing, flirting, swaying her peach-flower crowned head, with her gown gathered into her hand, her slippers were pinching her, as they say; she was thinking of her protested bills, or her lover's protested bills."

°°°°"You have made me wild to know the truth," cried Eugene; "I will go to call on Mme. de Restaud to-morrow."

°°°°"Yes," echoed Poiret; "you must go and call on Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"And perhaps you will find Father Goriot there, who will take payment for the assistance he politely rendered."

°°°°Eugene looked disgusted. "Why, then, this Paris of yours is a slough."

°°°°"And an uncommonly queer slough, too," replied Vautrin. "The mud splashes you as you drive through it in your carriage--you are a respectable person; you go afoot and are splashed--you are a scoundrel. You are so unlucky as to walk off with something or other belonging to somebody else, and they exhibit you as a curiosity in the Place du Palais-de-Justice; you steal a million, and you are pointed out in every salon as a model of virtue. And you pay thirty millions for the police and the courts of justice, for the maintenance of law and order! A pretty slate of things it is!"

°°°°"What," cried Mme. Vauquer, "has Father Goriot really melted down his silver posset-dish?"

°°°°"There were two turtle-doves on the lid, were there not?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that there were."

°°°°"Then, was he fond of it?" said Eugene. "He cried while he was breaking up the cup and plate. I happened to see him by accident."

°°°°"It was dear to him as his own life," answered the widow.

°°°°"There! you see how infatuated the old fellow is!" cried Vautrin. "The woman yonder can coax the soul out of him"

°°°°The student went up to his room. Vautrin went out, and a few moments later Mme. Couture and Victorine drove away in a cab which Sylvie had called for them. Poiret gave his arm to Mlle. Michonneau, and they went together to spend the two sunniest hours of the day in the Jardin des Plantes.

°°°°"Well, those two are as good as married," was the portly Sylvie's comment. "They are going out together to-day for the first time. They are such a couple of dry sticks that if they happen to strike against each other they will draw sparks like flint and steel."

°°°°"Keep clear of Mlle. Michonneau's shawl, then, said Mme. Vauquer, laughing; "it would flare up like tinder."

°°°°At four o'clock that evening, when Goriot came in, he saw, by the light of two smoky lamps, that Victorine's eyes were red. Mme. Vauquer was listening to the history of the visit made that morning to M. Taillefer; it had been made in vain. Taillefer was tired of the annual application made by his daughter and her elderly friend; he gave them a personal interview in order to arrive at an understanding with them.

°°°°"My dear lady," said Mme. Couture, addressing Mme. Vauquer, "just imagine it; he did not even ask Victorine to sit down, she was standing the whole time. He said to me quite coolly, without putting himself in a passion, that we might spare ourselves the trouble of going there; that the young lady (he would not call her his daughter) was injuring her cause by importuning him (IMPORTUNING! once a year, the wretch!); that as Victorine's mother had nothing when he married her, Victorine ought not to expect anything from him; in fact, he said the most cruel things, that made the poor child burst out crying. The little thing threw herself at her father's feet and spoke up bravely; she said that she only persevered in her visits for her mother's sake; that she would obey him without a murmur, but that she begged him to read her poor dead mother's farewell letter. She took it up and gave it to him, saying the most beautiful things in the world, most beautifully expressed; I do not know where she learned them; God

°°°°must have put them into her head, for the poor child was inspired to speak so nicely that it made me cry like a fool to hear her talk. And what do you think the monster was doing all the time? Cutting his nails! He took the letter that poor Mme. Taillefer had soaked with tears, and flung it on to the chimney-piece. 'That is all right,' he said. He held out his hands to raise his daughter, but she covered them with kisses, and he drew them away again. Scandalous, isn't it? And his great booby of a son came in and took no notice of his sister."

°°°°"What inhuman wretches they must be!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"And then they both went out of the room," Mme. Couture went on, without heeding the worthy vermicelli maker's exclamation; "father and son bowed to me, and asked me to excuse them on account of urgent business! That is the history of our call. Well, he has seen his daughter at any rate. How he can refuse to acknowledge her I cannot think, for they are as alike as two peas."

°°°°The boarders dropped in one after another, interchanging greetings and empty jokes that certain classes of Parisians regard as humorous and witty. Dulness is their prevailing ingredient, and the whole point consists in mispronouncing a word or a gesture. This kind of argot is always changing. The essence of the jest consists in some catchword suggested by a political event, an incident in the police courts, a street song, or a bit of burlesque at some theatre, and forgotten in a month. Anything and everything serves to keep up a game of battledore and shuttlecock with words and ideas. The diorama, a recent invention, which carried an optical illusion a degree further than panoramas, had given rise to a mania among art students for ending every word with RAMA. The Maison Vauquer had caught the infection from a young artist among the boarders.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur-r-r Poiret," said the employe from the Museum, "how is your health-orama?" Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned to Mme. Couture and Victorine with a "Ladies, you seem melancholy."

°°°°"Is dinner ready?" cried Horace Bianchon, a medical student, and a friend of Rastignac's; "my stomach is sinking usque ad talones."

°°°°"There is an uncommon frozerama outside," said Vautrin. "Make room there, Father Goriot! Confound it, your foot covers the whole front of the stove."

°°°°"Illustrious M. Vautrin," put in Bianchon, "why do you say frozerama? It is incorrect; it should be frozenrama."

°°°°"No, it shouldn't," said the official from the Museum; "frozerama is right by the same rule that you say 'My feet are froze.' "

°°°°"Ah! ah!"

°°°°"Here is his Excellency the Marquis de Rastignac, Doctor of the Law of Contraries," cried Bianchon, seizing Eugene by the throat, and almost throttling him.

°°°°"Hallo there! hallo!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau came noiselessly in, bowed to the rest of the party, and took her place beside the three women without saying a word.

°°°°"That old bat always makes me shudder," said Bianchon in a low voice, indicating Mlle. Michonneau to Vautrin. "I have studied Gall's system, and I am sure she has the bump of Judas."

°°°°"Then you have seen a case before?" said Vautrin.

°°°°"Who has not?" answered Bianchon. "Upon my word, that ghastly old maid looks just like one of the long worms that will gnaw a beam through, give them time enough."

°°°°"That is the way, young man," returned he of the forty years and the dyed whiskers:

°°°°"The rose has lived the life of a rose--   A morning's space."

°°°°"Aha! here is a magnificent soupe-au-rama," cried Poiret as Christophe came in bearing the soup with cautious heed.

°°°°"I beg your pardon, sir," said Mme. Vauquer; "it is soupe aux choux."

°°°°All the young men roared with laughter.

°°°°"Had you there, Poiret!"

°°°°"Poir-r-r-rette! she had you there!"

°°°°"Score two points to Mamma Vauquer," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Did any of you notice the fog this morning?" asked the official.

°°°°"It was a frantic fog," said Bianchon, "a fog unparalleled, doleful, melancholy, sea-green, asthmatical--a Goriot of a fog!"

°°°°"A Goriorama," said the art student, "because you couldn't see a thing in it."

°°°°"Hey! Milord Gaoriotte, they air talking about yoo-o-ou!"

°°°°Father Goriot, seated at the lower end of the table, close to the door through which the servant entered, raised his face; he had smelt at a scrap of bread that lay under his table napkin, an old trick acquired in his commercial capacity, that still showed itself at times.

°°°°"Well," Madame Vauquer cried in sharp tones, that rang above the rattle of spoons and plates and the sound of other voices, "and is there anything the matter with the bread?"

°°°°"Nothing whatever, madame," he answered; "on the contrary, it is made of the best quality of corn; flour from Etampes."

°°°°"How could you tell?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"By the color, by the flavor."

°°°°"You knew the flavor by the smell, I suppose," said Mme. Vauquer. "You have grown so economical, you will find out how to live on the smell of cooking at last."

°°°°"Take out a patent for it, then," cried the Museum official; "you would make a handsome fortune."

°°°°"Never mind him," said the artist; "he does that sort of thing to delude us into thinking that he was a vermicelli maker."

°°°°"Your nose is a corn-sampler, it appears?" inquired the official.

°°°°"Corn WHAT?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"Corn-el."

°°°°"Corn-et."

°°°°"Corn-elian."

°°°°"Corn-ice."

°°°°"Corn-ucopia."

°°°°"Corn-crake."

°°°°"Corn-cockle."

°°°°"Corn-orama."

°°°°The eight responses came like a rolling fire from every part of the room, and the laughter that followed was the more uproarious because poor Father Goriot stared at the others with a puzzled look, like a foreigner trying to catch the meaning of words in a language which he does not understand.

°°°°"Corn? . . ." he said, turning to Vautrin, his next neighbor.

°°°°"Corn on your foot, old man!" said Vautrin, and he drove Father Goriot's cap down over his eyes by a blow on the crown.

°°°°The poor old man thus suddenly attacked was for a moment too bewildered to do anything. Christophe carried off his plate, thinking that he had finished his soup, so that when Goriot had pushed back his cap from his eyes his spoon encountered the table. Every one burst out laughing. "You are a disagreeable joker, sir," said the old man, "and if you take any further liberties with me----"

°°°°"Well, what then, old boy?" Vautrin interrupted.

°°°°"Well, then, you shall pay dearly for it some day----"

°°°°"Down below, eh?" said the artist, "in the little dark corner where they put naughty boys."

°°°°"Well, mademoiselle," Vautrin said, turning to Victorine, "you are eating nothing. So papa was refractory, was he?"

°°°°"A monster!" said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"Mademoiselle might make application for aliment pending her suit; she is not eating anything. Eh! eh! just see how Father Goriot is staring at Mlle. Victorine."

°°°°The old man had forgotten his dinner, he was so absorbed in gazing at the poor girl; the sorrow in her face was unmistakable,--the slighted love of a child whose father would not recognize her.

°°°°"We are mistaken about Father Goriot, my dear boy," said Eugene in a low voice. "He is not an idiot, nor wanting in energy. Try your Gall system on him, and let me know what you think. I saw him crush a silver dish last night as if it had been made of wax; there seems to be something extra-ordinary going on in his mind just now, to judge by his face. His life is so mysterious that it must be worth studying. Oh! you may laugh, Bianchon; I am not joking."

°°°°"The man is a subject, is he?" said Bianchon; "all right! I will dissect him, if he will give me the chance."

°°°°"No; feel his bumps."

°°°°"Hm!--his stupidity might perhaps be contagious."

°°°°The next day Rastignac dressed himself very elegantly, and about three o'clock in the afternoon went to call on Mme. de Restaud. On the way thither he indulged in the wild intoxicating dreams which fill a young head so full of delicious excitement. Young men at his age take no account of obstacles nor of dangers; they see success in every direction; imagination has free play, and turns their lives into a romance; they are saddened or discouraged by the collapse of one of the visionary schemes that have no existence save in their heated fancy. If youth were not ignorant and timid, civilization would be impossible.

°°°°Eugene took unheard-of pains to keep himself in a spotless condition, but on his way through the streets he began to think about Mme. de Restaud and what he should say to her. He equipped himself with wit, rehearsed repartees in the course of an imaginary conversation, and prepared certain neat speeches a la Talleyrand, conjuring up a series of small events which should prepare the way for the declaration on which he had based his future; and during these musings the law student was bespattered with mud, and by the time he reached the Palais Royal he was obliged to have his boots blacked and his trousers brushed.

°°°°"If I were rich," he said, as he changed the five-franc piece he had brought with him in case anything might happen, "I would take a cab, then I could think at my ease."

°°°°At last he reached the Rue du Helder, and asked for the Comtesse de Restaud. He bore the contemptuous glances of the servants, who had seen him cross the court on foot, with the cold fury of a man who knows that he will succeed some day. He understood the meaning of their glances at once, for he had felt his inferiority as soon as he entered the court, where a smart cab was waiting. All the delights of life in Paris seemed to be implied by this visible and manifest sign of luxury and extravagance. A fine horse, in magnificent harness, was pawing the ground, and all at once the law student felt out of humor with himself. Every compartment in his brain which he had thought to find so full of wit was bolted fast; he grew positively stupid. He sent up his name to the Countess, and waited in the ante-chamber, standing on one foot before a window that looked out upon the court; mechanically he leaned his elbow against the sash, and stared before him. The time seemed long; he would have left the house but for the southern tenacity of purpose which works miracles when it is single-minded.

°°°°"Madame is in her boudoir, and cannot see any one at present, sir," said the servant. "She gave me no answer; but if you will go into the dining-room, there is some one already there."

°°°°Rastignac was impressed with a sense of the formidable power of the lackey who can accuse or condemn his masters by a word; he coolly opened the door by which the man had just entered the ante-chamber, meaning, no doubt, to show these insolent flunkeys that he was familiar with the house; but he found that he had thoughtlessly precipitated himself into a small room full of dressers, where lamps were standing, and hot-water pipes, on which towels were being dried; a dark passage and a back staircase lay beyond it. Stifled laughter from the ante-chamber added to his confusion.

°°°°"This way to the drawing-room, sir," said the servant, with the exaggerated respect which seemed to be one more jest at his expense.

°°°°Eugene turned so quickly that he stumbled against a bath. By good luck, he managed to keep his hat on his head, and saved it from immersion in the water; but just as he turned, a door opened at the further end of the dark passage, dimly lighted by a small lamp. Rastignac heard voices and the sound of a kiss; one of the speakers was Mme. de Restaud, the other was Father Goriot. Eugene followed the servant through the dining-room into the drawing- room; he went to a window that looked out into the courtyard, and stood there for a while. He meant to know whether this Goriot was really the Goriot that he knew. His heart beat unwontedly fast; he remembered Vautrin's hideous insinuations. A well-dressed young man suddenly emerged from the room almost as Eugene entered it, saying impatiently to the servant who stood at the door: "I am going, Maurice. Tell Madame la Comtesse that I waited more than half an hour for her."

°°°°Whereupon this insolent being, who, doubtless, had a right to be insolent, sang an Italian trill, and went towards the window where Eugene was standing, moved thereto quite as much by a desire to see the student's face as by a wish to look out into the courtyard.

°°°°"But M. le Comte had better wait a moment longer; madame is disengaged," said Maurice, as he returned to the ante-chamber.

°°°°Just at that moment Father Goriot appeared close to the gate; he had emerged from a door at the foot of the back staircase. The worthy soul was preparing to open his umbrella regardless of the fact that the great gate had opened to admit a tilbury, in which a young man with a ribbon at his button-hole was seated. Father Goriot had scarcely time to start back and save himself. The horse took fright at the umbrella, swerved, and dashed forward towards the flight of steps. The young man looked round in annoyance, saw Father Goriot, and greeted him as he went out with constrained courtesy, such as people usually show to a money- lender so long as they require his services, or the sort of respect they feel it necessary to show for some one whose reputation has been blown upon, so that they blush to acknowledge his acquaintance. Father Goriot gave him a little friendly nod and a good-natured smile. All this happened with lightning speed. Eugene was so deeply interested that he forgot that he was not alone till he suddenly heard the Countess' voice.

°°°°"Oh! Maxime, were you going away?" she said reproachfully, with a shade of pique in her manner. The Countess had not seen the incident nor the entrance of the tilbury. Rastignac turned abruptly and saw her standing before him, coquettishly dressed in a loose white cashmere gown with knots of rose-colored ribbon here and there; her hair was carelessly coiled about her head, as is the wont of Parisian women in the morning; there was a soft fragrance about her--doubtless she was fresh from a bath;--her graceful form seemed more flexible, her beauty more luxuriant. Her eyes glistened. A young man can see everything at a glance; he feels the radiant influence of woman as a plant discerns and absorbs its nutriment from the air; he did not need to touch her hands to feel their cool freshness. He saw faint rose tints through the cashmere of the dressing gown; it had fallen slightly open, giving glimpses of a bare throat, on which the student's eyes rested. The Countess had no need of the adventitious aid of corsets; her girdle defined the outlines of her slender waist; her throat was a challenge to love; her feet, thrust into slippers, were daintily small. As Maxime took her hand and kissed it, Eugene became aware of Maxime's existence, and the Countess saw Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! is that you M. de Rastignac? I am very glad to see you," she said, but there was something in her manner that a shrewd observer would have taken as a hint to depart.

°°°°Maxime, as the Countess Anastasie had called the young man with the haughty insolence of bearing, looked from Eugene to the lady, and from the lady to Eugene; it was sufficiently evident that he wished to be rid of the latter. An exact and faithful rendering of the glance might be given in the words: "Look here, my dear; I hope you intend to send this little whipper-snapper about his business."

°°°°The Countess consulted the young man's face with an intent submissiveness that betrays all the secrets of a woman's heart, and Rastignac all at once began to hate him violently. To begin with, the sight of the fair carefully arranged curls on the other's comely head had convinced him that his own crop was hideous; Maxime's boots, moreover, were elegant and spotless, while his own, in spite of all his care, bore some traces of his recent walk; and, finally, Maxime's overcoat fitted the outline of his figure gracefully, he looked like a pretty woman, while Eugene was wearing a black coat at half-past two. The quick- witted child of the Charente felt the disadvantage at which he was placed beside this tall, slender dandy, with the clear gaze and the pale face, one of those men who would ruin orphan children without scruple. Mme. de Restaud fled into the next room without waiting for Eugene to speak; shaking out the skirts of her dressing-gown in her flight, so that she looked like a white butterfly, and Maxime hurried after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant's ball; he guessed the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he said to himself, "This is my rival; I mean to cut him out."

°°°°Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls's eye twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and so sulkily, that Anastasie's fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, "Why do you not go?" a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make their exit.

°°°°Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

°°°°"Madame," he began, "I hastened to call upon you----"

°°°°He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess; he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime with a cordial "Good morning," that astonished Eugene not a little. The young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

°°°°"M. de Restaud," said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law student.

°°°°Eugene bowed profoundly.

°°°°"This gentleman," she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband, "is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last ball."

°°°°Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs! These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house, produced a magical effect. The Count's stiff manner relaxed at once as he returned the student's bow.

°°°°"Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance," he said.

°°°°Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a fairy's wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open again; Rastignac's carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer's lodging- house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

°°°°"I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct," the Comte de Restaud said, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, they are extinct," answered the law student. "My great- uncle, the Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family. They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault, Mme. de Beauseant's grandfather on the mother's side. We are the younger branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King's service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated."

°°°°"Was not your great-uncle in command of the Vengeur before 1789?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the Warwick."

°°°°Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who should say, "If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that fellow, it is all over with us." Anastasie understood the glance that M. de Trailles gave her. With a woman's admirable tact, she began to smile and said:

°°°°"Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the Warwick and the Vengeur."

°°°°She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the boudoir. The morganatic couple (to use a convenient German expression which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

°°°°"Anastasie!" he cried pettishly, "just stay a moment, dear; you know very well that----"

°°°°"I am coming back in a minute," she interrupted; "I have a commission for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it."

°°°°She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her husband's voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands' characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, "You are busy, I do not want to interrupt you; good-day," and he went.

°°°°"Just wait a moment, Maxime!" the Count called after him.

°°°°"Come and dine with us," said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure that Rastignac had taken his leave.

°°°°The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover, for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate, hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair typical Parisian.

°°°°"Anastasie!" the Count called again to his wife.

°°°°"Poor Maxime!" she said, addressing the young man. "Come, we must resign ourselves. This evening----"

°°°°"I hope, Nasie," he said in her ear, "that you will give orders not to admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you will compel me to kill him."

°°°°"Are you mad, Maxime?" she said. "A young lad of a student is, on the contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him."

°°°°Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip, and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had been closed after him.

°°°°"What do you think, dear?" cried the Count, her husband, "this gentleman's family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted."

°°°°"Delighted to find that we have acquaintances in common," said the Countess, with a preoccupied manner.

°°°°"More than you think," said Eugene, in a low voice.

°°°°"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

°°°°"Why, only just now," said the student, "I saw a gentleman go out at the gate, Father Goriot, my next door neighbor in the house where I am lodging."

°°°°At the sound of this name, and the prefix that embellished it, the Count, who was stirring the fire, let the tongs fall as though they had burned his fingers, and rose to his feet.

°°°°"Sir," he cried, "you might have called him 'Monsieur Goriot'!"

°°°°The Countess turned pale at first at the sight of her husband's vexation, then she reddened; clearly she was embarrassed, her answer was made in a tone that she tried to make natural, and with an air of assumed carelessness:

°°°°"You could not know any one who is dearer to us both . . ."

°°°°She broke off, glanced at the piano as if some fancy had crossed her mind, and asked, "Are you fond of music, M. de Rastignac?"

°°°°"Exceedingly," answered Eugene, flushing, and disconcerted by a dim suspicion that he had somehow been guilty of a clumsy piece of folly.

°°°°"Do you sing?" she cried, going to the piano, and, sitting down before it, she swept her fingers over the keyboard from end to end. R-r-r-rah!

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°The Comte de Restaud walked to and fro.

°°°°"That is a pity; you are without one great means of success.--Ca- ro, ca-a-ro, ca-a-a-ro, non du-bi-ta-re," sang the Countess.

°°°°Eugene had a second time waved a magic wand when he uttered Goriot's name, but the effect seemed to be entirely opposite to that produced by the formula "related to Mme. de Beauseant." His position was not unlike that of some visitor permitted as a favor to inspect a private collection of curiosities, when by inadvertence he comes into collision with a glass case full of sculptured figures, and three or four heads, imperfectly secured, fall at the shock. He wished the earth would open and swallow him. Mme. de Restaud's expression was reserved and chilly, her eyes had grown indifferent, and sedulously avoided meeting those of the unlucky student of law.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "you wish to talk with M. de Restaud; permit me to wish you good-day----"

°°°°The Countess interrupted him by a gesture, saying hastily, "Whenever you come to see us, both M. de Restaud and I shall be delighted to see you."

°°°°Eugene made a profound bow and took his leave, followed by M. de Restaud, who insisted, in spite of his remonstrances, on accompanying him into the hall.

°°°°"Neither your mistress nor I are at home to that gentleman when he calls," the Count said to Maurice.

°°°°As Eugene set foot on the steps, he saw that it was raining.

°°°°"Come," said he to himself, "somehow I have just made a mess of it, I do not know how. And now I am going to spoil my hat and coat into the bargain. I ought to stop in my corner, grind away at law, and never look to be anything but a boorish country magistrate. How can I go into society, when to manage properly you want a lot of cabs, varnished boots, gold watch chains, and all sorts of things; you have to wear white doeskin gloves that cost six francs in the morning, and primrose kid gloves every evening? A fig for that old humbug of a Goriot!"

°°°°When he reached the street door, the driver of a hackney coach, who had probably just deposited a wedding party at their door, and asked nothing better than a chance of making a little money for himself without his employer's knowledge, saw that Eugene had no umbrella, remarked his black coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, and varnished boots, and stopped and looked at him inquiringly. Eugene, in the blind desperation that drives a young man to plunge deeper and deeper into an abyss, as if he might hope to find a fortunate issue in its lowest depths, nodded in reply to the driver's signal, and stepped into the cab; a few stray petals of orange blossom and scraps of wire bore witness to its recent occupation by a wedding party.

°°°°"Where am I to drive, sir?" demanded the man, who, by this time, had taken off his white gloves.

°°°°"Confound it!" Eugene said to himself, "I am in for it now, and at least I will not spend cab-hire for nothing!--Drive to the Hotel Beauseant," he said aloud.

°°°°"Which?" asked the man, a portentous word that reduced Eugene to confusion. This young man of fashion, species incerta, did not know that there were two Hotels Beauseant; he was not aware how rich he was in relations who did not care about him.

°°°°"The Vicomte de Beauseant, Rue----"

°°°°"De Grenelle," interrupted the driver, with a jerk of his head. "You see, there are the hotels of the Marquis and Comte de Beauseant in the Rue Saint-Dominique," he added, drawing up the step.

°°°°"I know all about that," said Eugene, severely.--"Everybody is laughing at me to-day, it seems!" he said to himself, as he deposited his hat on the opposite seat. "This escapade will cost me a king's ransom, but, at any rate, I shall call on my so- called cousin in a thoroughly aristocratic fashion. Goriot has cost me ten francs already, the old scoundrel. My word! I will tell Mme. de Beauseant about my adventure; perhaps it may amuse her. Doubtless she will know the secret of the criminal relation between that handsome woman and the old rat without a tail. It would be better to find favor in my cousin's eyes than to come in contact with that shameless woman, who seems to me to have very expensive tastes. Surely the beautiful Vicomtesse's personal interest would turn the scale for me, when the mere mention of her name produces such an effect. Let us look higher. If you set yourself to carry the heights of heaven, you must face God."

°°°°The innumerable thoughts that surged through his brain might be summed up in these phrases. He grew calmer, and recovered something of his assurance as he watched the falling rain. He told himself that though he was about to squander two of the precious five-franc pieces that remained to him, the money was well laid out in preserving his coat, boots, and hat; and his cabman's cry of "Gate, if you please," almost put him in spirits. A Swiss, in scarlet and gold, appeared, the great door groaned on its hinges, and Rastignac, with sweet satisfaction, beheld his equipage pass under the archway and stop before the flight of steps beneath the awning. The driver, in a blue-and-red greatcoat, dismounted and let down the step. As Eugene stepped out of the cab, he heard smothered laughter from the peristyle. Three or four lackeys were making merry over the festal appearance of the vehicle. In another moment the law student was enlightened as to the cause of their hilarity; he felt the full force of the contrast between his equipage and one of the smartest broughams in Paris; a coachman, with powdered hair, seemed to find it difficult to hold a pair of spirited horses, who stood chafing the bit. In Mme. de Restaud's courtyard, in the Chaussee d'Antin, he had seen the neat turnout of a young man of six-and-twenty; in the Faubourg Saint-Germain he found the luxurious equipage of a man of rank; thirty thousand francs would not have purchased it.

°°°°"Who can be here?" said Eugene to himself. He began to understand, though somewhat tardily, that he must not expect to find many women in Paris who were not already appropriated, and that the capture of one of these queens would be likely to cost something more than bloodshed. "Confound it all! I expect my cousin also has her Maxime."

°°°°He went up the steps, feeling that he was a blighted being. The glass door was opened for him; the servants were as solemn as jackasses under the curry comb. So far, Eugene had only been in the ballroom on the ground floor of the Hotel Beauseant; the fete had followed so closely on the invitation, that he had not had time to call on his cousin, and had therefore never seen Mme. de Beauseant's apartments; he was about to behold for the first time a great lady among the wonderful and elegant surroundings that reveal her character and reflect her daily life. He was the more curious, because Mme. de Restaud's drawing-room had provided him with a standard of comparison.

°°°°At half-past four the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was visible. Five minutes earlier she would not have received her cousin, but Eugene knew nothing of the recognized routine of various houses in Paris. He was conducted up the wide, white-painted, crimson- carpeted staircase, between the gilded balusters and masses of flowering plants, to Mme. de Beauseant's apartments. He did not know the rumor current about Mme. de Beauseant, one of the biographies told, with variations, in whispers, every evening in the salons of Paris.

°°°°For three years past her name had been spoken of in connection with that of one of the most wealthy and distinguished Portuguese nobles, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto. It was one of those innocent liaisons which possess so much charm for the two thus attached to each other that they find the presence of a third person intolerable. The Vicomte de Beauseant, therefore, had himself set an example to the rest of the world by respecting, with as good a grace as might be, this morganatic union. Any one who came to call on the Vicomtesse in the early days of this friendship was sure to find the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto there. As, under the circumstances, Mme. de Beauseant could not very well shut her door against these visitors, she gave them such a cold reception, and showed so much interest in the study of the ceiling, that no one could fail to understand how much he bored her; and when it became known in Paris that Mme. de Beauseant was bored by callers between two and four o'clock, she was left in perfect solitude during that interval. She went to the Bouffons or to the Opera with M. de Beauseant and M. d'Ajuda-Pinto; and M. de Beauseant, like a well-bred man of the world, always left his wife and the Portuguese as soon as he had installed them. But M. d'Ajuda-Pinto must marry, and a Mlle. de Rochefide was the young lady. In the whole fashionable world there was but one person who as yet knew nothing of the arrangement, and that was Mme. de Beauseant. Some of her friends had hinted at the possibility, and she had laughed at them, believing that envy had prompted those ladies to try to make mischief. And now, though the bans were about to be published, and although the handsome Portuguese had come that day to break the news to the Vicomtesse, he had not found courage as yet to say one word about his treachery. How was it? Nothing is doubtless more difficult than the notification of an ultimatum of this kind. There are men who feel more at their ease when they stand up before another man who threatens their lives with sword or pistol than in the presence of a woman who, after two hours of lamentations and reproaches, falls into a dead swoon and requires salts. At this moment, therefore, M. d'Ajuda-Pinto was on thorns, and anxious to take his leave. He told himself that in some way or other the news would reach Mme. de Beauseant; he would write, it would be much better to do it by letter, and not to utter the words that should stab her to the heart.

°°°°So when the servant announced M. Eugene de Rastignac, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto trembled with joy. To be sure, a loving woman shows even more ingenuity in inventing doubts of her lover than in varying the monotony of his happiness; and when she is about to be forsaken, she instinctively interprets every gesture as rapidly as Virgil's courser detected the presence of his companion by snuffing the breeze. It was impossible, therefore, that Mme. de Beauseant should not detect that involuntary thrill of satisfaction; slight though it was, it was appalling in its artlessness.

°°°°Eugene had yet to learn that no one in Paris should present himself in any house without first making himself acquainted with the whole history of its owner, and of its owner's wife and family, so that he may avoid making any of the terrible blunders which in Poland draw forth the picturesque exclamation, "Harness five bullocks to your cart!" probably because you will need them all to pull you out of the quagmire into which a false step has plunged you. If, down to the present day, our language has no name for these conversational disasters, it is probably because they are believed to be impossible, the publicity given in Paris to every scandal is so prodigious. After the awkward incident at Mme. de Restaud's, no one but Eugene could have reappeared in his character of bullock-driver in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room. But if Mme. de Restaud and M. de Trailles had found him horribly in the way, M. d'Ajuda hailed his coming with relief.

°°°°"Good-bye," said the Portuguese, hurrying to the door, as Eugene made his entrance into a dainty little pink-and-gray drawing- room, where luxury seemed nothing more than good taste.

°°°°"Until this evening," said Mme. de Beauseant, turning her head to give the Marquis a glance. "We are going to the Bouffons, are we not?"

°°°°"I cannot go," he said, with his fingers on the door handle.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant rose and beckoned to him to return. She did not pay the slightest attention to Eugene, who stood there dazzled by the sparkling marvels around him; he began to think that this was some story out of the Arabian Nights made real, and did not know where to hide himself, when the woman before him seemed to be unconscious of his existence. The Vicomtesse had raised the forefinger of her right hand, and gracefully signed to the Marquis to seat himself beside her. The Marquis felt the imperious sway of passion in her gesture; he came back towards her. Eugene watched him, not without a feeling of envy.

°°°°"That is the owner of the brougham!" he said to himself. "But is it necessary to have a pair of spirited horses, servants in livery, and torrents of gold to draw a glance from a woman here in Paris?"

°°°°The demon of luxury gnawed at his heart, greed burned in his veins, his throat was parched with the thirst of gold.

°°°°He had a hundred and thirty francs every quarter. His father, mother, brothers, sisters, and aunt did not spend two hundred francs a month among them. This swift comparison between his present condition and the aims he had in view helped to benumb his faculties.

°°°°"Why not?" the Vicomtesse was saying, as she smiled at the Portuguese. "Why cannot you come to the Italiens?"

°°°°"Affairs! I am to dine with the English Ambassador."

°°°°"Throw him over."

°°°°When a man once enters on a course of deception, he is compelled to add lie to lie. M. d'Ajuda therefore said, smiling, "Do you lay your commands on me?"

°°°°"Yes, certainly."

°°°°"That was what I wanted to have you say to me," he answered, dissembling his feelings in a glance which would have reassured any other woman.

°°°°He took the Vicomtesse's hand, kissed it, and went.

°°°°Eugene ran his fingers through his hair, and constrained himself to bow. He thought that now Mme. de Beauseant would give him her attention; but suddenly she sprang forward, rushed to a window in the gallery, and watched M. d'Ajuda step into his carriage; she listened to the order that he gave, and heard the Swiss repeat it to the coachman:

°°°°"To M. de Rochefide's house."

°°°°Those words, and the way in which M. d'Ajuda flung himself back in the carriage, were like a lightning flash and a thunderbolt for her; she walked back again with a deadly fear gnawing at her heart. The most terrible catastrophes only happen among the heights. The Vicomtesse went to her own room, sat down at a table, and took up a sheet of dainty notepaper.

°°°°"When, instead of dining with the English Ambassador,"   she wrote, "you go to the Rochefides, you owe me an   explanation, which I am waiting to hear."

°°°°She retraced several of the letters, for her hand was trembling so that they were indistinct; then she signed the note with an initial C for "Claire de Bourgogne," and rang the bell.

°°°°"Jacques," she said to the servant, who appeared immediately, "take this note to M. de Rochefide's house at half-past seven and ask for the Marquis d'Ajuda. If M. d'Ajuda is there, leave the note without waiting for an answer; if he is not there, bring the note back to me."

°°°°"Madame la Vicomtess, there is a visitor in the drawing-room."

°°°°"Ah! yes, of course," she said, opening the door.

°°°°Eugene was beginning to feel very uncomfortable, but at last the Vicomtesse appeared; she spoke to him, and the tremulous tones of her voice vibrated through his heart.

°°°°"Pardon me, monsieur," she said; "I had a letter to write. Now I am quite at liberty."

°°°°She scarcely knew what she was saying, for even as she spoke she thought, "Ah! he means to marry Mlle. de Rochefide? But is he still free? This evening the marriage shall be broken off, or else . . . But before to-morrow I shall know."

°°°°"Cousin . . ." the student replied.

°°°°"Eh?" said the Countess, with an insolent glance that sent a cold shudder through Eugene; he understood what that "Eh?" meant; he had learned a great deal in three hours, and his wits were on the alert. He reddened:

°°°°"Madame . . ." he began; he hesitated a moment, and then went on. "Pardon me; I am in such need of protection that the nearest scrap of relationship could do me no harm."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant smiled but there was sadness in her smile; even now she felt forebodings of the coming pain, the air she breathed was heavy with the storm that was about to burst.

°°°°"If you knew how my family are situated," he went on, "you would love to play the part of a beneficent fairy godmother who graciously clears the obstacles from the path of her protege."

°°°°"Well, cousin," she said, laughing, "and how can I be of service to you?"

°°°°"But do I know even that? I am distantly related to you, and this obscure and remote relationship is even now a perfect godsend to me. You have confused my ideas; I cannot remember the things that I meant to say to you. I know no one else here in Paris. . . . Ah! if I could only ask you to counsel me, ask you to look upon me as a poor child who would fain cling to the hem of your dress, who would lay down his life for you."

°°°°"Would you kill a man for me?"

°°°°"Two," said Eugene.

°°°°"You, child. Yes, you are a child," she said, keeping back the tears that came to her eyes; "you would love sincerely."

°°°°"Oh!" he cried, flinging up his head.

°°°°The audacity of the student's answer interested the Vicomtesse in him. The southern brain was beginning to scheme for the first time. Between Mme. de Restaud's blue boudoir and Mme. de Beauseant's rose-colored drawing-room he had made a three years' advance in a kind of law which is not a recognized study in Paris, although it is a sort of higher jurisprudence, and, when well understood, is a highroad to success of every kind.

°°°°"Ah! that is what I meant to say!" said Eugene. "I met Mme. de Restaud at your ball, and this morning I went to see her.

°°°°"You must have been very much in the way," said Mme. de Beauseant, smiling as she spoke.

°°°°"Yes, indeed. I am a novice, and my blunders will set every one against me, if you do not give me your counsel. I believe that in Paris it is very difficult to meet with a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion who would be willing to teach me, what you women can explain so well--life. I shall find a M. de Trailles everywhere. So I have come to you to ask you to give me a key to a puzzle, to entreat you to tell me what sort of blunder I made this morning. I mentioned an old man----"

°°°°"Madame la Duchess de Langeais," Jacques cut the student short; Eugene gave expression to his intense annoyance by a gesture.

°°°°"If you mean to succeed," said the Vicomtesse in a low voice, "in the first place you must not be so demonstrative."

°°°°"Ah! good morning, dear," she continued, and rising and crossing the room, she grasped the Duchess' hands as affectionately as if they had been sisters; the Duchess responded in the prettiest and most gracious way.

°°°°"Two intimate friends!" said Rastignac to himself. "Henceforward I shall have two protectresses; those two women are great friends, no doubt, and this newcomer will doubtless interest herself in her friend's cousin."

°°°°"To what happy inspiration do I owe this piece of good fortune, dear Antoinette?" asked Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°"Well, I saw M. d'Ajuda-Pinto at M. de Rochefide's door, so I thought that if I came I should find you alone."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant's mouth did not tighten, her color did not rise, her expression did not alter, or rather, her brow seemed to clear as the Duchess uttered those deadly words.

°°°°"If I had known that you were engaged----" the speaker added, glancing at Eugene.

°°°°"This gentleman is M. Eugene de Rastignac, one of my cousins," said the Vicomtesse. "Have you any news of General de Montriveau?" she continued. "Serizy told me yesterday that he never goes anywhere now; has he been to see you to-day?"

°°°°It was believed that the Duchess was desperately in love with M. de Montriveau, and that he was a faithless lover; she felt the question in her very heart, and her face flushed as she answered:

°°°°"He was at the Elysee yesterday."

°°°°"In attendance?"

°°°°"Claire," returned the Duchess, and hatred overflowed in the glances she threw at Mme. de Beauseant; "of course you know that M. d'Ajuda-Pinto is going to marry Mlle. de Rochefide; the bans will be published to-morrow."

°°°°This thrust was too cruel; the Vicomtesse's face grew white, but she answered, laughing, "One of those rumors that fools amuse themselves with. What should induce M. d'Ajuda to take one of the noblest names in Portugal to the Rochefides? The Rochefides were only ennobled yesterday."

°°°°"But Bertha will have two hundred thousand livres a year, they say."

°°°°"M. d'Ajuda is too wealthy to marry for money."

°°°°"But, my dear, Mlle. de Rochefide is a charming girl."

°°°°"Indeed?"

°°°°"And, as a matter of fact, he is dining with them to-day; the thing is settled. It is very surprising to me that you should know so little about it."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant turned to Rastignac. "What was the blunder that you made, monsieur?" she asked. "The poor boy is only just launched into the world, Antoinette, so that he understands nothing of all this that we are speaking of. Be merciful to him, and let us finish our talk to-morrow. Everything will be announced to-morrow, you know, and your kind informal communication can be accompanied by official confirmation."

°°°°The Duchess gave Eugene one of those insolent glances that measure a man from head to foot, and leave him crushed and annihilated.

°°°°"Madame, I have unwittingly plunged a dagger into Mme. de Restaud's heart; unwittingly--therein lies my offence," said the student of law, whose keen brain had served him sufficiently well, for he had detected the biting epigrams that lurked beneath this friendly talk. "You continue to receive, possibly you fear, those who know the amount of pain that they deliberately inflict; but a clumsy blunderer who has no idea how deeply he wounds is looked upon as a fool who does not know how to make use of his opportunities, and every one despise him."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant gave the student a glance, one of those glances in which a great soul can mingle dignity and gratitude. It was like balm to the law student, who was still smarting under the Duchess' insolent scrutiny; she had looked at him as an auctioneer might look at some article to appraise its value.

°°°°"Imagine, too, that I had just made some progress with the Comte de Restaud; for I should tell you, madame," he went on, turning to the Duchess with a mixture of humility and malice in his manner, "that as yet I am only a poor devil of a student, very much alone in the world, and very poor----"

°°°°"You should not tell us that, M. de Rastignac. We women never care about anything that no one else will take."

°°°°"Bah!" said Eugene. "I am only two-and-twenty, and I must make up my mind to the drawbacks of my time of life. Besides, I am confessing my sins, and it would be impossible to kneel in a more charming confessional; you commit your sins in one drawing-room, and receive absolution for them in another."

°°°°The Duchess' expression grew colder, she did not like the flippant tone of these remarks, and showed that she considered them to be in bad taste by turning to the Vicomtesse with--"This gentleman has only just come----"

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant began to laugh outright at her cousin and at the Duchess both.

°°°°"He has only just come to Paris, dear, and is in search of some one who will give him lessons in good taste."

°°°°"Mme. la Duchesse," said Eugene, "is it not natural to wish to be initiated into the mysteries which charm us?" ("Come, now," he said to himself, "my language is superfinely elegant, I'm sure.")

°°°°"But Mme. de Restaud is herself, I believe, M. de Trailles' pupil," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Of that I had no idea, madame," answered the law student, "so I rashly came between them. In fact, I got on very well with the lady's husband, and his wife tolerated me for a time until I took it into my head to tell them that I knew some one of whom I had just caught a glimpse as he went out by a back staircase, a man who had given the Countess a kiss at the end of a passage."

°°°°"Who was it?" both women asked together.

°°°°"An old man who lives at the rate of two louis a month in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, where I, a poor student, lodge likewise. He is a truly unfortunate creature, everybody laughs at him--we all call him 'Father Goriot.' "

°°°°"Why, child that you are," cried the Vicomtesse, "Mme. de Restaud was a Mlle. Goriot!"

°°°°"The daughter of a vermicelli manufacturer," the Duchess added; "and when the little creature went to Court, the daughter of a pastry-cook was presented on the same day. Do you remember, Claire? The King began to laugh, and made some joke in Latin about flour. People--what was it?--people----"

°°°°"Ejusdem farinae," said Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that was it," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Oh! is that her father?" the law student continued, aghast.

°°°°"Yes, certainly; the old man had two daughters; he dotes on them, so to speak, though they will scarcely acknowledge him."

°°°°"Didn't the second daughter marry a banker with a German name?" the Vicomtesse asked, turning to Mme. de Langeais, "a Baron de Nucingen? And her name is Delphine, is it not? Isn't she a fair- haired woman who has a side-box at the Opera? She comes sometimes to the Bouffons, and laughs loudly to attract attention."

°°°°The Duchess smiled and said:

°°°°"I wonder at you, dear. Why do you take so much interest in people of that kind? One must have been as madly in love as Restaud was, to be infatuated with Mlle. Anastasie and her flour sacks. Oh! he will not find her a good bargain! She is in M. de Trailles' hands, and he will ruin her."

°°°°"And they do not acknowledge their father!" Eugene repeated.

°°°°"Oh! well, yes, their father, the father, a father," replied the Vicomtesse, "a kind father who gave them each five or six hundred thousand francs, it is said, to secure their happiness by marrying them well; while he only kept eight or ten thousand livres a year for himself, thinking that his daughters would always be his daughters, thinking that in them he would live his life twice over again, that in their houses he should find two homes, where he would be loved and looked up to, and made much of. And in two years' time both his sons-in-law had turned him out of their houses as if he were one of the lowest outcasts."

°°°°Tears came into Eugene's eyes. He was still under the spell of youthful beliefs, he had just left home, pure and sacred feelings had been stirred within him, and this was his first day on the battlefield of civilization in Paris. Genuine feeling is so infectious that for a moment the three looked at each other in silence.

°°°°"Eh, mon Dieu!" said Mme. de Langeais; "yes, it seems very horrible, and yet we see such things every day. Is there not a reason for it? Tell me, dear, have you ever really thought what a son-in-law is? A son-in-law is the man for whom we bring up, you and I, a dear little one, bound to us very closely in innumerable ways; for seventeen years she will be the joy of her family, its 'white soul,' as Lamartine says, and suddenly she will become its scourge. When HE comes and takes her from us, his love from the very beginning is like an axe laid to the root of all the old affection in our darling's heart, and all the ties that bound her to her family are severed. But yesterday our little daughter thought of no one but her mother and father, as we had no thought that was not for her; by to-morrow she will have become a hostile stranger. The tragedy is always going on under our eyes. On the one hand you see a father who has sacrificed himself to his son, and his daughter-in-law shows him the last degree of insolence. On the other hand, it is the son-in-law who turns his wife's mother out of the house. I sometimes hear it said that there is nothing dramatic about society in these days; but the Drama of the Son-in-law is appalling, to say nothing of our marriages, which have come to be very poor farces. I can explain how it all came about in the old vermicelli maker's case. I think I recollect that Foriot----"

°°°°"Goriot, madame."

°°°°"Yes, that Moriot was once President of his Section during the Revolution. He was in the secret of the famous scarcity of grain, and laid the foundation of his fortune in those days by selling flour for ten times its cost. He had as much flour as he wanted. My grandmother's steward sold him immense quantities. No doubt Noriot shared the plunder with the Committee of Public Salvation, as that sort of person always did. I recollect the steward telling my grandmother that she might live at Grandvilliers in complete security, because her corn was as good as a certificate of civism. Well, then, this Loriot, who sold corn to those butchers, has never had but one passion, they say--he idolizes his daughters. He settled one of them under Restaud's roof, and grafted the other into the Nucingen family tree, the Baron de Nucingen being a rich banker who had turned Royalist. You can quite understand that so long as Bonaparte was Emperor, the two sons-in-law could manage to put up with the old Ninety-three; but after the restoration of the Bourbons, M. de Restaud felt bored by the old man's society, and the banker was still more tired of it. His daughters were still fond of him; they wanted 'to keep the goat and the cabbage,' so they used to see Joriot whenever there was no one there, under pretence of affection. 'Come to- day, papa, we shall have you all to ourselves, and that will be much nicer!' and all that sort of thing. As for me, dear, I believe that love has second-sight: poor Ninety-three; his heart must have bled. He saw that his daughters were ashamed of him, that if they loved their husbands his visits must make mischief. So he immolated himself. He made the sacrifice because he was a father; he went into voluntary exile. His daughters were satisfied, so he thought that he had done the best thing he could; but it was a family crime, and father and daughters were accomplices. You see this sort of thing everywhere. What could this old Doriot have been but a splash of mud in his daughters' drawing-rooms? He would only have been in the way, and bored other people, besides being bored himself. And this that happened between father and daughters may happen to the prettiest woman in

°°°°Paris and the man she loves the best; if her love grows tiresome, he will go; he will descend to the basest trickery to leave her. It is the same with all love and friendship. Our heart is a treasury; if you pour out all its wealth at once, you are bankrupt. We show no more mercy to the affection that reveals its utmost extent than we do to another kind of prodigal who has not a penny left. Their father had given them all he had. For twenty years he had given his whole heart to them; then, one day, he gave them all his fortune too. The lemon was squeezed; the girls left the rest in the gutter."

°°°°"The world is very base," said the Vicomtesse, plucking at the threads of her shawl. She did not raise her head as she spoke; the words that Mme. de Langeais had meant for her in the course of her story had cut her to the quick.

°°°°"Base? Oh, no," answered the Duchess; "the world goes its own way, that is all. If I speak in this way, it is only to show that I am not duped by it. I think as you do," she said, pressing the Vicomtesse's hand. "The world is a slough; let us try to live on the heights above it."

°°°°She rose to her feet and kissed Mme. de Beauseant on the forehead as she said: "You look very charming to-day, dear. I have never seen such a lovely color in your cheeks before."

°°°°Then she went out with a slight inclination of the head to the cousin.

°°°°"Father Goriot is sublime!" said Eugene to himself, as he remembered how he had watched his neighbor work the silver vessel into a shapeless mass that night.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant did not hear him; she was absorbed in her own thoughts. For several minutes the silence remained unbroken till the law student became almost paralyzed with embarrassment, and was equally afraid to go or stay or speak a word.

°°°°"The world is basely ungrateful and ill-natured," said the Vicomtesse at last. "No sooner does a trouble befall you than a friend is ready to bring the tidings and to probe your heart with the point of a dagger while calling on you to admire the handle. Epigrams and sarcasms already! Ah! I will defend myself!"

°°°°She raised her head like the great lady that she was, and lightnings flashed from her proud eyes.

°°°°"Ah!" she said, as she saw Eugene, "are you there?"

°°°°"Still," he said piteously.

°°°°"Well, then, M. de Rastignac, deal with the world as it deserves. You are determined to succeed? I will help you. You shall sound the depths of corruption in woman; you shall measure the extent of man's pitiful vanity. Deeply as I am versed in such learning, there were pages in the book of life that I had not read. Now I know all. The more cold-blooded your calculations, the further you will go. Strike ruthlessly; you will be feared. Men and women for you must be nothing more than post-horses; take a fresh relay, and leave the last to drop by the roadside; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition. You will be nothing here, you see, unless a woman interests herself in you; and she must be young and wealthy, and a woman of the world. Yet, if you have a heart, lock it carefully away like a treasure; do not let any one suspect it, or you will be lost; you would cease to be the executioner, you would take the victim's place. And if ever you should love, never let your secret escape you! Trust no one until you are very sure of the heart to which you open your heart. Learn to mistrust every one; take every precaution for the sake of the love which does not exist as yet. Listen, Miguel"-- the name slipped from her so naturally that she did not notice her mistake--"there is something still more appalling than the ingratitude of daughters who have cast off their old father and wish that he were dead, and that is a rivalry between two sisters. Restaud comes of a good family, his wife has been received into their circle; she has been presented at court; and her sister, her wealthy sister, Mme. Delphine de Nucingen, the wife of a great capitalist, is consumed with envy, and ready to die of spleen. There is gulf set between the sisters--indeed, they are sisters no longer--the two women who refuse to acknowledge their father do not acknowledge each other. So Mme. de Nucingen would lap up all the mud that lies between the Rue Saint-Lazare and the Rue de Grenelle to gain admittance to my salon. She fancied that she should gain her end through de Marsay; she has made herself de Marsay's slave, and she bores him. De Marsay cares very little about her. If you will introduce her to me, you will be her darling, her Benjamin; she will idolize you. If, after that, you can love her, do so; if not, make her useful. I will ask her to come once or twice to one of my great crushes, but I will never receive her here in the morning. I will bow to her when I see her, and that will be quite sufficient. You have shut the Comtesse de Restaud's door against you by mentioning Father Goriot's name. Yes, my good friend, you may call at her house twenty times, and every time out of the twenty you will find that she is not at home. The servants have their orders, and will not admit you. Very well, then, now let Father Goriot gain the right of entry into her sister's house for you. The beautiful Mme. de Nucingen will give the signal for a battle. As soon as she singles you out, other women will begin to lose their heads about you, and her enemies and rivals and intimate friends will all try to take you from her. There are women who will fall in love with a man because another woman has chosen him; like the city madams, poor things, who copy our millinery, and hope thereby to acquire our manners. You will have a success, and in Paris success is everything; it is the key of power. If the women credit you with wit and talent, the men will follow suit so long as you do not undeceive them yourself. There will be nothing you may not aspire to; you will go everywhere, and you will find out what the world is--an assemblage of fools and knaves. But you must be neither the one nor the other. I am giving you my name like Ariadne's clue of thread to take with you into the labyrinth; make no unworthy use of it," she said, with a queenly glance and curve of her throat; "give it back to me unsullied. And now, go; leave me. We women also have our battles to fight."

°°°°"And if you should ever need some one who would gladly set a match to a train for you----"

°°°°"Well?" she asked.

°°°°He tapped his heart, smiled in answer to his cousin's smile, and went.

°°°°It was five o'clock, and Eugene was hungry; he was afraid lest he should not be in time for dinner, a misgiving which made him feel that it was pleasant to be borne so quickly across Paris. This sensation of physical comfort left his mind free to grapple with the thoughts that assailed him. A mortification usually sends a young man of his age into a furious rage; he shakes his fist at society, and vows vengeance when his belief in himself is shaken. Just then Rastignac was overwhelmed by the words, "You have shut the Countess' door against you."

°°°°"I shall call!" he said to himself, "and if Mme. de Beauseant is right, if I never find her at home--I . . . well, Mme. de Restaud shall meet me in every salon in Paris. I will learn to fence and have some pistol practice, and kill that Maxime of hers!"

°°°°"And money?" cried an inward monitor. "How about money, where is that to come from?" And all at once the wealth displayed in the Countess de Restaud's drawing-room rose before his eyes. That was the luxury which Goriot's daughter had loved too well, the gilding, the ostentatious splendor, the unintelligent luxury of the parvenu, the riotous extravagance of a courtesan. Then the attractive vision suddenly went under an eclipse as he remembered the stately grandeur of the Hotel de Beauseant. As his fancy wandered among these lofty regions in the great world of Paris, innumerable dark thoughts gathered in his heart; his ideas widened, and his conscience grew more elastic. He saw the world as it is; saw how the rich lived beyond the jurisdiction of law and public opinion, and found in success the ultima ratio mundi.

°°°°"Vautrin is right, success is virtue!" he said to himself.

°°°°Arrived in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, he rushed up to his room for ten francs wherewith to satisfy the demands of the cabman, and went in to dinner. He glanced round the squalid room, saw the eighteen poverty-stricken creatures about to feed like cattle in their stalls, and the sight filled him with loathing. The transition was too sudden, and the contrast was so violent that it could not but act as a powerful stimulant; his ambition developed and grew beyond all social bounds. On the one hand, he beheld a vision of social life in its most charming and refined forms, of quick-pulsed youth, of fair, impassioned faces invested with all the charm of poetry, framed in a marvelous setting of luxury or art; and, on the other hand, he saw a sombre picture, the miry verge beyond these faces, in which passion was extinct and nothing was left of the drama but the cords and pulleys and bare mechanism. Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, the words uttered in anger by the forsaken lady, her petulant offer, came to his mind, and poverty was a ready expositor. Rastignac determined to open two parallel trenches so as to insure success; he would be a learned doctor of law and a man of fashion. Clearly he was still a child! Those two lines are asymptotes, and will never meet.

°°°°"You are very dull, my lord Marquis," said Vautrin, with one of the shrewd glances that seem to read the innermost secrets of another mind.

°°°°"I am not in the humor to stand jokes from people who call me 'my lord Marquis,' " answered Eugene. "A marquis here in Paris, if he is not the veriest sham, ought to have a hundred thousand livres a year at least; and a lodger in the Maison Vauquer is not exactly Fortune's favorite."

°°°°Vautrin's glance at Rastignac was half-paternal, half- contemptuous. "Puppy!" it seemed to say; "I should make one mouthful of him!" Then he answered:

°°°°"You are in a bad humor; perhaps your visit to the beautiful Comtesse de Restaud was not a success."

°°°°"She has shut her door against me because I told her that her father dined at our table," cried Rastignac.

°°°°Glances were exchanged all round the room; Father Goriot looked down.

°°°°"You have sent some snuff into my eye," he said to his neighbor, turning a little aside to rub his hand over his face.

°°°°"Any one who molests Father Goriot will have henceforward to reckon with me," said Eugene, looking at the old man's neighbor; "he is worth all the rest of us put together.--I am not speaking of the ladies," he added, turning in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer.

°°°°Eugene's remarks produced a sensation, and his tone silenced the dinner-table. Vautrin alone spoke. "If you are going to champion Father Goriot, and set up for his responsible editor into the bargain, you had need be a crack shot and know how to handle the foils," he said, banteringly.

°°°°"So I intend," said Eugene.

°°°°"Then you are taking the field today?"

°°°°"Perhaps," Rastignac answered. "But I owe no account of myself to any one, especially as I do not try to find out what other people do of a night."

°°°°Vautrin looked askance at Rastignac.

°°°°"If you do not mean to be deceived by the puppets, my boy, you must go behind and see the whole show, and not peep through holes in the curtain. That is enough," he added, seeing that Eugene was about to fly into a passion. "We can have a little talk whenever you like."

°°°°There was a general feeling of gloom and constraint. Father Goriot was so deeply dejected by the student's remark that he did not notice the change in the disposition of his fellow-lodgers, nor know that he had met with a champion capable of putting an end to the persecution.

°°°°"Then, M. Goriot sitting there is the father of a countess," said Mme. Vauquer in a low voice.

°°°°"And of a baroness," answered Rastignac.

°°°°"That is about all he is capable of," said Bianchon to Rastignac; "I have taken a look at his head; there is only one bump--the bump of Paternity; he must be an ETERNAL FATHER."

°°°°Eugene was too intent on his thoughts to laugh at Bianchon's joke. He determined to profit by Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, and was asking himself how he could obtain the necessary money. He grew grave. The wide savannas of the world stretched before his eyes; all things lay before him, nothing was his. Dinner came to an end, the others went, and he was left in the dining-room.

°°°°"So you have seen my daughter?" Goriot spoke tremulously, and the sound of his voice broke in upon Eugene's dreams. The young man took the elder's hand, and looked at him with something like kindness in his eyes.

°°°°"You are a good and noble man," he said. "We will have some talk about your daughters by and by."

°°°°He rose without waiting for Goriot's answer, and went to his room. There he wrote the following letter to his mother:--

°°°°"My Dear Mother,--Can you nourish your child from your breast again? I am in a position to make a rapid fortune, but I want twelve hundred francs--I must have them at all costs. Say nothing about this to my father; perhaps he might make objections, and unless I have the money, I may be led to put an end to myself, and so escape the clutches of despair. I will tell you everything when I see you. I will not begin to try to describe my present situation; it would take volumes to put the whole story clearly and fully. I have not been gambling, my kind mother, I owe no one a penny; but if you would preserve the life that you gave me, you must send me the sum I mention. As a matter of fact, I go to see the Vicomtesse de Beauseant; she is using her influence for me; I am obliged to go into society, and I have not a penny to lay out on clean gloves. I can manage to exist on bread and water, or go without food, if need be, but I cannot do without the tools with which they cultivate the vineyards in this country. I must resolutely make up my mind at once to make my way, or stick in the mire for the rest of my days. I know that all your hopes are set on me, and I want to realize them quickly. Sell some of your old jewelry, my kind mother; I will give you other jewels very soon. I know enough of our affairs at home to know all that such a sacrifice means, and you must not think that I would lightly ask you to make it; I should be a monster if I could. You must think of my entreaty as a cry forced from me by imperative necessity. Our whole future lies in the subsidy with which I must begin my first campaign, for life in Paris is one continual battle. If you cannot otherwise procure the whole of the money, and are forced to sell our aunt's lace, tell her that I will send her some still handsomer," and so forth.

°°°°He wrote to ask each of his sisters for their savings--would they despoil themselves for him, and keep the sacrifice a secret from the family? To his request he knew that they would not fail to respond gladly, and he added to it an appeal to their delicacy by touching the chord of honor that vibrates so loudly in young and high-strung natures.

°°°°Yet when he had written the letters, he could not help feeling misgivings in spite of his youthful ambition; his heart beat fast, and he trembled. He knew the spotless nobleness of the lives buried away in the lonely manor house; he knew what trouble and what joy his request would cause his sisters, and how happy they would be as they talked at the bottom of the orchard of that dear brother of theirs in Paris. Visions rose before his eyes; a sudden strong light revealed his sisters secretly counting over their little store, devising some girlish stratagem by which the money could be sent to him incognito, essaying, for the first time in their lives, a piece of deceit that reached the sublime in its unselfishness.

°°°°"A sister's heart is a diamond for purity, a deep sea of tenderness!" he said to himself. He felt ashamed of those letters.

°°°°What power there must be in the petitions put up by such hearts; how pure the fervor that bears their souls to Heaven in prayer! What exquisite joy they would find in self-sacrifice! What a pang for his mother's heart if she could not send him all that he asked for! And this noble affection, these sacrifices made at such terrible cost, were to serve as the ladder by which he meant to climb to Delphine de Nucingen. A few tears, like the last grains of incense flung upon the sacred alter fire of the hearth, fell from his eyes. He walked up and down, and despair mingled with his emotion. Father Goriot saw him through the half-open door.

°°°°"What is the matter, sir?" he asked from the threshold.

°°°°"Ah! my good neighbor, I am as much a son and brother as you are a father. You do well to fear for the Comtesse Anastasie; there is one M. Maxime de Trailles, who will be her ruin."

°°°°Father Goriot withdrew, stammering some words, but Eugene failed to catch their meaning.

°°°°The next morning Rastignac went out to post his letters. Up to the last moment he wavered and doubted, but he ended by flinging them into the box. "I shall succeed!" he said to himself. So says the gambler; so says the great captain; but the three words that have been the salvation of some few, have been the ruin of many more.

°°°°A few days after this Eugene called at Mme. de Restaud's house; she was not at home. Three times he tried the experiment, and three times he found her doors closed against him, though he was careful to choose an hour when M. de Trailles was not there. The Vicomtesse was right.

°°°°The student studied no longer. He put in an appearance at lectures simply to answer to his name, and after thus attesting his presence, departed forthwith. He had been through a reasoning process familiar to most students. He had seen the advisability of deferring his studies to the last moment before going up for his examinations; he made up his mind to cram his second and third years' work into the third year, when he meant to begin to work in earnest, and to complete his studies in law with one great effort. In the meantime he had fifteen months in which to navigate the ocean of Paris, to spread the nets and set the lines that would bring him a protectress and a fortune. Twice during that week he saw Mme. de Beauseant; he did not go to her house until he had seen the Marquis d'Ajuda drive away.

°°°°Victory for yet a few more days was with the great lady, the most poetic figure in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; and the marriage of the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto with Mlle. de Rochefide was postponed. The dread of losing her happiness filled those days with a fever of joy unknown before, but the end was only so much the nearer. The Marquis d'Ajuda and the Rochefides agreed that this quarrel and reconciliation was a very fortunate thing; Mme. de Beauseant (so they hoped) would gradually become reconciled to the idea of the marriage, and in the end would be brought to sacrifice d'Ajuda's morning visits to the exigencies of a man's career, exigencies which she must have foreseen. In spite of the most solemn promises, daily renewed, M. d'Ajuda was playing a part, and the Vicomtesse was eager to be deceived. "Instead of taking a leap heroically from the window, she is falling headlong down the staircase," said her most intimate friend, the Duchesse de Langeais. Yet this after-glow of happiness lasted long enough for the Vicomtesse to be of service to her young cousin. She had a half-superstitious affection for him. Eugene had shown her sympathy and devotion at a crisis when a woman sees no pity, no real comfort in any eyes; when if a man is ready with soothing flatteries, it is because he has an interested motive.

°°°°Rastignac made up his mind that he must learn the whole of Goriot's previous history; he would come to his bearings before attempting to board the Maison de Nucingen. The results of his inquiries may be given briefly as follows:--

°°°°In the days before the Revolution, Jean-Joachim Goriot was simply a workman in the employ of a vermicelli maker. He was a skilful, thrifty workman, sufficiently enterprising to buy his master's business when the latter fell a chance victim to the disturbances of 1789. Goriot established himself in the Rue de la Jussienne, close to the Corn Exchange. His plain good sense led him to accept the position of President of the Section, so as to secure for his business the protection of those in power at that dangerous epoch. This prudent step had led to success; the foundations of his fortune were laid in the time of the Scarcity (real or artificial), when the price of grain of all kinds rose enormously in Paris. People used to fight for bread at the bakers' doors; while other persons went to the grocers' shops and bought Italian paste foods without brawling over it. It was during this year that Goriot made the money, which, at a later time, was to give him all the advantage of the great capitalist over the small buyer; he had, moreover, the usual luck of average ability; his mediocrity was the salvation of him. He excited no one's envy, it was not even suspected that he was rich till the peril of being rich was over, and all his intelligence was concentrated, not on political, but on commercial speculations. Goriot was an authority second to none on all questions relating to corn, flour, and "middlings"; and the production, storage, and quality of grain. He could estimate the yield of the harvest, and foresee market prices; he bought his cereals in Sicily, and imported Russian wheat. Any one who had heard him hold forth on the regulations that control the importation and exportation of grain, who had seen his grasp of the subject, his clear insight into the principles involved, his appreciation of weak points in the way that the system worked, would have thought that here was the stuff of which a minister is made. Patient, active, and persevering, energetic and prompt in action, he surveyed his business horizon with an eagle eye. Nothing there took him by surprise; he foresaw all things, knew all that was happening, and kept his own counsel; he was a diplomatist in his quick comprehension of a situation; and in the routine of business he was as patient and plodding as a soldier on the march. But beyond this business horizon he could not see. He used to spend his hours of leisure on the threshold of his shop, leaning against the framework of the door. Take him from his dark little counting-house, and he became once more the rough, slow-witted workman, a man who cannot understand a piece of reasoning, who is indifferent to all intellectual pleasures, and falls asleep at the play, a Parisian Dolibom in short, against whose stupidity other minds are powerless.

°°°°Natures of this kind are nearly all alike; in almost all of them you will find some hidden depth of sublime affection. Two all- absorbing affections filled the vermicelli maker's heart to the exclusion of every other feeling; into them he seemed to put all the forces of his nature, as he put the whole power of his brain into the corn trade. He had regarded his wife, the only daughter of a rich farmer of La Brie, with a devout admiration; his love for her had been boundless. Goriot had felt the charm of a lovely and sensitive nature, which, in its delicate strength, was the very opposite of his own. Is there any instinct more deeply implanted in the heart of man than the pride of protection, a protection which is constantly exerted for a fragile and defenceless creature? Join love thereto, the warmth of gratitude that all generous souls feel for the source of their pleasures, and you have the explanation of many strange incongruities in human nature.

°°°°After seven years of unclouded happiness, Goriot lost his wife. It was very unfortunate for him. She was beginning to gain an ascendency over him in other ways; possibly she might have brought that barren soil under cultivation, she might have widened his ideas and given other directions to his thoughts. But when she was dead, the instinct of fatherhood developed in him till it almost became a mania. All the affection balked by death seemed to turn to his daughters, and he found full satisfaction for his heart in loving them. More or less brilliant proposals were made to him from time to time; wealthy merchants or farmers with daughters vied with each other in offering inducements to him to marry again; but he determined to remain a widower. His father-in-law, the only man for whom he felt a decided friendship, gave out that Goriot had made a vow to be faithful to his wife's memory. The frequenters of the Corn Exchange, who could not comprehend this sublime piece of folly, joked about it among themselves, and found a ridiculous nickname for him. One of them ventured (after a glass over a bargain) to call him by it, and a blow from the vermicelli maker's fist sent him headlong into a gutter in the Rue Oblin. He could think of nothing else when his children were concerned; his love for them made him fidgety and anxious; and this was so well known, that one day a competitor, who wished to get rid of him to secure the field to himself, told Goriot that Delphine had just been knocked down by a cab. The vermicelli maker turned ghastly pale, left the Exchange at once, and did not return for several days afterwards; he was ill in consequence of the shock and the subsequent relief on discovering that it was a false alarm. This time, however, the offender did not escape with a bruised shoulder; at a critical moment in the man's affairs, Goriot drove him into bankruptcy, and forced him to disappear from the Corn Exchange.

°°°°As might have been expected, the two girls were spoiled. With an income of sixty thousand francs, Goriot scarcely spent twelve hundred on himself, and found all his happiness in satisfying the whims of the two girls. The best masters were engaged, that Anastasie and Delphine might be endowed with all the accomplishments which distinguish a good education. They had a chaperon--luckily for them, she was a woman who had good sense and good taste;--they learned to ride; they had a carriage for their use; they lived as the mistress of a rich old lord might live; they had only to express a wish, their father would hasten to give them their most extravagant desires, and asked nothing of them in return but a kiss. Goriot had raised the two girls to the level of the angels; and, quite naturally, he himself was left beneath them. Poor man! he loved them even for the pain that they gave him.

°°°°When the girls were old enough to be married, they were left free to choose for themselves. Each had half her father's fortune as her dowry; and when the Comte de Restaud came to woo Anastasie for her beauty, her social aspirations led her to leave her father's house for a more exalted sphere. Delphine wished for money; she married Nucingen, a banker of German extraction, who became a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire. Goriot remained a vermicelli maker as before. His daughters and his sons-in-law began to demur; they did not like to see him still engaged in trade, though his whole life was bound up with his business. For five years he stood out against their entreaties, then he yielded, and consented to retire on the amount realized by the sale of his business and the savings of the last few years. It was this capital that Mme. Vauquer, in the early days of his residence with her, had calculated would bring in eight or ten thousand livres in a year. He had taken refuge in her lodging- house, driven there by despair when he knew that his daughters were compelled by their husbands not only to refuse to receive him as an inmate in their houses, but even to see him no more except in private.

°°°°This was all the information which Rastignac gained from a M. Muret who had purchased Goriot's business, information which confirmed the Duchesse de Langeais' suppositions, and herewith the preliminary explanation of this obscure but terrible Parisian tragedy comes to an end.

°°°°Towards the end of the first week in December Rastignac received two letters--one from his mother, and one from his eldest sister. His heart beat fast, half with happiness, half with fear, at the sight of the familiar handwriting. Those two little scraps of paper contained life or death for his hopes. But while he felt a shiver of dread as he remembered their dire poverty at home, he knew their love for him so well that he could not help fearing that he was draining their very life-blood. His mother's letter ran as follows:--

°°°°"My Dear Child,--I am sending you the money that you asked for. Make a good use of it. Even to save your life I could not raise so large a sum a second time without your father's knowledge, and there would be trouble about it. We should be obliged to mortgage the land. It is impossible to judge of the merits of schemes of which I am ignorant; but what sort of schemes can they be, that you should fear to tell me about them? Volumes of explanation would not have been needed; we mothers can understand at a word, and that word would have spared me the anguish of uncertainty. I do not know how to hide the painful impression that your letter has made upon me, my dear son. What can you have felt when you were moved to send this chill of dread through my heart? It must have been very painful to you to write the letter that gave me so much pain as I read it. To what courses are you committed? You are going to appear to be something that you are not, and your whole life and success depends upon this? You are about to see a society into which you cannot enter without rushing into expense that you cannot afford, without losing precious time that is needed for your studies. Ah! my dear Eugene, believe your mother, crooked ways cannot lead to great ends. Patience and endurance are the two qualities most needed in your position. I am not scolding you; I do not want any tinge of bitterness to spoil our offering. I am only talking like a mother whose trust in you is as great as her foresight for you. You know the steps that you must take, and I, for my part, know the purity of heart, and how good your intentions are; so I can say to you without a doubt, 'Go forward, beloved!' If I tremble, it is because I am a mother, but my prayers and blessings will be with you at every step. Be very careful, dear boy. You must have a man's prudence, for it lies with you to shape the destinies of five others who are dear to you, and must look to you. Yes, our fortunes depend upon you, and your success is ours. We all pray to God to be with you in all that you do. Your aunt Marcillac has been most generous beyond words in this matter; she saw at once how it was, even down to your gloves. 'But I have a weakness for the eldest!' she said gaily. You must love your aunt very much, dear Eugene. I shall wait till you have succeeded before telling you all that she has done for you, or her money would burn your fingers. You, who are young, do not know what it is to part with something that is a piece of your past! But what would we not sacrifice for your sakes? Your aunt says that I am to send you a kiss on the forehead from her, and that kiss is to bring you luck again and again, she says. She would have written you herself, the dear kind-hearted woman, but she is troubled with the gout in her fingers just now. Your father is very well. The vintage of 1819 has turned out better than we expected. Good-bye, dear boy; I will say nothing about your sisters, because Laure is writing to you, and I must let her have the pleasure of giving you all the home news. Heaven send that you may succeed! Oh! yes, dear Eugene, you must succeed. I have come, through you, to a knowledge of a pain so sharp that I do not think I could endure it a second time. I have come to know what it is to be poor, and to long for money for my children's sake. There, good-bye! Do not leave us for long without news of you; and here, at the last, take a kiss from your mother."

°°°°By the time Eugene had finished the letter he was in tears. He thought of Father Goriot crushing his silver keepsake into a shapeless mass before he sold it to meet his daughter's bill of exchange.

°°°°"Your mother has broken up her jewels for you," he said to himself; "your aunt shed tears over those relics of hers before she sold them for your sake. What right have you to heap execrations on Anastasie? You have followed her example; you have selfishly sacrificed others to your own future, and she sacrifices her father to her lover; and of you two, which is the worse?"

°°°°He was ready to renounce his attempts; he could not bear to take that money. The fires of remorse burned in his heart, and gave him intolerable pain, the generous secret remorse which men seldom take into account when they sit in judgment upon their fellow-men; but perhaps the angels in heaven, beholding it, pardon the criminal whom our justice condemns. Rastignac opened his sister's letter; its simplicity and kindness revived his heart.

°°°°"Your letter came just at the right time, dear brother. Agathe and I had thought of so many different ways of spending our money, that we did not know what to buy with it; and now you have come in, and, like the servant who upset all the watches that belonged to the King of Spain, you have restored harmony; for, really and truly, we did not know which of all the things we wanted we wanted most, and we were always quarreling about it, never thinking, dear Eugene, of a way of spending our money which would satisfy us completely. Agathe jumped for you. Indeed, we have been like two mad things all day, 'to such a prodigious degree' (as aunt would say), that mother said, with her severe expression, 'Whatever can be the matter with you, mesdemoiselles?' I think if we had been scolded a little, we should have been still better pleased. A woman ought to be very glad to suffer for one she loves! I, however, in my inmost soul, was doleful and cross in the midst of all my joy. I shall make a bad wife, I am afraid, I am too fond of spending. I had bought two sashes and a nice little stiletto for piercing eyelet-holes in my stays, trifles that I really did not want, so that I have less than that slow-coach Agathe, who is so economical, and hoards her money like a magpie. She had two hundred francs! And I have only one hundred and fifty! I am nicely punished; I could throw my sash down the well; it will be painful to me to wear it now. Poor dear, I have robbed you. And Agathe was so nice about it. She said, 'Let us send the three hundred and fifty francs in our two names!' But I could not help telling you everything just as it happened.

°°°°"Do you know how we managed to keep your commandments? We took our glittering hoard, we went out for a walk, and when once fairly on the highway we ran all the way to Ruffec, where we handed over the coin, without more ado, to M. Grimbert of the Messageries Royales. We came back again like swallows on the wing. 'Don't you think that happiness has made us lighter?' Agathe said. We said all sorts of things, which I shall not tell you, Monsieur le Parisien, because they were all about you. Oh, we love you dearly, dear brother; it was all summed up in those few words. As for keeping the secret, little masqueraders like us are capable of anything (according to our aunt), even of holding our tongues. Our mother has been on a mysterious journey to Angouleme, and the aunt went with her, not without solemn councils, from which we were shut out, and M. le Baron likewise. They are silent as to the weighty political considerations that prompted their mission, and conjectures are rife in the State of Rastignac. The Infantas are embroidering a muslin robe with open- work sprigs for her Majesty the Queen; the work progresses in the most profound secrecy. There be but two more breadths to finish. A decree has gone forth that no wall shall be built on the side of Verteuil, but that a hedge shall be planted instead thereof. Our subjects may sustain some disappointment of fruit and espaliers, but strangers will enjoy a fair prospect. Should the heir-presumptive lack pocket-handkerchiefs, be it known unto him that the dowager Lady of Marcillac, exploring the recesses of her drawers and boxes (known respectively as Pompeii and Herculaneum), having brought to light a fair piece of cambric whereof she wotted not, the Princesses Agathe and Laure place at their brother's disposal their thread, their needles, and hands somewhat of the reddest. The two young Princes, Don Henri and Don Gabriel, retain their fatal habits of stuffing themselves with grape-jelly, of teasing their sisters, of taking their pleasure by going a-bird-nesting, and of cutting switches for themselves from the osier-beds, maugre the laws of the realm. Moreover, they list not to learn naught, wherefore the Papal Nuncio (called of the commonalty, M. le Cure) threateneth them with excommunication, since that they neglect the sacred canons of grammatical construction for the construction of other canon, deadly engines made of the stems of elder.

°°°°"Farewell, dear brother, never did letter carry so many wishes for your success, so much love fully satisfied. You will have a great deal to tell us when you come home! You will tell me everything, won't you? I am the oldest. From something the aunt let fall, we think you must have had some success.

°°°°"Something was said of a lady, but nothing more was said . . .

°°°°"Of course not, in our family! Oh, by-the-by, Eugene, would you rather that we made that piece of cambric into shirts for you instead of pocket-handkerchiefs? If you want some really nice shirts at once, we ought to lose no time in beginning upon them; and if the fashion is different now in Paris, send us one for a pattern; we want more particularly to know about the cuffs. Good- bye! Good-bye! Take my kiss on the left side of your forehead, on the temple that belongs to me, and to no one else in the world. I am leaving the other side of the sheet for Agathe, who has solemnly promised not to read a word that I have written; but, all the same, I mean to sit by her side while she writes, so as to be quite sure that she keeps her word.--Your loving sister, "Laure de Rastignac."

°°°°"Yes!" said Eugene to himself. "Yes! Success at all costs now! Riches could not repay such devotion as this. I wish I could give them every sort of happiness! Fifteen hundred and fifty francs," he went on after a pause. "Every shot must go to the mark! Laure is right. Trust a woman! I have only calico shirts. Where some one else's welfare is concerned, a young girl becomes as ingenious as a thief. Guileless where she herself is in question, and full of foresight for me,--she is like a heavenly angel forgiving the strange incomprehensible sins of earth."

°°°°The world lay before him. His tailor had been summoned and sounded, and had finally surrendered. When Rastignac met M. de Trailles, he had seen at once how great a part the tailor plays in a young man's career; a tailor is either a deadly enemy or a staunch friend, with an invoice for a bond of friendship; between these two extremes there is, alack! no middle term. In this representative of his craft Eugene discovered a man who understood that his was a sort of paternal function for young men at their entrance into life, who regarded himself as a stepping- stone between a young man's present and future. And Rastignac in gratitude made the man's fortune by an epigram of a kind in which he excelled at a later period of his life.

°°°°"I have twice known a pair of trousers turned out by him make a match of twenty thousand livres a year!"

°°°°Fifteen hundred francs, and as many suits of clothes as he chose to order! At that moment the poor child of the South felt no more doubts of any kind. The young man went down to breakfast with the indefinable air which the consciousness of the possession of money gives to youth. No sooner are the coins slipped into a student's pocket than his wealth, in imagination at least, is piled into a fantastic column, which affords him a moral support. He begins to hold up his head as he walks; he is conscious that he has a means of bringing his powers to bear on a given point; he looks you straight in the face; his gestures are quick and decided; only yesterday he was diffident and shy, any one might have pushed him aside; to-morrow, he will take the wall of a prime minister. A miracle has been wrought in him. Nothing is beyond the reach of his ambition, and his ambition soars at random; he is light-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic; in short, the fledgling bird has discovered that he has wings. A poor student snatches at every chance pleasure much as a dog runs all sorts of risks to steal a bone, cracking it and sucking the marrow as he flies from pursuit; but a young man who can rattle a few runaway gold coins in his pocket can take his pleasure deliberately, can taste the whole of the sweets of secure possession; he soars far above earth; he has forgotten what the word POVERTY means; all Paris is his. Those are days when the whole world shines radiant with light, when everything glows and sparkles before the eyes of youth, days that bring joyous energy that is never brought into harness, days of debts and of painful fears that go hand in hand with every delight. Those who do not know the left bank of the Seine between the Rue Saint-Jacques and the Rue des Saints-Peres know nothing of life.

°°°°"Ah! if the women of Paris but knew," said Rastignac, as he devoured Mme. Vauquer's stewed pears (at five for a penny), "they would come here in search of a lover."

°°°°Just then a porter from the Messageries Royales appeared at the door of the room; they had previously heard the bell ring as the wicket opened to admit him. The man asked for M. Eugene de Rastignac, holding out two bags for him to take, and a form of receipt for his signature. Vautrin's keen glance cut Eugene like a lash.

°°°°"Now you will be able to pay for those fencing lessons and go to the shooting gallery," he said.

°°°°"Your ship has come in," said Mme. Vauquer, eyeing the bags.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau did not dare to look at the money, for fear her eyes should betray her cupidity.

°°°°"You have a kind mother," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"You have a kind mother, sir," echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, mamma has been drained dry," said Vautrin, "and now you can have your fling, go into society, and fish for heiresses, and dance with countesses who have peach blossom in their hair. But take my advice, young man, and don't neglect your pistol practice."

°°°°Vautrin struck an attitude, as if he were facing an antagonist. Rastignac, meaning to give the porter a tip, felt in his pockets and found nothing. Vautrin flung down a franc piece on the table.

°°°°"Your credit is good," he remarked, eyeing the student, and Rastignac was forced to thank him, though, since the sharp encounter of wits at dinner that day, after Eugene came in from calling on Mme. de Beauseant, he had made up his mind that Vautrin was insufferable. For a week, in fact, they had both kept silence in each other's presence, and watched each other. The student tried in vain to account to himself for this attitude.

°°°°An idea, of course, gains in force by the energy with which it is expressed; it strikes where the brain sends it, by a law as mathematically exact as the law that determines the course of a shell from a mortar. The amount of impression it makes is not to be determined so exactly. Sometimes, in an impressible nature, the idea works havoc, but there are, no less, natures so robustly protected, that this sort of projectile falls flat and harmless on skulls of triple brass, as cannon-shot against solid masonry; then there are flaccid and spongy-fibred natures into which ideas from without sink like spent bullets into the earthworks of a redoubt. Rastignac's head was something of the powder-magazine order; the least shock sufficed to bring about an explosion. He was too quick, too young, not to be readily accessible to ideas; and open to that subtle influence of thought and feeling in others which causes so many strange phenomena that make an impression upon us of which we are all unconscious at the time. Nothing escaped his mental vision; he was lynx-eyed; in him the mental powers of perception, which seem like duplicates of the senses, had the mysterious power of swift projection that astonishes us in intellects of a high order--slingers who are quick to detect the weak spot in any armor.

°°°°In the past month Eugene's good qualities and defects had rapidly developed with his character. Intercourse with the world and the endeavor to satisfy his growing desires had brought out his defects. But Rastignac came from the South side of the Loire, and had the good qualities of his countrymen. He had the impetuous courage of the South, that rushes to the attack of a difficulty, as well as the southern impatience of delay or suspense. These traits are held to be defects in the North; they made the fortune of Murat, but they likewise cut short his career. The moral would appear to be that when the dash and boldness of the South side of the Loire meets, in a southern temperament, with the guile of the North, the character is complete, and such a man will gain (and keep) the crown of Sweden.

°°°°Rastignac, therefore, could not stand the fire from Vautrin's batteries for long without discovering whether this was a friend or a foe. He felt as if this strange being was reading his inmost soul, and dissecting his feelings, while Vautrin himself was so close and secretive that he seemed to have something of the profound and unmoved serenity of a sphinx, seeing and hearing all things and saying nothing. Eugene, conscious of that money in his pocket, grew rebellious.

°°°°"Be so good as to wait a moment," he said to Vautrin, as the latter rose, after slowly emptying his coffee-cup, sip by sip.

°°°°"What for?" inquired the older man, as he put on his large- brimmed hat and took up the sword-cane that he was wont to twirl like a man who will face three or four footpads without flinching.

°°°°"I will repay you in a minute," returned Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he spoke, counted out a hundred and forty francs, and pushed them towards Mme. Vauquer. "Short reckonings make good friends" he added, turning to the widow; "that clears our accounts till the end of the year. Can you give me change for a five-franc piece?"

°°°°"Good friends make short reckonings," echoed Poiret, with a glance at Vautrin.

°°°°"Here is your franc," said Rastignac, holding out the coin to the sphinx in the black wig.

°°°°"Any one might think that you were afraid to owe me a trifle," exclaimed this latter, with a searching glance that seemed to read the young man's inmost thoughts; there was a satirical and cynical smile on Vautrin's face such as Eugene had seen scores of times already; every time he saw it, it exasperated him almost beyond endurance.

°°°°"Well . . . so I am," he answered. He held both the bags in his hand, and had risen to go up to his room.

°°°°Vautrin made as if he were going out through the sitting-room, and the student turned to go through the second door that opened into the square lobby at the foot of the staircase.

°°°°"Do you know, Monsieur le Marquis de Rastignacorama, that what you were saying just now was not exactly polite?" Vautrin remarked, as he rattled his sword-cane across the panels of the sitting-room door, and came up to the student.

°°°°Rastignac looked coolly at Vautrin, drew him to the foot of the staircase, and shut the dining-room door. They were standing in the little square lobby between the kitchen and the dining-room; the place was lighted by an iron-barred fanlight above a door that gave access into the garden. Sylvie came out of her kitchen, and Eugene chose that moment to say:

°°°°MONSIEUR Vautrin, I am not a marquis, and my name is not Rastignacorama."

°°°°"They will fight," said Mlle. Michonneau, in an indifferent tone.

°°°°"Fight!" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Not they," replied Mme. Vauquer, lovingly fingering her pile of coins.

°°°°"But there they are under the lime-trees," cried Mlle. Victorine, who had risen so that she might see out into the garden. "Poor young man! he was in the right, after all."

°°°°"We must go upstairs, my pet," said Mme. Couture; "it is no business of ours."

°°°°At the door, however, Mme. Couture and Victorine found their progress barred by the portly form of Sylvie the cook.

°°°°"What ever can have happened?" she said. "M. Vautrin said to M. Eugene, 'Let us have an explanation!' then he took him by the arm, and there they are, out among the artichokes."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking. "Mamma Vauquer," he said smiling, "don't frighten yourself at all. I am only going to try my pistols under the lime-trees."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur," cried Victorine, clasping her hands as she spoke, "why do you want to kill M. Eugene?"

°°°°Vautrin stepped back a pace or two, and gazed at Victorine.

°°°°"Oh! this is something fresh!" he exclaimed in a bantering tone, that brought the color into the poor girl's face. "That young fellow yonder is very nice, isn't he?" he went on. "You have given me a notion, my pretty child; I will make you both happy."

°°°°Mme. Couture laid her hand on the arm of her ward, and drew the girl away, as she said in her ear:

°°°°"Why, Victorine, I cannot imagine what has come over you this morning."

°°°°"I don't want any shots fired in my garden," said Mme. Vauquer. "You will frighten the neighborhood and bring the police up here all in a moment."

°°°°"Come, keep cool, Mamma Vauquer," answered Vautrin. "There, there; it's all right; we will go to the shooting-gallery."

°°°°He went back to Rastignac, laying his hand familiarly on the young man's arm.

°°°°"When I have given you ocular demonstration of the fact that I can put a bullet through the ace on a card five times running at thirty-five paces," he said, "that won't take away your appetite, I suppose? You look to me to be inclined to be a trifle quarrelsome this morning, and as if you would rush on your death like a blockhead."

°°°°"Do you draw back?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Don't try to raise my temperature," answered Vautrin, "it is not cold this morning. Let us go and sit over there," he added, pointing to the green-painted garden seats; "no one can overhear us. I want a little talk with you. You are not a bad sort of youngster, and I have no quarrel with you. I like you, take Trump--(confound it!)--take Vautrin's word for it. What makes me like you? I will tell you by-and-by. Meantime, I can tell you that I know you as well as if I had made you myself, as I will prove to you in a minute. Put down your bags," he continued, pointing to the round table.

°°°°Rastignac deposited his money on the table, and sat down. He was consumed with curiosity, which the sudden change in the manner of the man before him had excited to the highest pitch. Here was a strange being who, a moment ago, had talked of killing him, and now posed as his protector.

°°°°"You would like to know who I really am, what I was, and what I do now," Vautrin went on. "You want to know too much, youngster. Come! come! keep cool! You will hear more astonishing things than that. I have had my misfortunes. Just hear me out first, and you shall have your turn afterwards. Here is my past in three words. Who am I? Vautrin. What do I do? Just what I please. Let us change the subject. You want to know my character. I am good- natured to those who do me a good turn, or to those whose hearts speak to mine. These last may do anything they like with me; they may bruise my shins, and I shall not tell them to 'mind what they are about'; but, nom d'une pipe, the devil himself is not an uglier customer than I can be if people annoy me, or if I don't happen to take to them; and you may just as well know at once that I think no more of killing a man than of that," and he spat before him as he spoke. "Only when it is absolutely necessary to do so, I do my best to kill him properly. I am what you call an artist. I have read Benvenuto Cellini's Memoirs, such as you see me; and, what is more, in Italian: A fine-spirited fellow he was! From him I learned to follow the example set us by Providence, who strikes us down at random, and to admire the beautiful whenever and wherever it is found. And, setting other questions aside, is it not a glorious part to play, when you pit yourself against mankind, and the luck is on your side? I have thought a good deal about the constitution of your present social Dis- order. A duel is downright childish, my boy! utter nonsense and folly! When one of two living men must be got out of the way, none but an idiot would leave chance to decide which it is to be; and in a duel it is a toss-up--heads or tails--and there you are! Now I, for instance, can hit the ace in the middle of a card five times running, send one bullet after another through the same hole, and at thirty-five paces, moreover! With that little accomplishment you might think yourself certain of killing your man, mightn't you. Well, I have fired, at twenty paces, and missed, and the rogue who had never handled a pistol in his life-- look here!"--(he unbuttoned his waistcoat and exposed his chest, covered, like a bear's back, with a shaggy fell; the student gave a startled shudder)--"he was a raw lad, but he made his mark on me," the extraordinary man went on, drawing Rastignac's fingers over a deep scar on his breast. But that happened when I myself was a mere boy; I was one-and-twenty then (your age), and I had some beliefs left--in a woman's love, and in a pack of rubbish that you will be over head and ears in directly. You and I were to have fought just now, weren't we? You might have killed me. Suppose that I were put under the earth, where would you be? You would have to clear out of this, go to Switzerland, draw on papa's purse--and he has none too much in it as it is. I mean to open your eyes to your real position, that is what I am going to do: but I shall do it from the point of view of a man who, after studying the world very closely, sees that there are but two alternatives--stupid obedience or revolt. I obey nobody; is that clear? Now, do you know how much you will want at the pace you are going? A million; and promptly, too, or that little head of ours will be swaying to and fro in the drag-nets at Saint-Cloud, while we are gone to find out whether or no there is a Supreme Being. I will put you in the way of that million."

°°°°He stopped for a moment and looked at Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! you do not look so sourly at papa Vautrin now! At the mention of the million you look like a young girl when somebody has said, 'I will come for you this evening!' and she betakes herself to her toilette as a cat licks its whiskers over a saucer of milk. All right. Come, now, let us go into the question, young man; all between ourselves, you know. We have a papa and mamma down yonder, a great-aunt, two sisters (aged eighteen and seventeen), two young brothers (one fifteen, and the other ten), that is about the roll-call of the crew. The aunt brings up the two sisters; the cure comes and teaches the boys Latin. Boiled chestnuts are oftener on the table than white bread. Papa makes a suit of clothes last a long while; if mamma has a different dress winter and summer, it is about as much as she has; the sisters manage as best they can. I know all about it; I have lived in the south.

°°°°"That is how things are at home. They send you twelve hundred francs a year, and the whole property only brings in three thousand francs all told. We have a cook and a manservant; papa is a baron, and we must keep up appearances. Then we have our ambitions; we are connected with the Beauseants, and we go afoot through the streets; we want to be rich, and we have not a penny; we eat Mme. Vauquer's messes, and we like grand dinners in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; we sleep on a truckle-bed, and dream of a mansion! I do not blame you for wanting these things. What sort of men do the women run after? Men of ambition. Men of ambition have stronger frames, their blood is richer in iron, their hearts are warmer than those of ordinary men. Women feel that when their power is greatest, they look their best, and that those are their happiest hours; they like power in men, and prefer the strongest even if it is a power that may be their own destruction. I am going to make an inventory of your desires in order to put the question at issue before you. Here it is:--

°°°°"We are as hungry as a wolf, and those newly-cut teeth of ours are sharp; what are we to do to keep the pot boiling? In the first place, we have the Code to browse upon; it is not amusing, and we are none the wiser for it, but that cannot be helped. So far so good. We mean to make an advocate of ourselves with a prospect of one day being made President of a Court of Assize, when we shall send poor devils, our betters, to the galleys with a T.F.* [*Travaux forces.] on their shoulders, so that the rich may be convinced that they can sleep in peace. There is no fun in that; and you are a long while coming to it; for, to begin with, there are two years of nauseous drudgery in Paris, we see all the lollipops that we long for out of our reach. It is tiresome to want things and never to have them. If you were a pallid creature of the mollusk order, you would have nothing to fear, but it is different when you have the hot blood of a lion and are ready to get into a score of scrapes every day of your life. This is the ghastliest form of torture known in this inferno of God's making, and you will give in to it. Or suppose that you are a good boy, drink nothing stronger than milk, and bemoan your hard lot; you, with your generous nature, will endure hardships that would drive a dog mad, and make a start, after long waiting, as deputy to some rascal or other in a hole of a place where the Government will fling you a thousand francs a year like the scraps that are thrown to the butcher's dog. Bark at thieves, plead the cause of the rich, send men of heart to the guillotine, that is your work! Many thanks! If you have no influence, you may rot in your provincial tribunal. At thirty you will be a Justice with twelve hundred francs a year (if you have not flung off the gown for good before then). By the time you are forty you may look to marry a miller's daughter, an heiress with some six thousand livres a year. Much obliged! If you have influence, you may possibly be a Public Prosecutor by the time you are thirty; with a salary of a thousand crowns, you could look to marry the mayor's daughter. Some petty piece of political trickery, such as mistaking Villele for Manuel in a bulletin (the names rhyme, and that quiets your conscience), and you will probably be a Procureur General by the time you are forty, with a chance of becoming a deputy. Please to observe, my dear boy, that our conscience will have been a little damaged in the process, and that we shall endure twenty years of drudgery and hidden poverty, and that our sisters are wearing Dian's livery. I have the honor to call your attention to another fact: to wit, that there are but twenty Procureurs Generaux at a time in all France, while there are some twenty thousand of you young men who aspire to that elevated position; that there are some mountebanks among you who would sell their family to screw their fortunes a peg higher. If this sort of thing sickens you, try another course. The Baron de Rastignac thinks of becoming an advocate, does he? There's a nice prospect for you! Ten years of drudgery straight away. You are obliged to live at the rate of a thousand francs a month; you must have a library of law books, live in chambers, go into society, go down on your knees to ask a solicitor for briefs, lick the dust off the floor of the Palais de Justice. If this kind of business led to anything, I should not say no; but just give me the names of five advocates here in Paris who by the time that they are fifty are making fifty thousand francs a year! Bah! I would sooner turn pirate on the high seas than have my soul shrivel up inside me like that. How will you find the capital? There is but one way, marry a woman who has money. There is no fun in it. Have you a mind to marry? You hang a stone around your neck; for if you marry for money, what becomes of our exalted notions of honor and so forth? You might as well fly in the face of social conventions at once. Is it nothing to crawl like a serpent before your wife, to lick her mother's feet, to descend to dirty actions that would sicken swine--faugh!--never mind if you at least make your fortune. But you will be as doleful as a dripstone if you marry for money. It is better to wrestle with men than to wrangle at home with your wife. You are at the crossway of the roads of life, my boy; choose your way.

°°°°"But you have chosen already. You have gone to see your cousin of Beauseant, and you have had an inkling of luxury; you have been to Mme. de Restaud's house, and in Father Goriot's daughter you have seen a glimpse of the Parisienne for the first time. That day you came back with a word written on your forehead. I knew it, I could read it--'SUCCESS!' Yes, success at any price. 'Bravo,' said I to myself, 'here is the sort of fellow for me.' You wanted money. Where was it all to come from? You have drained your sisters' little hoard (all brothers sponge more or less on their sisters). Those fifteen hundred francs of yours (got together, God knows how! in a country where there are more chestnuts than five-franc pieces) will slip away like soldiers after pillage. And, then, what will you do? Shall you begin to work? Work, or what you understand by work at this moment, means, for a man of Poiret's calibre, an old age in Mamma Vauquer's lodging-house. There are fifty thousand young men in your position at this moment, all bent as you are on solving one and the same problem--how to acquire a fortune rapidly. You are but a unit in that aggregate. You can guess, therefore, what efforts you must make, how desperate the struggle is. There are not fifty thousand good positions for you; you must fight and devour one another like spiders in a pot. Do you know how a man makes his way here? By brilliant genius or by skilful corruption. You must either cut your way through these masses of men like a cannon ball, or steal among them like a plague. Honesty is nothing to the purpose. Men bow before the power of genius; they hate it, and try to slander it, because genius does not divide the spoil; but if genius persists, they bow before it. To sum it all up in a phrase, if they fail to smother genius in the mud, they fall on their knees and worship it. Corruption is a great power in the world, and talent is scarce. So corruption is the weapon of superfluous mediocrity; you will be made to feel the point of it everywhere. You will see women who spend more than ten thousand francs a year on dress, while their husband's salary (his whole income) is six thousand francs. You will see officials buying estates on twelve thousand francs a year. You will see women who sell themselves body and soul to drive in a carriage belonging to the son of a peer of France, who has a right to drive in the middle rank at Longchamp. You have seen that poor simpleton of a Goriot obliged to meet a bill with his daughter's name at the back of it, though her husband has fifty thousand francs a year. I defy you to walk a couple of yards anywhere in Paris without stumbling on some infernal complication. I'll bet my head to a head of that salad that you will stir up a hornet's nest by taking a fancy to the first young, rich, and pretty woman you meet. They are all dodging the law, all at loggerheads with their husbands. If I were to begin to tell you all that vanity or necessity (virtue is not often mixed up in it, you may be sure), all that vanity and necessity drive them to do for lovers, finery, housekeeping, or children, I should never come to an end. So an honest man is the common enemy.

°°°°"But do you know what an honest man is? Here, in Paris, an honest man is the man who keeps his own counsel, and will not divide the plunder. I am not speaking now of those poor bond-slaves who do the work of the world without a reward for their toil--God Almighty's outcasts, I call them. Among them, I grant you, is virtue in all the flower of its stupidity, but poverty is no less their portion. At this moment, I think I see the long faces those good folk would pull if God played a practical joke on them and stayed away at the Last Judgment.

°°°°"Well, then, if you mean to make a fortune quickly, you must either be rich to begin with, or make people believe that you are rich. It is no use playing here except for high stakes; once take to low play, it is all up with you. If in the scores of professions that are open to you, there are ten men who rise very rapidly, people are sure to call them thieves. You can draw your own conclusions. Such is life. It is no cleaner than a kitchen; it reeks like a kitchen; and if you mean to cook your dinner, you must expect to soil your hands; the real art is in getting them clean again, and therein lies the whole morality of our epoch. If I take this tone in speaking of the world to you, I have the right to do so; I know it well. Do you think that I am blaming it? Far from it; the world has always been as it is now. Moralists' strictures will never change it. Mankind are not perfect, but one age is more or less hypocritical than another, and then simpletons say that its morality is high or low. I do not think that the rich are any worse than the poor; man is much the same, high or low, or wherever he is. In a million of these human cattle there may be half a score of bold spirits who rise above the rest, above the laws; I am one of them. And you, if you are cleverer than your fellows, make straight to your end, and hold your head high. But you must lay your account with envy and slander and mediocrity, and every man's hand will be against you. Napoleon met with a Minister of War, Aubry by name, who all but sent him to the colonies.

°°°°"Feel your pulse. Think whether you can get up morning after morning, strengthened in yesterday's purpose. In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline. Listen attentively. You see, I have an idea of my own. My idea is to live a patriarchal life on a vast estate, say a hundred thousand acres, somewhere in the Southern States of America. I mean to be a planter, to have slaves, to make a few snug millions by selling my cattle, timber, and tobacco; I want to live an absolute monarch, and to do just as I please; to lead such a life as no one here in these squalid dens of lath and plaster ever imagines. I am a great poet; I do not write my poems, I feel them, and act them. At this moment I have fifty thousand francs, which might possibly buy forty negroes. I want two hundred thousand francs, because I want to have two hundred negroes to carry out my notions of the patriarachal life properly. Negroes, you see, are like a sort of family ready grown, and there are no inquisitive public prosecutors out there to interfere with you. That investment in ebony ought to mean three or four million francs in ten years' time. If I am successful, no one will ask me who I am. I shall be Mr. Four Millions, an American citizen. I shall be fifty years old by then, and sound and hearty still; I shall enjoy life after my own fashion. In two words, if I find you an heiress with a million, will you give me two hundred thousand francs? Twenty per cent commission, eh? Is that too much? Your little wife will be very much in love with you. Once married, you will show signs of uneasiness and remorse; for a couple of weeks you will be depressed. Then, some night after sundry grimacings, comes the confession, between two kisses, 'Two hundred thousand francs of debts, my darling!' This sort of farce is played every day in Paris, and by young men of the highest fashion. When a young wife has given her heart, she will not refuse her purse. Perhaps you are thinking that you will lose the money for good? Not you. You will make two hundred thousand francs again by some stroke of business. With your capital and your brains you should be able to accumulate as large a fortune as you could wish. ERGO, in six months you will have made your own fortune, and our old friend Vautrin's, and made an amiable woman very happy, to say nothing of your people at home, who must blow on their fingers to warm them, in the winter, for lack of firewood. You need not be surprised at my proposal, nor at the demand I make. Forty-seven out of every sixty great matches here in Paris are made after just such a bargain as this. The Chamber of Notaries compels my gentleman to----"

°°°°"What must I do?" said Rastignac, eagerly interrupting Vautrin's speech.

°°°°"Next to nothing," returned the other, with a slight involuntary movement, the suppressed exultation of the angler when he feels a bite at the end of his line. "Follow me carefully! The heart of a girl whose life is wretched and unhappy is a sponge that will thirstily absorb love; a dry sponge that swells at the first drop of sentiment. If you pay court to a young girl whose existence is a compound of loneliness, despair, and poverty, and who has no suspicion that she will come into a fortune, good Lord! it is quint and quatorze at piquet; it is knowing the numbers of the lottery before-hand; it is speculating in the funds when you have news from a sure source; it is building up a marriage on an indestructible foundation. The girl may come in for millions, and she will fling them, as if they were so many pebbles, at your feet. 'Take it, my beloved! Take it, Alfred, Adolphe, Eugene!' or whoever it was that showed his sense by sacrificing himself for her. And as for sacrificing himself, this is how I understand it. You sell a coat that is getting shabby, so that you can take her to the Cadran bleu, treat her to mushrooms on toast, and then go to the Ambigu-Comique in the evening; you pawn your watch to buy her a shawl. I need not remind you of the fiddle-faddle sentimentality that goes down so well with all women; you spill a few drops of water on your stationery, for instance; those are the tears you shed while far away from her. You look to me as if you were perfectly acquainted with the argot of the heart. Paris, you see, is like a forest in the New World, where you have to deal with a score of varieties of savages--Illinois and Hurons, who live on the proceed of their social hunting. You are a hunter of millions; you set your snares; you use lures and nets; there are many ways of hunting. Some hunt heiresses, others a legacy; some fish for souls, yet others sell their clients, bound hand and foot. Every one who comes back from the chase with his game- bag well filled meets with a warm welcome in good society. In justice to this hospitable part of the world, it must be said that you have to do with the most easy and good-natured of great cities. If the proud aristocracies of the rest of Europe refuse admittance among their ranks to a disreputable millionaire, Paris stretches out a hand to him, goes to his banquets, eats his dinners, and hobnobs with his infamy."

°°°°"But where is such a girl to be found?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Under your eyes; she is yours already."

°°°°"Mlle. Victorine?"

°°°°"Precisely."

°°°°"And what was that you said?"

°°°°"She is in love with you already, your little Baronne de Rastignac!"

°°°°"She has not a penny," Eugene continued, much mystified.

°°°°"Ah! now we are coming to it! Just another word or two, and it will all be clear enough. Her father, Taillefer, is an old scoundrel; it is said that he murdered one of his friends at the time of the Revolution. He is one of your comedians that sets up to have opinions of his own. He is a banker--senior partner in the house of Frederic Taillefer and Company. He has one son, and means to leave all he has to the boy, to the prejudice of Victorine. For my part, I don't like to see injustice of this sort. I am like Don Quixote, I have a fancy for defending the weak against the strong. If it should please God to take that youth away from him, Taillefer would have only his daughter left; he would want to leave his money to some one or other; an absurd notion, but it is only human nature, and he is not likely to have any more children, as I know. Victorine is gentle and amiable; she will soon twist her father round her fingers, and set his head spinning like a German top by plying him with sentiment! She will be too much touched by your devotion to forget you; you will marry her. I mean to play Providence for you, and Providence is to do my will. I have a friend whom I have attached closely to myself, a colonel in the Army of the Loire, who has just been transferred into the garde royale. He has taken my advice and turned ultra-royalist; he is not one of those fools who never change their opinions. Of all pieces of advice, my cherub, I would give you this--don't stick to your opinions any more than to your words. If any one asks you for them, let him have them-- at a price. A man who prides himself on going in a straight line through life is an idiot who believes in infallibility. There are no such things as principles; there are only events, and there are no laws but those of expediency: a man of talent accepts events and the circumstances in which he finds himself, and turns everything to his own ends. If laws and principles were fixed and invariable, nations would not change them as readily as we change our shirts. The individual is not obliged to be more particular than the nation. A man whose services to France have been of the very slightest is a fetich looked on with superstitious awe because he has always seen everything in red; but he is good, at the most, to be put into the Museum of Arts and Crafts, among the automatic machines, and labeled La Fayette; while the prince at whom everybody flings a stone, the man who despises humanity so much that he spits as many oaths as he is asked for in the face of humanity, saved France from being torn in pieces at the Congress of Vienna; and they who should have given him laurels fling mud at him. Oh! I know something of affairs, I can tell you; I have the secrets of many men! Enough. When I find three minds in agreement as to the application of a principle, I shall have a fixed and immovable opinion--I shall have to wait a long while first. In the Tribunals you will not find three judges of the same opinion on a single point of law. To return to the man I was telling you of. He would crucify Jesus Christ again, if I bade him. At a word from his old chum Vautrin he will pick a quarrel with a scamp that will not send so much as five francs to his sister, poor girl, and" (here Vautrin rose to his feet and stood like a fencing-master about to lunge)--"turn him off into the dark!" he added.

°°°°"How frightful!" said Eugene. "You do not really mean it? M. Vautrin, you are joking!"

°°°°"There! there! Keep cool!" said the other. "Don't behave like a baby. But if you find any amusement in it, be indignant, flare up! Say that I am a scoundrel, a rascal, a rogue, a bandit; but do not call me a blackleg nor a spy! There, out with it, fire away! I forgive you; it is quite natural at your age. I was like that myself once. Only remember this, you will do worse things yourself some day. You will flirt with some pretty woman and take her money. You have thought of that, of course," said Vautrin, "for how are you to succeed unless love is laid under contribution? There are no two ways about virtue, my dear student; it either is, or it is not. Talk of doing penance for your sins! It is a nice system of business, when you pay for your crime by an act of contrition! You seduce a woman that you may set your foot on such and such a rung of the social ladder; you sow dissension among the children of a family; you descend, in short, to every base action that can be committed at home or abroad, to gain your own ends for your own pleasure or your profit; and can you imagine that these are acts of faith, hope, or charity? How is it that a dandy, who in a night has robbed a boy of half his fortune, gets only a couple of months in prison; while a poor devil who steals a banknote for a thousand francs, with aggravating circumstances, is condemned to penal servitude? Those are your laws. Not a single provision but lands you in some absurdity. That man with yellow gloves and a golden tongue commits many a murder; he sheds no blood, but he drains his victim's veins as surely; a desperado forces open a door with a crowbar, dark deeds both of them! You yourself will do every one of those things that I suggest to you to-day, bar the bloodshed. Do you believe that there is any absolute standard in this world? Despise mankind and find out the meshes that you can slip through in the net of the Code. The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out, because it was properly executed."

°°°°"Silence, sir! I will not hear any more; you make me doubt myself. At this moment my sentiments are all my science."

°°°°"Just as you please, my fine fellow; I did think you were so weak-minded," said Vautrin, "I shall say no more about it. One last word, however," and he looked hard at the student--"you have my secret," he said.

°°°°"A young man who refuses your offer knows that he must forget it."

°°°°"Quite right, quite right; I am glad to hear you say so. Somebody else might not be so scrupulous, you see. Keep in mind what I want to do for you. I will give you a fortnight. The offer is still open."

°°°°"What a head of iron the man has!" said Eugene to himself, as he watched Vautrin walk unconcernedly away with his cane under his arm. "Yet Mme. de Beauseant said as much more gracefully; he has only stated the case in cruder language. He would tear my heart with claws of steel. What made me think of going to Mme. de Nucingen? He guessed my motives before I knew them myself. To sum it up, that outlaw has told me more about virtue than all I have learned from men and books. If virtue admits of no compromises, I have certainly robbed my sisters," he said, throwing down the bags on the table.

°°°°He sat down again and fell, unconscious of his surroundings, into deep thought.

°°°°"To be faithful to an ideal of virtue! A heroic martyrdom! Pshaw! every one believes in virtue, but who is virtuous? Nations have made an idol of Liberty, but what nation on the face of the earth is free? My youth is still like a blue and cloudless sky. If I set myself to obtain wealth or power, does it mean that I must make up my mind to lie, and fawn, and cringe, and swagger, and flatter, and dissemble? To consent to be the servant of others who have likewise fawned, and lied, and flattered? Must I cringe to them before I can hope to be their accomplice? Well, then, I decline. I mean to work nobly and with a single heart. I will work day and night; I will owe my fortune to nothing but my own exertions. It may be the slowest of all roads to success, but I shall lay my head on the pillow at night untroubled by evil thoughts. Is there a greater thing than this--to look back over your life and know that it is stainless as a lily? I and my life are like a young man and his betrothed. Vautrin has put before me all that comes after ten years of marriage. The devil! my head is swimming. I do not want to think at all; the heart is a sure guide."

°°°°Eugene was roused from his musings by the voice of the stout Sylvie, who announced that the tailor had come, and Eugene therefore made his appearance before the man with the two money bags, and was not ill pleased that it should be so. When he had tried on his dress suit, he put on his new morning costume, which completely metamorphosed him.

°°°°"I am quite equal to M. de Trailles," he said to himself. "In short, I look like a gentleman."

°°°°"You asked me, sir, if I knew the houses where Mme. de Nucingen goes," Father Goriot's voice spoke from the doorway of Eugene's room."

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Very well then, she is going to the Marechale Carigliano's ball on Monday. If you can manage to be there, I shall hear from you whether my two girls enjoyed themselves, and how they were dressed, and all about it in fact."

°°°°"How did you find that out, my good Goriot?" said Eugene, putting a chair by the fire for his visitor.

°°°°"Her maid told me. I hear all about their doings from Therese and Constance," he added gleefully.

°°°°The old man looked like a lover who is still young enough to be made happy by the discovery of some little stratagem which brings him information of his lady-love without her knowledge.

°°°°"YOU will see them both!" he said, giving artless expression to a pang of jealousy.

°°°°"I do not know," answered Eugene. "I will go to Mme. de Beauseant and ask her for an introduction to the Marechale."

°°°°Eugene felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought of appearing before the Vicomtesse, dressed as henceforward he always meant to be. The "abysses of the human heart," in the moralists' phrase, are only insidious thoughts, involuntary promptings of personal interest. The instinct of enjoyment turns the scale; those rapid changes of purpose which have furnished the text for so much rhetoric are calculations prompted by the hope of pleasure. Rastignac beholding himself well dressed and impeccable as to gloves and boots, forgot his virtuous resolutions. Youth, moreover, when bent upon wrongdoing does not dare to behold himself in the mirror of consciousness; mature age has seen itself; and therein lies the whole difference between these two phases of life.

°°°°A friendship between Eugene and his neighbor, Father Goriot, had been growing up for several days past. This secret friendship and the antipathy that the student had begun to entertain for Vautrin arose from the same psychological causes. The bold philosopher who shall investigate the effects of mental action upon the physical world will doubtless find more than one proof of the material nature of our sentiments in other animals. What physiognomist is as quick to discern character as a dog is to discover from a stranger's face whether this is a friend or no? Those by-words--"atoms," "affinities"--are facts surviving in modern languages for the confusion of philosophic wiseacres who amuse themselves by winnowing the chaff of language to find its grammatical roots. We FEEL that we are loved. Our sentiments make themselves felt in everything, even at a great distance. A letter is a living soul, and so faithful an echo of the voice that speaks in it, that finer natures look upon a letter as one of love's most precious treasures. Father Goriot's affection was of the instinctive order, a canine affection raised to a sublime pitch; he had scented compassion in the air, and the kindly respect and youthful sympathy in the student's heart. This friendship had, however, scarcely reached the stage at which confidences are made. Though Eugene had spoken of his wish to meet Mme. de Nucingen, it was not because he counted on the old man to introduce him to her house, for he hoped that his own audacity might stand him in good stead. All that Father Goriot had said as yet about his daughters had referred to the remarks that the student had made so freely in public on that day of the two visits.

°°°°"How could you think that Mme. de Restaud bore you a grudge for mentioning my name?" he had said on the day following that scene at dinner. "My daughters are very fond of me; I am a happy father; but my sons-in-law have behaved badly to me, and rather than make trouble between my darlings and their husbands, I choose to see my daughters secretly. Fathers who can see their daughters at any time have no idea of all the pleasure that all this mystery gives me; I cannot always see mine when I wish, do you understand? So when it is fine I walk out in the Champs- Elysees, after finding out from their waiting-maids whether my daughters mean to go out. I wait near the entrance; my heart beats fast when the carriages begin to come; I admire them in their dresses, and as they pass they give me a little smile, and it seems as if everything was lighted up for me by a ray of bright sunlight. I wait, for they always go back the same way, and then I see them again; the fresh air has done them good and brought color into their cheeks; all about me people say, 'What a beautiful woman that is!' and it does my heart good to hear them.

°°°°"Are they not my own flesh and blood? I love the very horses that draw them; I envy the little lap-dog on their knees. Their happiness is my life. Every one loves after his own fashion, and mine does no one any harm; why should people trouble their heads about me? I am happy in my own way. Is there any law against going to see my girls in the evening when they are going out to a ball? And what a disappointment it is when I get there too late, and am told that 'Madame has gone out!' Once I waited till three o'clock in the morning for Nasie; I had not seen her for two whole days. I was so pleased, that it was almost too much for me! Please do not speak of me unless it is to say how good my daughters are to me. They are always wanting to heap presents upon me, but I will not have it. 'Just keep your money,' I tell them. 'What should I do with it? I want nothing.' And what am I, sir, after all? An old carcase, whose soul is always where my daughters are. When you have seen Mme. de Nucingen, tell me which you like the most," said the old man after a moment's pause, while Eugene put the last touches to his toilette. The student was about to go out to walk in the Garden of the Tuileries until the hour when he could venture to appear in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room.

°°°°That walk was a turning-point in Eugene's career. Several women noticed him; he looked so handsome, so young, and so well dressed. This almost admiring attention gave a new turn to his thoughts. He forgot his sisters and the aunt who had robbed herself for him; he no longer remembered his own virtuous scruples. He had seen hovering above his head the fiend so easy to mistake for an angel, the Devil with rainbow wings, who scatters rubies, and aims his golden shafts at palace fronts, who invests women with purple, and thrones with a glory that dazzles the eyes of fools till they forget the simple origins of royal dominion; he had heard the rustle of that Vanity whose tinsel seems to us to be the symbol of power. However cynical Vautrin's words had been, they had made an impression on his mind, as the sordid features of the old crone who whispers, "A lover, and gold in torrents," remain engraven on a young girl's memory.

°°°°Eugene lounged about the walks till it was nearly five o'clock, then he went to Mme. de Beauseant, and received one of the terrible blows against which young hearts are defenceless. Hitherto the Vicomtesse had received him with the kindly urbanity, the bland grace of manner that is the result of fine breeding, but is only complete when it comes from the heart.

°°°°Today Mme. de Beauseant bowed constrainedly, and spoke curtly:

°°°°"M. de Rastignac, I cannot possibly see you, at least not at this moment. I am engaged . . ."

°°°°An observer, and Rastignac instantly became an observer, could read the whole history, the character and customs of caste, in the phrase, in the tones of her voice, in her glance and bearing. He caught a glimpse of the iron hand beneath the velvet glove-- the personality, the egoism beneath the manner, the wood beneath the varnish. In short, he heard that unmistakable I THE KING that issues from the plumed canopy of the throne, and finds its last echo under the crest of the simplest gentleman.

°°°°Eugene had trusted too implicitly to the generosity of a woman; he could not believe in her haughtiness. Like all the unfortunate, he had subscribed, in all good faith, the generous compact which should bind the benefactor to the recipient, and the first article in that bond, between two large-hearted natures, is a perfect equality. The kindness which knits two souls together is as rare, as divine, and as little understood as the passion of love, for both love and kindness are the lavish generosity of noble natures. Rastignac was set upon going to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball, so he swallowed down this rebuff.

°°°°"Madame," he faltered out, "I would not have come to trouble you about a trifling matter; be so kind as to permit me to see you later, I can wait."

°°°°"Very well, come and dine with me," she said, a little confused by the harsh way in which she had spoken, for this lady was as genuinely kind-hearted as she was high-born.

°°°°Eugene was touched by this sudden relenting, but none the less he said to himself as he went away, "Crawl in the dust, put up with every kind of treatment. What must the rest of the world be like when one of the kindest of women forgets all her promises of befriending me in a moment, and tosses me aside like an old shoe? So it is every one for himself? It is true that her house is not a shop, and I have put myself in the wrong by needing her help. You should cut your way through the world like a cannon ball, as Vautrin said."

°°°°But the student's bitter thoughts were soon dissipated by the pleasure which he promised himself in this dinner with the Vicomtesse. Fate seemed to determine that the smallest accidents in his life should combine to urge him into a career, which the terrible sphinx of the Maison Vauquer had described as a field of battle where you must either slay or be slain, and cheat to avoid being cheated. You leave your conscience and your heart at the barriers, and wear a mask on entering into this game of grim earnest, where, as in ancient Sparta, you must snatch your prize without being detected if you would deserve the crown.

°°°°On his return he found the Vicomtesse gracious and kindly, as she had always been to him. They went together to the dining-room, where the Vicomte was waiting for his wife. In the time of the Restoration the luxury of the table was carried, as is well known, to the highest degree, and M. de Beauseant, like many jaded men of the world, had few pleasures left but those of good cheer; in this matter, in fact, he was a gourmand of the schools of Louis XVIII. and of the Duc d'Escars, and luxury was supplemented by splendor. Eugene, dining for the first time in a house where the traditions of grandeur had descended through many generations, had never seen any spectacle like this that now met his eyes. In the time of the Empire, balls had always ended with a supper, because the officers who took part in them must be fortified for immediate service, and even in Paris might be called upon to leave the ballroom for the battlefield. This arrangement had gone out of fashion under the Monarchy, and Eugene had so far only been asked to dances. The self-possession which pre-eminently distinguished him in later life already stood him in good stead, and he did not betray his amazement. Yet as he saw for the first time the finely wrought silver plate, the completeness of every detail, the sumptuous dinner, noiselessly served, it was difficult for such an ardent imagination not to prefer this life of studied and refined luxury to the hardships of the life which he had chosen only that morning.

°°°°His thoughts went back for a moment to the lodging-house, and with a feeling of profound loathing, he vowed to himself that at New Year he would go; prompted at least as much by a desire to live among cleaner surroundings as by a wish to shake off Vautrin, whose huge hand he seemed to feel on his shoulder at that moment. When you consider the numberless forms, clamorous or mute, that corruption takes in Paris, common-sense begins to wonder what mental aberration prompted the State to establish great colleges and schools there, and assemble young men in the capital; how it is that pretty women are respected, or that the gold coin displayed in the money-changer's wooden saucers does not take to itself wings in the twinkling of an eye; and when you come to think further, how comparatively few cases of crime there are, and to count up the misdemeanors committed by youth, is there not a certain amount of respect due to these patient Tantaluses who wrestle with themselves and nearly always come off victorious? The struggles of the poor student in Paris, if skilfully drawn, would furnish a most dramatic picture of modern civilization.

°°°°In vain Mme. de Beauseant looked at Eugene as if asking him to speak; the student was tongue-tied in the Vicomte's presence.

°°°°"Are you going to take me to the Italiens this evening?" the Vicomtesse asked her husband.

°°°°"You cannot doubt that I should obey you with pleasure," he answered, and there was a sarcastic tinge in his politeness which Eugene did not detect, "but I ought to go to meet some one at the Varietes."

°°°°"His mistress," said she to herself.

°°°°"Then, is not Ajuda coming for you this evening?" inquired the Vicomte.

°°°°"No," she answered, petulantly.

°°°°"Very well, then, if you really must have an arm, take that of M. de Rastignac."

°°°°The Vicomtess turned to Eugene with a smile.

°°°°"That would be a very compromising step for you," she said.

°°°°" 'A Frenchman loves danger, because in danger there is glory,' to quote M. de Chateaubriand," said Rastignac, with a bow.

°°°°A few moments later he was sitting beside Mme. de Beauseant in a brougham, that whirled them through the streets of Paris to a fashionable theatre. It seemed to him that some fairy magic had suddenly transported him into a box facing the stage. All the lorgnettes of the house were pointed at him as he entered, and at the Vicomtesse in her charming toilette. He went from enchantment to enchantment.

°°°°"You must talk to me, you know," said Mme. de Beauseant. "Ah! look! There is Mme. de Nucingen in the third box from ours. Her sister and M. de Trailles are on the other side."

°°°°The Vicomtesse glanced as she spoke at the box where Mlle. de Rochefide should have been; M. d'Ajuda was not there, and Mme. de Beauseant's face lighted up in a marvelous way.

°°°°"She is charming," said Eugene, after looking at Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"She has white eyelashes."

°°°°"Yes, but she has such a pretty slender figure!"

°°°°"Her hands are large."

°°°°"Such beautiful eyes!"

°°°°"Her face is long."

°°°°"Yes, but length gives distinction."

°°°°"It is lucky for her that she has some distinction in her face. Just see how she fidgets with her opera-glass! The Goriot blood shows itself in every movement," said the Vicomtesse, much to Eugene's astonishment.

°°°°Indeed, Mme. de Beauseant seemed to be engaged in making a survey of the house, and to be unconscious of Mme. Nucingen's existence; but no movement made by the latter was lost upon the Vicomtesse. The house was full of the loveliest women in Paris, so that Delphine de Nucingen was not a little flattered to receive the undivided attention of Mme. de Beauseant's young, handsome, and well-dressed cousin, who seemed to have no eyes for any one else.

°°°°"If you look at her so persistently, you will make people talk, M. de Rastignac. You will never succeed if you fling yourself at any one's head like that."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Eugene, "you have protected me indeed so far, and now if you would complete your work, I only ask of you a favor which will cost you but little, and be of very great service to me. I have lost my heart."

°°°°"Already!"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"And to that woman!"

°°°°"How could I aspire to find any one else to listen to me?" he asked, with a keen glance at his cousin. "Her Grace the Duchesse de Carigliano is a friend of the Duchesse de Berri," he went on, after a pause; "you are sure to see her, will you be so kind as to present me to her, and to take me to her ball on Monday? I shall meet Mme. de Nucingen there, and enter into my first skirmish."

°°°°"Willingly," she said. "If you have a liking for her already, your affairs of the heart are like to prosper. That is de Marsay over there in the Princesse Galathionne's box. Mme. de Nucingen is racked with jealousy. There is no better time for approaching a woman, especially if she happens to be a banker's wife. All those ladies of the Chaussee-d'Antin love revenge."

°°°°"Then, what would you do yourself in such a case?"

°°°°"I should suffer in silence."

°°°°At this point the Marquis d'Ajuda appeared in Mme. de Beauseant's box.

°°°°"I have made a muddle of my affairs to come to you," he said, "and I am telling you about it, so that it may not be a sacrifice."

°°°°Eugene saw the glow of joy on the Vicomtesse's face, and knew that this was love, and learned the difference between love and the affectations of Parisian coquetry. He admired his cousin, grew mute, and yielded his place to M. d'Ajuda with a sigh.

°°°°"How noble, how sublime a woman is when she loves like that!" he said to himself. "And HE could forsake her for a doll! Oh! how could any one forsake her?"

°°°°There was a boy's passionate indignation in his heart. He could have flung himself at Mme. de Beauseant's feet; he longed for the power of the devil if he could snatch her away and hide her in his heart, as an eagle snatches up some white yeanling from the plains and bears it to its eyrie. It was humiliating to him to think that in all this gallery of fair pictures he had not one picture of his own. "To have a mistress and an almost royal position is a sign of power," he said to himself. And he looked at Mme. de Nucingen as a man measures another who has insulted him.

°°°°The Vicomtesse turned to him, and the expression of her eyes thanked him a thousand times for his discretion. The first act came to an end just then.

°°°°"Do you know Mme. de Nucingen well enough to present M. de Rastignac to her?" she asked of the Marquis d'Ajuda.

°°°°"She will be delighted," said the Marquis. The handsome Portuguese rose as he spoke and took the student's arm, and in another moment Eugene found himself in Mme. de Nucingen's box.

°°°°"Madame," said the Marquis, "I have the honor of presenting to you the Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac; he is a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's. You have made so deep an impression upon him, that I thought I would fill up the measure of his happiness by bringing him nearer to his divinity."

°°°°Words spoken half jestingly to cover their somewhat disrespectful import; but such an implication, if carefully disguised, never gives offence to a woman. Mme. de Nucingen smiled, and offered Eugene the place which her husband had just left.

°°°°"I do not venture to suggest that you should stay with me, monsieur," she said. "Those who are so fortunate as to be in Mme. de Beauseant's company do not desire to leave it."

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, lowering his voice, "I think that to please my cousin I should remain with you. Before my lord Marquis came we were speaking of you and of your exceedingly distinguished appearance," he added aloud.

°°°°M. d'Ajuda turned and left them.

°°°°"Are you really going to stay with me, monsieur?" asked the Baroness. "Then we shall make each other's acquaintance. Mme. de Restaud told me about you, and has made me anxious to meet you."

°°°°"She must be very insincere, then, for she has shut her door on me."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Madame, I will tell you honestly the reason why; but I must crave your indulgence before confiding such a secret to you. I am your father's neighbor; I had no idea that Mme. de Restaud was his daughter. I was rash enough to mention his name; I meant no harm, but I annoyed your sister and her husband very much. You cannot think how severely the Duchesse de Langeais and my cousin blamed this apostasy on a daughter's part, as a piece of bad taste. I told them all about it, and they both burst out laughing. Then Mme. de Beauseant made some comparison between you and your sister, speaking in high terms of you, and saying how very fond you were of my neighbor, M. Goriot. And, indeed, how could you help loving him? He adores you so passionately that I am jealous already. We talked about you this morning for two hours. So this evening I was quite full of all that your father had told me, and while I was dining with my cousin I said that you could not be as beautiful as affectionate. Mme. de Beauseant meant to gratify such warm admiration, I think, when she brought me here, telling me, in her gracious way, that I should see you."

°°°°"Then, even now, I owe you a debt of gratitude, monsieur," said the banker's wife. "We shall be quite old friends in a little while."

°°°°"Although a friendship with you could not be like an ordinary friendship," said Rastignac; "I should never wish to be your friend."

°°°°Such stereotyped phrases as these, in the mouths of beginners, possess an unfailing charm for women, and are insipid only when read coldly; for a young man's tone, glance and attitude give a surpassing eloquence to the banal phrases. Mme. de Nucingen thought that Rastignac was adorable. Then, woman-like, being at a loss how to reply to the student's outspoken admiration, she answered a previous remark.

°°°°"Yes, it is very wrong of my sister to treat our poor father as she does," she said; "he has been a Providence to us. It was not until M. de Nucingen positively ordered me only to receive him in the mornings that I yielded the point. But I have been unhappy about it for a long while; I have shed many tears over it. This violence to my feelings, with my husband's brutal treatment, have been two causes of my unhappy married life. There is certainly no woman in Paris whose lot seems more enviable than mine, and yet, in reality, there is not one so much to be pitied. You will think I must be out of my senses to talk to you like this; but you know my father, and I cannot regard you as a stranger."

°°°°"You will find no one," said Eugene, "who longs as eagerly as I do to be yours. What do all women seek? Happiness." (He answered his own question in low, vibrating tones.) "And if happiness for a woman means that she is to be loved and adored, to have a friend to whom she can pour out her wishes, her fancies, her sorrows and joys; to whom she can lay bare her heart and soul, and all her fair defects and her gracious virtues, without fear of a betrayal; believe me, the devotion and the warmth that never fails can only be found in the heart of a young man who, at a bare sign from you, would go to his death, who neither knows nor cares to know anything as yet of the world, because you will be all the world to him. I myself, you see (you will laugh at my simplicity), have just come from a remote country district; I am quite new to this world of Paris; I have only known true and loving hearts; and I made up my mind that here I should find no love. Then I chanced to meet my cousin, and to see my cousin's heart from very near; I have divined the inexhaustible treasures of passion, and, like Cherubino, I am the lover of all women, until the day comes when I find THE woman to whom I may devote myself. As soon as I saw you, as soon as I came into the theatre this evening, I felt myself borne towards you as if by the current of a stream. I had so often thought of you already, but I had never dreamed that you would be so beautiful! Mme. de Beauseant told me that I must not look so much at you. She does not know the charm of your red lips, your fair face, nor see how soft your eyes are. . . . I also am beginning to talk nonsense; but let me talk."

°°°°Nothing pleases a woman better than to listen to such whispered words as these; the most puritanical among them listens even when she ought not to reply to them; and Rastignac, having once begun, continued to pour out his story, dropping his voice, that she might lean and listen; and Mme. de Nucingen, smiling, glanced from time to time at de Marsay, who still sat in the Princesse Galathionne's box.

°°°°Rastignac did not leave Mme. de Nucingen till her husband came to take her home.

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, "I shall have the pleasure of calling upon you before the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball."

°°°°"If Matame infites you to come," said the Baron, a thickset Alsatian, with indications of a sinister cunning in his full-moon countenance, "you are quide sure of being well receifed."

°°°°"My affairs seem to be in a promising way," said Eugene to himself.--" 'Can you love me?' I asked her, and she did not resent it. The bit is in the horse's mouth, and I have only to mount and ride;" and with that he went to pay his respects to Mme. de Beauseant, who was leaving the theatre on d'Ajuda's arm.

°°°°The student did not know that the Baroness' thoughts had been wandering; that she was even then expecting a letter from de Marsay, one of those letters that bring about a rupture that rends the soul; so, happy in his delusion, Eugene went with the Vicomtesse to the peristyle, where people were waiting till their carriages were announced.

°°°°"That cousin of yours is hardly recognizable for the same man," said the Portuguese laughingly to the Vicomtesse, when Eugene had taken leave of them. "He will break the bank. He is as supple as an eel; he will go a long way, of that I am sure. Who else could have picked out a woman for him, as you did, just when she needed consolation?"

°°°°"But it is not certain that she does not still love the faithless lover," said Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°The student meanwhile walked back from the Theatre-Italien to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, making the most delightful plans as he went. He had noticed how closely Mme. de Restaud had scrutinized him when he sat beside Mme. de Nucingen, and inferred that the Countess' doors would not be closed in the future. Four important houses were now open to him--for he meant to stand well with the Marechale; he had four supporters in the inmost circle of society in Paris. Even now it was clear to him that, once involved in this intricate social machinery, he must attach himself to a spoke of the wheel that was to turn and raise his fortunes; he would not examine himself too curiously as to the methods, but he was certain of the end, and conscious of the power to gain and keep his hold.

°°°°"If Mme. de Nucingen takes an interest in me, I will teach her how to manage her husband. That husband of hers is a great speculator; he might put me in the way of making a fortune by a single stroke."

°°°°He did not say this bluntly in so many words; as yet, indeed, he was not sufficient of a diplomatist to sum up a situation, to see its possibilities at a glance, and calculate the chances in his favor. These were nothing but hazy ideas that floated over his mental horizon; they were less cynical than Vautrin's notions; but if they had been tried in the crucible of conscience, no very pure result would have issued from the test. It is by a succession of such like transactions that men sink at last to the level of the relaxed morality of this epoch, when there have never been so few of those who square their courses with their theories, so few of those noble characters who do not yield to temptation, for whom the slightest deviation from the line of rectitude is a crime. To these magnificent types of uncompromising Right we owe two masterpieces--the Alceste of Moliere, and, in our own day, the characters of Jeanie Deans and her father in Sir Walter Scott's novel. Perhaps a work which should chronicle the opposite course, which should trace out all the devious courses through which a man of the world, a man of ambitions, drags his conscience, just steering clear of crime that he may gain his end and yet save appearances, such a chronicle would be no less edifying and no less dramatic.

°°°°Rastignac went home. He was fascinated by Mme. de Nucingen; he seemed to see her before him, slender and graceful as a swallow. He recalled the intoxicating sweetness of her eyes, her fair hair, the delicate silken tissue of the skin, beneath which it almost seemed to him that he could see the blood coursing; the tones of her voice still exerted a spell over him; he had forgotten nothing; his walk perhaps heated his imagination by sending a glow of warmth through his veins. He knocked unceremoniously at Goriot's door.

°°°°"I have seen Mme. Delphine, neighbor," said he.

°°°°"Where?"

°°°°"At the Italiens."

°°°°"Did she enjoy it?. . . . Just come inside," and the old man left his bed, unlocked the door, and promptly returned again.

°°°°It was the first time that Eugene had been in Father Goriot's room, and he could not control his feeling of amazement at the contrast between the den in which the father lived and the costume of the daughter whom he had just beheld. The window was curtainless, the walls were damp, in places the varnished wall- paper had come away and gave glimpses of the grimy yellow plaster beneath. The wretched bed on which the old man lay boasted but one thin blanket, and a wadded quilt made out of large pieces of Mme. Vauquer's old dresses. The floor was damp and gritty. Opposite the window stood a chest of drawers made of rosewood, one of the old-fashioned kind with a curving front and brass handles, shaped like rings of twisted vine stems covered with flowers and leaves. On a venerable piece of furniture with a wooden shelf stood a ewer and basin and shaving apparatus. A pair of shoes stood in one corner; a night-table by the bed had neither a door nor marble slab. There was not a trace of a fire in the empty grate; the square walnut table with the crossbar against which Father Goriot had crushed and twisted his posset- dish stood near the hearth. The old man's hat was lying on a broken-down bureau. An armchair stuffed with straw and a couple of chairs completed the list of ramshackle furniture. From the tester of the bed, tied to the ceiling by a piece of rag, hung a strip of some cheap material in large red and black checks. No poor drudge in a garret could be worse lodged than Father Goriot in Mme. Vauquer's lodging-house. The mere sight of the room sent a chill through you and a sense of oppression; it was like the worst cell in a prison. Luckily, Goriot could not see the effect that his surroundings produced on Eugene as the latter deposited his candle on the night-table. The old man turned round, keeping the bedclothes huddled up to his chin.

°°°°"Well," he said, "and which do you like the best, Mme. de Restaud or Mme. de Nucingen?"

°°°°"I like Mme. Delphine the best," said the law student, "because she loves you the best."

°°°°At the words so heartily spoken the old man's hand slipped out from under the bedclothes and grasped Eugene's.

°°°°"Thank you, thank you," he said, gratefully. "Then what did she say about me?"

°°°°The student repeated the Baroness' remarks with some embellishments of his own, the old man listening the while as though he heard a voice from Heaven.

°°°°"Dear child!" he said. "Yes, yes, she is very fond of me. But you must not believe all that she tells you about Anastasie. The two sisters are jealous of each other, you see, another proof of their affection. Mme. de Restaud is very fond of me too. I know she is. A father sees his children as God sees all of us; he looks into the very depths of their hearts; he knows their intentions; and both of them are so loving. Oh! if I only had good sons-in-law, I should be too happy, and I dare say there is no perfect happiness here below. If I might live with them-- simply hear their voices, know that they are there, see them go and come as I used to do at home when they were still with me; why, my heart bounds at the thought. . . . Were they nicely dressed?"

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene. "But, M. Goriot, how is it that your daughters have such fine houses, while you live in such a den as this?"

°°°°"Dear me, why should I want anything better?" he replied, with seeming carelessness. "I can't quite explain to you how it is; I am not used to stringing words together properly, but it all lies there----" he said, tapping his heart. "My real life is in my two girls, you see; and so long as they are happy, and smartly dressed, and have soft carpets under their feet, what does it matter what clothes I wear or where I lie down of a night? I shall never feel cold so long as they are warm; I shall never feel dull if they are laughing. I have no troubles but theirs. When you, too, are a father, and you hear your children's little voices, you will say to yourself, 'That has all come from me.' You will feel that those little ones are akin to every drop in your veins, that they are the very flower of your life (and what else are they?); you will cleave so closely to them that you seem to feel every movement that they make. Everywhere I hear their voices sounding in my ears. If they are sad, the look in their eyes freezes my blood. Some day you will find out that there is far more happiness in another's happiness than in your own. It is something that I cannot explain, something within that sends a glow of warmth all through you. In short, I live my life three times over. Shall I tell you something funny? Well, then, since I have been a father, I have come to understand God. He is everywhere in the world, because the whole world comes from Him. And it is just the same with my children, monsieur. Only, I love my daughters better than God loves the world, for the world is not so beautiful as God Himself is, but my children are more beautiful than I am. Their lives are so bound up with mine that I felt somehow that you would see them this evening. Great Heaven! If any man would make my little Delphine as happy as a wife is when she is loved, I would black his boots and run on his errands. That miserable M. de Marsay is a cur; I know all about him from her maid. A longing to wring his neck comes over me now and then. He does not love her! does not love a pearl of a woman, with a voice like a nightingale and shaped like a model. Where can her eyes have been when she married that great lump of an Alsatian? They ought both of them to have married young men, good-looking and good-tempered--but, after all, they had their own way."

°°°°Father Goriot was sublime. Eugene had never yet seen his face light up as it did now with the passionate fervor of a father's love. It is worthy of remark that strong feeling has a very subtle and pervasive power; the roughest nature, in the endeavor to express a deep and sincere affection, communicates to others the influence that has put resonance into the voice, and eloquence into every gesture, wrought a change in the very features of the speaker; for under the inspiration of passion the stupidest human being attains to the highest eloquence of ideas, if not of language, and seems to move in some sphere of light. In the old man's tones and gesture there was something just then of the same spell that a great actor exerts over his audience. But does not the poet in us find expression in our affections?

°°°°"Well," said Eugene, "perhaps you will not be sorry to hear that she is pretty sure to break with de Marsay before long. That sprig of fashion has left her for the Princesse Galathionne. For my part, I fell in love with Mme. Delphine this evening."

°°°°"Stuff!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"I did indeed, and she did not regard me with aversion. For a whole hour we talked of love, and I am to go to call on her on Saturday, the day after to-morrow."

°°°°"Oh! how I should love you, if she should like you. You are kind- hearted; you would never make her miserable. If you were to forsake her, I would cut your throat at once. A woman does not love twice, you see! Good heavens! what nonsense I am talking, M. Eugene! It is cold; you ought not to stay here. MON DIEU! so you have heard her speak? What message did she give you for me?"

°°°°"None at all," said Eugene to himself; aloud he answered, "She told me to tell you that your daughter sends you a good kiss."

°°°°"Good-night, neighbor! Sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you! I have mine already made for me by that message from her. May God grant you all your desires! You have come in like a good angel on me to-night, and brought with you the air that my daughter breathes."

°°°°"Poor old fellow!" said Eugene as he lay down. "It is enough to melt a heart of stone. His daughter no more thought of him than of the Grand Turk."

°°°°Ever after this conference Goriot looked upon his neighbor as a friend, a confidant such as he had never hoped to find; and there was established between the two the only relationship that could attach this old man to another man. The passions never miscalculate. Father Goriot felt that this friendship brought him closer to his daughter Delphine; he thought that he should find a warmer welcome for himself if the Baroness should care for Eugene. Moreover, he had confided one of his troubles to the younger man. Mme. de Nucingen, for whose happiness he prayed a thousand times daily, had never known the joys of love. Eugene was certainly (to make use of his own expression) one of the nicest young men that he had ever seen, and some prophetic instinct seemed to tell him that Eugene was to give her the happiness which had not been hers. These were the beginnings of a friendship that grew up between the old man and his neighbor; but for this friendship the catastrophe of the drama must have remained a mystery.

°°°°The affection with which Father Goriot regarded Eugene, by whom he seated himself at breakfast, the change in Goriot's face, which as a rule, looked as expressionless as a plaster cast, and a few words that passed between the two, surprised the other lodgers. Vautrin, who saw Eugene for the first time since their interview, seemed as if he would fain read the student's very soul. During the night Eugene had had some time in which to scan the vast field which lay before him; and now, as he remembered yesterday's proposal, the thought of Mlle. Taillefer's dowry came, of course, to his mind, and he could not help thinking of Victorine as the most exemplary youth may think of an heiress. It chanced that their eyes met. The poor girl did not fail to see that Eugene looked very handsome in his new clothes. So much was said in the glance, thus exchanged, that Eugene could not doubt but that he was associated in her mind with the vague hopes that lie dormant in a girl's heart and gather round the first attractive newcomer. "Eight hundred thousand francs!" a voice cried in his ears, but suddenly he took refuge in the memories of yesterday evening, thinking that his extemporized passion for Mme. de Nucingen was a talisman that would preserve him from this temptation.

°°°°"They gave Rossini's Barber of Seville at the Italiens yesterday evening," he remarked. "I never heard such delicious music. Good gracious! how lucky people are to have a box at the Italiens!"

°°°°Father Goriot drank in every word that Eugene let fall, and watched him as a dog watches his master's slightest movement.

°°°°"You men are like fighting cocks," said Mme. Vauquer; "you do what you like."

°°°°"How did you get back?" inquired Vautrin.

°°°°"I walked," answered Eugene.

°°°°"For my own part," remarked the tempter, "I do not care about doing things by halves. If I want to enjoy myself that way, I should prefer to go in my carriage, sit in my own box, and do the thing comfortably. Everything or nothing; that is my motto."

°°°°"And a good one, too," commented Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Perhaps you will see Mme. de Nucingen to-day," said Eugene, addressing Goriot in an undertone. "She will welcome you with open arms, I am sure; she would want to ask you for all sorts of little details about me. I have found out that she will do anything in the world to be known by my cousin Mme. de Beauseant; don't forget to tell her that I love her too well not to think of trying to arrange this."

°°°°Rastignac went at once to the Ecole de Droit. He had no mind to stay a moment longer than was necessary in that odious house. He wasted his time that day; he had fallen a victim to that fever of the brain that accompanies the too vivid hopes of youth. Vautrin's arguments had set him meditating on social life, and he was deep in these reflections when he happened on his friend Bianchon in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

°°°°"What makes you look so solemn?" said the medical student, putting an arm through Eugene's as they went towards the Palais.

°°°°"I am tormented by temptations."

°°°°"What kind? There is a cure for temptation."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Yielding to it."

°°°°"You laugh, but you don't know what it is all about. Have you read Rousseau?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Do you remember that he asks the reader somewhere what he would do if he could make a fortune by killing an old mandarin somewhere in China by mere force of wishing it, and without stirring from Paris?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Well, then?"

°°°°"Pshaw! I am at my thirty-third mandarin."

°°°°"Seriously, though. Look here, suppose you were sure that you could do it, and had only to give a nod. Would you do it?"

°°°°"Is he well stricken in years, this mandarin of yours? Pshaw! after all, young or old, paralytic, or well and sound, my word for it. . . . Well, then. Hang it, no!"

°°°°"You are a good fellow, Bianchon. But suppose you loved a woman well enough to lose your soul in hell for her, and that she wanted money for dresses and a carriage, and all her whims, in fact?"

°°°°"Why, here you are taking away my reason, and want me to reason!"

°°°°"Well, then, Bianchon, I am mad; bring me to my senses. I have two sisters as beautiful and innocent as angels, and I want them to be happy. How am I to find two hundred thousand francs apiece for them in the next five years? Now and then in life, you see, you must play for heavy stakes, and it is no use wasting your luck on low play."

°°°°"But you are only stating the problem that lies before every one at the outset of his life, and you want to cut the Gordian knot with a sword. If that is the way of it, dear boy, you must be an Alexander, or to the hulks you go. For my own part, I am quite contented with the little lot I mean to make for myself somewhere in the country, when I mean to step into my father's shoes and plod along. A man's affections are just as fully satisfied by the smallest circle as they can be by a vast circumference. Napoleon himself could only dine once, and he could not have more mistresses than a house student at the Capuchins. Happiness, old man, depends on what lies between the sole of your foot and the crown of your head; and whether it costs a million or a hundred louis, the actual amount of pleasure that you receive rests entirely with you, and is just exactly the same in any case. I am for letting that Chinaman live."

°°°°"Thank you, Bianchon; you have done me good. We will always be friends."

°°°°"I say," remarked the medical student, as they came to the end of a broad walk in the Jardin des Plantes, "I saw the Michonneau and Poiret a few minutes ago on a bench chatting with a gentleman whom I used to see in last year's troubles hanging about the Chamber of Deputies; he seems to me, in fact, to be a detective dressed up like a decent retired tradesman. Let us keep an eye on that couple; I will tell you why some time. Good-bye; it is nearly four o'clock, and I must be in to answer to my name."

°°°°When Eugene reached the lodging-house, he found Father Goriot waiting for him.

°°°°"Here," cried the old man, "here is a letter from her. Pretty handwriting, eh?"

°°°°Eugene broke the seal and read:--

°°°°"Sir,--I have heard from my father that you are fond of Italian music. I shall be delighted if you will do me the pleasure of accepting a seat in my box. La Fodor and Pellegrini will sing on Saturday, so I am sure that you will not refuse me. M. de Nucingen and I shall be pleased if you will dine with us; we shall be quite by ourselves. If you will come and be my escort, my husband will be glad to be relieved from his conjugal duties. Do not answer, but simply come.--Yours sincerely, D. DE N."

°°°°"Let me see it," said Father Goriot, when Eugene had read the letter. "You are going, aren't you?" he added, when he had smelled the writing-paper. "How nice it smells! Her fingers have touched it, that is certain."

°°°°"A woman does not fling herself at a man's head in this way," the student was thinking. "She wants to use me to bring back de Marsay; nothing but pique makes a woman do a thing like this."

°°°°"Well," said Father Goriot, "what are you thinking about?"

°°°°Eugene did not know the fever or vanity that possessed some women in those days; how should he imagine that to open a door in the Faubourg Saint-Germain a banker's wife would go to almost any length. For the coterie of the Faubourg Saint-Germain was a charmed circle, and the women who moved in it were at that time the queens of society; and among the greatest of these Dames du Petit-Chateau, as they were called, were Mme. de Beauseant and her friends the Duchesse de Langeais and the Duchesse de Maufrigneause. Rastignac was alone in his ignorance of the frantic efforts made by women who lived in the Chausee-d'Antin to enter this seventh heaven and shine among the brightest constellations of their sex. But his cautious disposition stood him in good stead, and kept his judgment cool, and the not altogether enviable power of imposing instead of accepting conditions.

°°°°"Yes, I am going," he replied.

°°°°So it was curiosity that drew him to Mme. de Nucingen; while, if she had treated him disdainfully, passion perhaps might have brought him to her feet. Still he waited almost impatiently for to-morrow, and the hour when he could go to her. There is almost as much charm for a young man in a first flirtation as there is in first love. The certainty of success is a source of happiness to which men do not confess, and all the charm of certain women lies in this. The desire of conquest springs no less from the easiness than from the difficulty of triumph, and every passion is excited or sustained by one or the other of these two motives which divide the empire of love. Perhaps this division is one result of the great question of temperaments; which, after all, dominates social life. The melancholic temperament may stand in need of the tonic of coquetry, while those of nervous or sanguine complexion withdraw if they meet with a too stubborn resistance. In other words, the lymphatic temperament is essentially despondent, and the rhapsodic is bilious.

°°°°Eugene lingered over his toilette with an enjoyment of all its little details that is grateful to a young man's self-love, though he will not own to it for fear of being laughed at. He thought, as he arranged his hair, that a pretty woman's glances would wander through the dark curls. He indulged in childish tricks like any young girl dressing for a dance, and gazed complacently at his graceful figure while he smoothed out the creases of his coat.

°°°°"There are worse figures, that is certain," he said to himself.

°°°°Then he went downstairs, just as the rest of the household were sitting down to dinner, and took with good humor the boisterous applause excited by his elegant appearance. The amazement with which any attention to dress is regarded in a lodging-house is a very characteristic trait. No one can put on a new coat but every one else must say his say about it.

°°°°"Clk! clk! clk!" cried Bianchon, making the sound with his tongue against the roof of his mouth, like a driver urging on a horse.

°°°°"He holds himself like a duke and a peer of France," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Are you going a-courting?" inquired Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried the artist.

°°°°"My compliments to my lady your wife," from the employe at the Museum.

°°°°"Your wife; have you a wife?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, in compartments, water-tight and floats, guaranteed fast color, all prices from twenty-five to forty sous, neat check patterns in the latest fashion and best taste, will wash, half- linen, half-cotton, half-wool; a certain cure for toothache and other complaints under the patronage of the Royal College of Physicians! children like it! a remedy for headache, indigestion, and all other diseases affecting the throat, eyes, and ears!" cried Vautrin, with a comical imitation of the volubility of a quack at a fair. "And how much shall we say for this marvel, gentlemen? Twopence? No. Nothing of the sort. All that is left in stock after supplying the Great Mogul. All the crowned heads of Europe, including the Gr-r-rand Duke of Baden, have been anxious to get a sight of it. Walk up! walk up! gentlemen! Pay at the desk as you go in! Strike up the music there! Brooum, la, la, trinn! la, la, boum! boum! Mister Clarinette, there you are out of tune!" he added gruffly; "I will rap your knuckles for you!"

°°°°"Goodness! what an amusing man!" said Mme. Vauquer to Mme. Couture; "I should never feel dull with him in the house."

°°°°This burlesque of Vautrin's was the signal for an outburst of merriment, and under cover of jokes and laughter Eugene caught a glance from Mlle. Taillefer; she had leaned over to say a few words in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"The cab is at the door," announced Sylvie.

°°°°"But where is he going to dine?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"With Madame la Baronne de Nucingen."

°°°°"M. Goriot's daughter," said the law student.

°°°°At this, all eyes turned to the old vermicelli maker; he was gazing at Eugene with something like envy in his eyes.

°°°°Rastignac reached the house in the Rue Saint-Lazare, one of those many-windowed houses with a mean-looking portico and slender columns, which are considered the thing in Paris, a typical banker's house, decorated in the most ostentatious fashion; the walls lined with stucco, the landings of marble mosaic. Mme. de Nucingen was sitting in a little drawing-room; the room was painted in the Italian fashion, and decorated like a restaurant. The Baroness seemed depressed. The effort that she made to hide her feelings aroused Eugene's interest; it was plain that she was not playing a part. He had expected a little flutter of excitement at his coming, and he found her dispirited and sad. The disappointment piqued his vanity.

°°°°"My claim to your confidence is very small, madame," he said, after rallying her on her abstracted mood; "but if I am in the way, please tell me so frankly; I count on your good faith."

°°°°"No, stay with me," she said; "I shall be all alone if you go. Nucingen is dining in town, and I do not want to be alone; I want to be taken out of myself."

°°°°"But what is the matter?"

°°°°"You are the very last person whom I should tell," she exclaimed.

°°°°"Then I am connected in some way in this secret. I wonder what it is?"

°°°°"Perhaps. Yet, no," she went on; "it is a domestic quarrel, which ought to be buried in the depths of the heart. I am very unhappy; did I not tell you so the day before yesterday? Golden chains are the heaviest of all fetters."

°°°°When a woman tells a young man that she is very unhappy, and when the young man is clever, and well dressed, and has fifteen hundred francs lying idle in his pocket, he is sure to think as Eugene said, and he becomes a coxcomb.

°°°°"What can you have left to wish for?" he answered. "You are young, beautiful, beloved, and rich."

°°°°"Do not let us talk of my affairs," she said shaking her head mournfully. "We will dine together tete-a-tete, and afterwards we will go to hear the most exquisite music. Am I to your taste?" she went on, rising and displaying her gown of white cashmere, covered with Persian designs in the most superb taste.

°°°°"I wish that you were altogether mine," said Eugene; "you are charming."

°°°°"You would have a forlorn piece of property," she said, smiling bitterly. "There is nothing about me that betrays my wretchedness; and yet, in spite of appearances, I am in despair. I cannot sleep; my troubles have broken my night's rest; I shall grow ugly."

°°°°"Oh! that is impossible," cried the law student; "but I am curious to know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface."

°°°°"Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me," she said. "Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else, for pity's sake," she added. "Let me show you my rooms."

°°°°"No; let us stay here," answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen's hand in his. She surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

°°°°"Listen," said Rastignac; "if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end to them, even if I have to kill half-a- dozen men; or I shall go, never to return."

°°°°"Very well," she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of despair, "I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes," she said to herself, "I have no other resource left."

°°°°She rang the bell.

°°°°"Are the horses put in for the master?" she asked of the servant.

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve dinner at seven o'clock."

°°°°"Now, come with me," she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in the banker's carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be dreaming.

°°°°"To the Palais-Royal," she said to the coachman; "stop near the Theatre-Francais."

°°°°She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

°°°°"Another moment and she will escape me," he said to himself.

°°°°When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

°°°°"Is it true that you love me?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes," he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the uneasiness that he felt.

°°°°"You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"Are you ready to do my bidding?"

°°°°"Blindly."

°°°°"Have you ever been to a gaming-house?" she asked in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Never."

°°°°"Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse," she said. "Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my troubles when you come back."

°°°°"Devil take me, I'm sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am about, but I will obey you," he added, with inward exultation, as he thought, "She has gone too far to draw back-- she can refuse me nothing now!"

°°°°Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand clothes-dealer, and hurried to number 9, which happened to be the nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his stakes.

°°°°"If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it turns up, you will win thirty-six louis," said a respectable- looking, white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

°°°°Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number 21 (his own age). There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had won.

°°°°"Take your money off, sir," said the old gentleman; "you don't often win twice running by that system."

°°°°Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once more.

°°°°"You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own," the old gentleman said in his ear. "Take my advice and go away with your winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable, you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck."

°°°°Rastignac's head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the white-haired man's possession, and went down-stairs with his seven thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his luck.

°°°°"So, that is over; and now where will you take me?" he asked, as soon as the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild embrace.

°°°°"You have saved me!" she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

°°°°"I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then," she went on, "I wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over disgracefully. If, at a woman's utmost need, SOMEBODY heaps gold upon her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever! But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept money in such a way? MON DIEU! is it not natural to share everything with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how, then, can our interests be separate?

°°°°"You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I longed to escape, to run away . . . where, I did not know. Half the women in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture. Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think of me as a woman whom he has paid." She tried to conceal her tears from him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

°°°°"It is hideous, is it not," she cried, "to speak in a breath of money and affection. You cannot love me after this," she added.

°°°°The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great, and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution of society, had thrown Eugene's thoughts into confusion; he uttered soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

°°°°"You will not remember this against me?" she asked; "promise me that you will not."

°°°°"Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so," he said. She took his hand and held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep gratitude.

°°°°"I am free and happy once more, thanks to you," she said. "Oh! I have felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this," she went on, as she took only six of the banknotes. "In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns, for I really ought to go halves with you."

°°°°Eugene's maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, "I am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy," he took the money.

°°°°"It shall be a last stake in reserve," he said, "in case of misfortune."

°°°°"That was what I was dreading to hear," she cried, turning pale. "Oh, if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you! I should die of sorrow!"

°°°°They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin's cynical words began to ring in his ears.

°°°°"Seat yourself there," said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside the fire. "I have a difficult letter to write," she added. "Tell me what to say."

°°°°"Say nothing," Eugene answered her. "Put the bills in an envelope, direct it, and send it by your maid."

°°°°"Why, you are a love of a man," she said. "Ah! see what it is to have been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through," she went on, smiling at him.

°°°°"She is charming," thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

°°°°"Do you like it?" she asked, as she rang for the maid.

°°°°"Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me."

°°°°Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

°°°°Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of the table which he had admired in his cousin's house.

°°°°"Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens afterwards," she said.

°°°°"I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am a poor student, and I have my way to make."

°°°°"Oh! you will succeed," she said laughing. "You will see. All that you wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy."

°°°°It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris, believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

°°°°Eugene took the Baroness' hand in his, and by some light pressure of the fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

°°°°"That was gratitude," she said, "for devotion that I did not dare to hope for, but now it would be a promise."

°°°°"And will you give me no promise, ingrate?"

°°°°He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a discontented air that delighted her.

°°°°"I shall see you at the ball on Monday," she said.

°°°°As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections. He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible excuses for appropriating it.

°°°°He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the stairhead he saw a light in Goriot's room; the old man had lighted a candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and go to his room without "telling him all about his daughter," to use his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without reserve.

°°°°"Then they think that I am ruined!" cried Father Goriot, in an agony of jealousy and desperation. "Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a year! MON DIEU! Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why did not YOU come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I had hold of them, I would wring their necks. MON DIEU! CRYING! Did you say she was crying?"

°°°°"With her head on my waistcoat," said Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! give it to me," said Father Goriot. "What! my daughter's tears have fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me have it. By the terms of her marriage- contract, she ought to have the use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth."

°°°°"Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the waistcoat."

°°°°Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student's hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

°°°°"You will succeed," the old man said. "God is just, you see. I know an honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to save one tear to either of them."

°°°°"An honest man!" said Eugene to himself as he lay down. "Upon my word, I think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey the voice of conscience." Perhaps none but believers in God do good in secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

°°°°The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant, who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball. The Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there. Delphine's dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene's eyes; she was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who can guess all that passes in a woman's mind. Who has not refrained from giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure; he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room; all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

°°°°Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

°°°°The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in a diabolical fashion.

°°°°"And do you suppose," cried that cold-blooded logician, "that a young man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, in the Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way, I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but, after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be out of place here, where we only aim at the purely patriarchalorama. If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend," Vautrin continued, with half-paternal jocularity, "you must have three horses, a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further. Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good- bye to your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe going to carry your billets-doux for you? Do you mean to employ the stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom of your elders!" he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each syllable. "Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously, and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way."

°°°°Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by which he had sought to corrupt the student's mind.

°°°°Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve in the small hours. He rose at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew. He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money, and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

°°°°One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in their youth and in the almost frantic eagerness with which youth grasps at pleasure. They are reckless with anything obtained on credit, while everything for which they must pay in ready money is made to last as long as possible; if they cannot have all that they want, they make up for it, it would seem, by squandering what they have. To state the matter simply--a student is far more careful of his hat than of his coat, because the latter being a comparatively costly article of dress, it is in the nature of things that a tailor should be a creditor; but it is otherwise with the hatter; the sums of money spent with him are so modest, that he is the most independent and unmanageable of his tribe, and it is almost impossible to bring him to terms. The young man in the balcony of a theatre who displays a gorgeous waistcoat for the benefit of the fair owners of opera glasses, has very probably no socks in his wardrobe, for the hosier is another of the genus of weevils that nibble at the purse. This was Rastignac's condition. His purse was always empty for Mme. Vauquer, always full at the demand of vanity; there was a periodical ebb and flow in his fortunes, which was seldom favorable to the payment of just debts. If he was to leave that unsavory and mean abode, where from time to time his pretensions met with humiliation, the first step was to pay his hostess for a month's board and lodging, and the second to purchase furniture worthy of the new lodgings he must take in his quality of dandy, a course that remained impossible. Rastignac, out of his winnings at cards, would pay his jeweler exorbitant prices for gold watches and chains, and then, to meet the exigencies of play, would carry them to the pawnbroker, that discreet and forbidding- looking friend of youth; but when it was a question of paying for board or lodging, or for the necessary implements for the cultivation of his Elysian fields, his imagination and pluck alike deserted him. There was no inspiration to be found in vulgar necessity, in debts contracted for past requirements. Like most of those who trust to their luck, he put off till the last moment the payment of debts that among the bourgeoisie are regarded as sacred engagements, acting on the plan of Mirabeau, who never settled his baker's bill until it underwent a formidable transformation into a bill of exchange.

°°°°It was about this time when Rastignac was down on his luck and fell into debt, that it became clear to the law student's mind that he must have some more certain source of income if he meant to live as he had been doing. But while he groaned over the thorny problems of his precarious situation, he felt that he could not bring himself to renounce the pleasures of this extravagant life, and decided that he must continue it at all costs. His dreams of obtaining a fortune appeared more and more chimerical, and the real obstacles grew more formidable. His initiation into the secrets of the Nucingen household had revealed to him that if he were to attempt to use this love affair as a means of mending his fortunes, he must swallow down all sense of decency, and renounce all the generous ideas which redeem the sins of youth. He had chosen this life of apparent splendor, but secretly gnawed by the canker worm of remorse, a life of fleeting pleasure dearly paid for by persistent pain; like Le Distrait of La Bruyere, he had descended so far as to make his bed in a ditch; but (also like Le Distrait) he himself was uncontaminated as yet by the mire that stained his garments.

°°°°"So we have killed our mandarin, have we?" said Bianchon one day as they left the dinner table.

°°°°"Not yet," he answered, "but he is at his last gasp."

°°°°The medical student took this for a joke, but it was not a jest. Eugene had dined in the house that night for the first time for a long while, and had looked thoughtful during the meal. He had taken his place beside Mlle. Taillefer, and stayed through the dessert, giving his neighbor an expressive glance from time to time. A few of the boarders discussed the walnuts at the table, and others walked about the room, still taking part in the conversation which had begun among them. People usually went when they chose; the amount of time that they lingered being determined by the amount of interest that the conversation possessed for them, or by the difficulty of the process of digestion. In winter-time the room was seldom empty before eight o'clock, when the four women had it all to themselves, and made up for the silence previously imposed upon them by the preponderating masculine element. This evening Vautrin had noticed Eugene's abstractedness, and stayed in the room, though he had seemed to be in a hurry to finish his dinner and go. All through the talk afterwards he had kept out of the sight of the law student, who quite believed that Vautrin had left the room. He now took up his position cunningly in the sitting-room instead of going when the last boarders went. He had fathomed the young man's thoughts, and felt that a crisis was at hand. Rastignac was, in fact, in a dilemma, which many another young man must have known.

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen might love him, or might merely be playing with him, but in either case Rastignac had been made to experience all the alternations of hope and despair of genuine passion, and all the diplomatic arts of a Parisienne had been employed on him. After compromising herself by continually appearing in public with Mme. de Beauseant's cousin she still hesitated, and would not give him the lover's privileges which he appeared to enjoy. For a whole month she had so wrought on his senses, that at last she had made an impression on his heart. If in the earliest days the student had fancied himself to be master, Mme. de Nucingen had since become the stronger of the two, for she had skilfully roused and played upon every instinct, good or bad, in the two or three men comprised in a young student in Paris. This was not the result of deep design on her part, nor was she playing a part, for women are in a manner true to themselves even through their grossest deceit, because their actions are prompted by a natural impulse. It may have been that Delphine, who had allowed this young man to gain such an ascendency over her, conscious that she had been too demonstrative, was obeying a sentiment of dignity, and either repented of her concessions, or it pleased her to suspend them. It is so natural to a Parisienne, even when passion has almost mastered her, to hesitate and pause before taking the plunge; to probe the heart of him to whom she intrusts her future. And once already Mme. de Nucingen's hopes had been betrayed, and her loyalty to a selfish young lover had been despised. She had good reason to be suspicious. Or it may have been that something in Eugene's manner (for his rapid success was making a coxcomb of him) had warned her that the grotesque nature of their position had lowered her somewhat in his eyes. She doubtless wished to assert her dignity; he was young, and she would be great in his eyes; for the lover who had forsaken her had held her so cheap that she was determined that Eugene should not think her an easy conquest, and for this very reason--he knew that de Marsay had been his predecessor. Finally, after the degradation of submission to the pleasure of a heartless young rake, it was so sweet to her to wander in the flower-strewn realms of love, that it was not wonderful that she should wish to dwell a while on the prospect, to tremble with the vibrations of love, to feel the freshness of the breath of its dawn. The true lover was suffering for the sins of the false. This inconsistency is unfortunately only to be expected so long as men do not know how many flowers are mown down in a young woman's soul by the first stroke of treachery.

°°°°Whatever her reasons may have been, Delphine was playing with Rastignac, and took pleasure in playing with him, doubtless because she felt sure of his love, and confident that she could put an end to the torture as soon as it was her royal pleasure to do so. Eugene's self-love was engaged; he could not suffer his first passage of love to end in a defeat, and persisted in his suit like a sportsman determined to bring down at least one partridge to celebrate his first Feast of Saint-Hubert. The pressure of anxiety, his wounded self-love, his despair, real or feigned, drew him nearer and nearer to this woman. All Paris credited him with this conquest, and yet he was conscious that he had made no progress since the day when he saw Mme. de Nucingen for the first time. He did not know as yet that a woman's coquetry is sometimes more delightful than the pleasure of secure possession of her love, and was possessed with helpless rage. If, at this time, while she denied herself to love, Eugene gathered the springtide spoils of his life, the fruit, somewhat sharp and green, and dearly bought, was no less delicious to the taste. There were moments when he had not a sou in his pockets, and at such times he thought in spite of his conscience of Vautrin's offer and the possibility of fortune by a marriage with Mlle. Taillefer. Poverty would clamor so loudly that more than once he was on the point of yielding to the cunning temptations of the terrible sphinx, whose glance had so often exerted a strange spell over him.

°°°°Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau went up to their rooms; and Rastignac, thinking that he was alone with the women in the dining-room, sat between Mme. Vauquer and Mme. Couture, who was nodding over the woolen cuffs that she was knitting by the stove, and looked at Mlle. Taillefer so tenderly that she lowered her eyes.

°°°°"Can you be in trouble, M. Eugene?" Victorine said after a pause.

°°°°"Who has not his troubles?" answered Rastignac. "If we men were sure of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should have no troubles."

°°°°For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible to mistake its meaning.

°°°°"You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to- day, but are you sure that it will never change?"

°°°°A smile flitted over the poor girl's lips; it seemed as if a ray of light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

°°°°"Ah! but suppose," he said, "that you should be rich and happy to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of poverty?"

°°°°A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

°°°°"Even if he were very poor?"

°°°°Again the same mute answer.

°°°°"What nonsense are you talking, you two?" exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Never mind," answered Eugene; "we understand each other."

°°°°"So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?" The words were uttered in Vautrin's deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door as he spoke.

°°°°"Oh! how you startled me!" Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed together.

°°°°"I might make a worse choice," said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin's voice had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

°°°°"No bad jokes, gentlemen!" said Mme. Couture. "My dear, let us go upstairs."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene and Vautrin were left alone.

°°°°"I felt sure you would come round to it," said the elder man with the coolness that nothing seemed to shake. "But stay a moment! I have as much delicacy as anybody else. Don't make up your mind on the spur of the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like."

°°°°The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes, which he fluttered before the student's eyes. Eugene was in a most painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis to the Marquis d'Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud's house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

°°°°"You must see," said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor, "that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself under any obligation to you."

°°°°"Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise," answered the tempter. "You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion, and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women. Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you? Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account," Vautrin went on, and a smile stole over his lips. "Take these bits of paper and write across this," he added, producing a piece of stamped paper, "Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day twelvemonth, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful. In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of strength, my boy."

°°°°"What manner of man are you?" cried Eugene. "Were you created to torment me?"

°°°°"Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes, and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your first fright will go off like a conscript's terror on the battlefield. You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, 'Here are a hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,' and you could sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won't compromise you in any way, and you hesitate. 'Tis an effeminate age."

°°°°Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for it.

°°°°"Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally," Vautrin continued. "I mean to leave this country in a few months' time for America, and set about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do; I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look at. What is a man's life to me? Not THAT," he said, and he snapped his thumb-nail against his teeth. "A man, in short, is everything to me, or just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret; you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin, but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A sentiment-- what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part, I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is my passion. I knew Venice Preserved by heart. Have you met many men plucky enough when a comrade says, 'Let us bury a dead body!' to go and do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!"

°°°°Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student's repudiation, he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying their blameworthy actions to themselves.

°°°°"He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is certain," said Eugene to himself.

°°°°He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of Vautrin's ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for his own ends, raised him in the student's eyes; but the thought of a compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de Restaud's.

°°°°For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid Messieurs de Trailles and d'Ajuda, played at whist for part of the evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to consider that his luck was heaven's reward for his perseverance in the right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin whether the bill he had given was still in the other's possession; and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand francs with a not unnatural relief.

°°°°"Everything is going on well," said Vautrin.

°°°°"But I am not your accomplice," said Eugene.

°°°°"I know, I know," Vautrin broke in. "You are still acting like a child. You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset."

°°°°Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not without good reason, his own suspicions.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," this M. Gondureau was saying, "I do not see any cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of Police----"

°°°°"Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter," said Gondureau.

°°°°Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by that word "police," and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers, confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where the BONUS flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature (an illegible scrawl) and by his title--"His Excellency Monseigneur le Ministre," five words which produce as much effect as the il Bondo Cani of the Calife de Bagdad, five words which in the eyes of this low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a moment? Pronounce the words "His Excellency," and these poor folk will forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests. Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences, annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the deus ex machina, the magical words "His Excellency," so as to dazzle Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

°°°°"If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister . . . Ah! that is quite another thing," said Poiret.

°°°°"You seem to be guided by this gentleman's opinion, and you hear what he says," said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau. "Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the nickname Trompe-la-Mort."

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort?" said Pioret. "Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves that nickname."

°°°°"Well, yes," said the detective. "They call him so because he has been so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----"

°°°°"Then is he a man of honor?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man's crime upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler, who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been unexceptionable."

°°°°"But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, why should he want me?" asked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Oh yes," said Poiret, "if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as to tell us, really knows for a certainty----"

°°°°"Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed Trompe-la- Mort, is in the confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing their affairs, which want a MAN OF MARK to see about them."

°°°°"Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?" asked Poiret. "This gentleman calls himself a MAN OF MARK because he is a MARKED MAN-- branded, you know."

°°°°"This so-called Vautrin," said the detective, "receives the money belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for their benefit."

°°°°"Their mistresses! You mean their wives," remarked Poiret.

°°°°"No, sir. A convict's wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We call them concubines."

°°°°"Then they all live in a state of concubinage?"

°°°°"Naturally."

°°°°"Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow. Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society."

°°°°"But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues, my dear sir----"

°°°°"Of course not, sir; but still----"

°°°°"Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie," said Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"You see how it is, mademoiselle," Gondureau continued. "The Government may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the Society of the Ten Thousand----"

°°°°"Ten Thousand Thieves!" cried Pioret in alarm.

°°°°"No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they won't touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society. If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds, we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again; they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, "What is there to hinder Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?"

°°°°"Oh!" said the detective, "a man is told off to follow him everywhere he goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions."

°°°°"You are quite right, sir," said Poiret, "utterly disgraced he would be."

°°°°"But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without more ado," remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but," he added in her ear, "keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.-- Trompe-la-Mort, when he came back here," he went on aloud "slipped into the skin of an honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning, that he is! You don't catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of consequence, who transacts a good deal of business."

°°°°"Naturally," said Poiret to himself.

°°°°"And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of the real Vautrin, he would put every one's back up among the business men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about."

°°°°"Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman," said Mlle. Michonneau briskly.

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him," said the detective. "I will tell you a secret--he does not like them."

°°°°"Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to identify him for two thousand francs."

°°°°"Nothing simpler," said the stranger. "I will send you a little bottle containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder, and PRESTO! the letters will appear."

°°°°"Why, that is just nothing at all," said Poiret.

°°°°"Well, do you agree?" said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

°°°°"But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all," said Mlle. Michonneau; "am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"What will you give me then?"

°°°°"Five hundred francs."

°°°°"It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir."

°°°°"I assure you," said Poiret, "that mademoiselle has a great deal of conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very intelligent."

°°°°"Well, now," Mlle. Michonneau went on, "make it three thousand francs if he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man."

°°°°"Done!" said Gondureau, "but on the condition that the thing is settled to-morrow."

°°°°"Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first."

°°°°"You are a sly one," said the detective as he rose to his feet. "Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M. Gondureau."

°°°°Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier's lecture, overheard the sufficiently striking nickname of Trompe-la-Mort, and caught the celebrated chief detective's "Done!"

°°°°"Why didn't you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a year," said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Why didn't I?" she asked. "Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without paying, and that would be an abominable sell."

°°°°"And suppose you did warn him," Poiret went on, "didn't that gentleman say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything."

°°°°"Anyhow," thought Mlle. Michonneau, "I can't abide him. He says nothing but disagreeable things to me."

°°°°"But you can do better than that," Poiret resumed. "As that gentleman said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief. Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into the bargain!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau's musings did not permit her to listen very closely to the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret's lips like water dripping from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

°°°°By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau versus Dame Morin, when he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

°°°°As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"I knew how it would end," remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. "They have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week past."

°°°°"Yes," he answered. "So she was found guilty."

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. Morin."

°°°°"I am talking about Mlle. Victorine," said Mlle, Michonneau, as she entered Poiret's room with an absent air, "and you answer, 'Mme. Morin.' Who may Mme. Morin be?"

°°°°"What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?" demanded Poiret.

°°°°"Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!"

°°°°That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel's voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac's face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately; he had said to himself that a woman's happiness should atone for this venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face; the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice broke in upon their bliss.

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity,"

°°°°he sang mockingly.

°°°°Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand, the light touch of Rastignac's hair against her cheek, a word whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student's warm breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love's sake in the most famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

°°°°"The thing is arranged," Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. "Our two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half- past eight in the morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father's fortune and affections. A funny way of putting it, isn't it? Taillefer's youngster is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know."

°°°°Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders likewise appeared.

°°°°"That is just as I intended." Vautrin said. "You know quite well what you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you."

°°°°He made as though he would take Eugene's hand, but Rastignac hastily withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

°°°°"Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes of virtue about us!" murmured Vautrin. "But Papa Doliban has three millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride's white dress, even in your own eyes."

°°°°Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, "You look melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me."

°°°°The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

°°°°"Let us go up to your room," the worthy soul remarked, when he had asked Sylvie for the law student's key. "This morning," he resumed, "you thought that SHE did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting ME! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move into it in three days' time. Don't split upon me. She wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn't bear to keep the secret from you. You will be in the Rue d'Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that won't run away."

°°°°Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student's back was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney- piece and set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac's arms stamped in gold on the leather.

°°°°"My dear boy," said the kind soul, "I have been up to the eyes in this business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?"

°°°°"What is it?"

°°°°"There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn't that so? I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say to myself, 'He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.' If I were ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs- Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my little girl again, so light- hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, 'I am very happy, papa!' When they say 'father' stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me 'papa,' it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else."

°°°°The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

°°°°"It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!" he said, raising his head after a pause. "All the time we were going about together she chatted away about you. 'He is so nice-looking, papa; isn't he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?' Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no sign, and he was dying of impatience.

°°°°Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were written:

°°°°"I want you to think of me every hour, BECAUSE . . .   "DELPHINE."

°°°°That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as well as for his daughter's sake.

°°°°"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera- dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me with you, will you not?"

°°°°"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

°°°°"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you! Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

°°°°"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to her this evening, will you not?"

°°°°"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

°°°°"Can I be of any use?"

°°°°"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening; it is a matter of life and death."

°°°°"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance; "are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were saying down below? . . . TONNERRE DE DIEU! you have no notion what a tap A LA GORIOT is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh! the thing is impossible!"

°°°°"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

°°°°"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

°°°°"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to- morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

°°°°"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

°°°°"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting in an appearance----"

°°°°Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing at the threshold of his door and singing:

°°°°"Oh! Richard, oh my king!   All the world abandons thee!   Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

°°°°The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a . . . tra la la."

°°°°"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is waiting for you."

°°°°"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my Bordeaux."

°°°°"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste, hasn't she? Eh?"

°°°°Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and, all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

°°°°Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with consternation.

°°°°"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as merry as a skylark."

°°°°"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

°°°°"Bargain?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on, seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.

°°°°"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules," said the young painter.

°°°°"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

°°°°"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

°°°°"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

°°°°"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and the cheese."

°°°°"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach besides."

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme. Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

°°°°"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

°°°°Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

°°°°"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this, Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right- hand side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

°°°°"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a hundred chestnuts."

°°°°"Oh! oh!"

°°°°"Booououh!"

°°°°"Prrr!"

°°°°These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a set firework.

°°°°"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called Vautrin.

°°°°"Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for it, I have some currant cordial."

°°°°"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered the medical student.

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for it," he added.

°°°°"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little cakes."

°°°°"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out the biscuits."

°°°°The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously struck up with the following variations:

°°°°"Scissors to grind!"

°°°°"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

°°°°"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

°°°°"China to mend!"

°°°°"Boat ahoy!"

°°°°"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

°°°°"Old clo'!"

°°°°"Cherries all ripe!"

°°°°But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

°°°°A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

°°°°"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs. When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer, telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the bread is ready for the oven; to- morrow we will eat it up and whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? . . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

°°°°Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

°°°°"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the widow.

°°°°These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

°°°°"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

°°°°"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two ladies----"

°°°°"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your young lady."

°°°°"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

°°°°"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

°°°°He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead, and began to sing:

°°°°"Sleep, little darlings;   I watch while you slumber."

°°°°"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

°°°°"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. " 'Tis your duty as a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "the young fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife-- there's your fortune for you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I go out and call a cab--all my own self."

°°°°And he started out, singing as he went:

°°°°"Oh! sun! divine sun!   Ripening the pumpkins every one."

°°°°"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over. HE never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't lose what he hadn't got-- Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

°°°°Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just as he was, like a package, across the bed.

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know what dissipation is."

°°°°"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

°°°°"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such things----"

°°°°"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

°°°°"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer. It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

°°°°"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

°°°°"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

°°°°"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

°°°°"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress as she spoke.

°°°°Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.

°°°°"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

°°°°The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face, so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet, austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught something of the golden glory of heaven.

°°°°"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing her fingers through Eugene's hair.

°°°°"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

°°°°There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

°°°°"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though you had nothing on."

°°°°"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

°°°°"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint- Pierre (good soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme. Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now, don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will idolize you."

°°°°The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady; "we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments with all the care of an antiquary."

°°°°"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine. "Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them."

°°°°"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M. Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

°°°°"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

°°°°"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two women were alone together.

°°°°"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady; "just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

°°°°"Oh! mamma."

°°°°"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in for."

°°°°"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life," said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

°°°°"MON DIEU! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

°°°°With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room, Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned, and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

°°°°That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

°°°°But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the scent.

°°°°"A delusion," he said. "Collin's sorbonne is the most dangerous that has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the Place de Greve."

°°°°As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible expressions borrowed from thieves' Latin, thieves, of all people, being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking-- his council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth after the axe has done its work.

°°°°"Collin is playing us off," he continued. "When we come across a man like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la- Mort's paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent crime than to punish it."

°°°°"And you do a service to our country," said Poiret.

°°°°"Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you are," said the head of the department. "Yes, of course, we are serving our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle. I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get it back for you."

°°°°"Well, now," Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, "there are idiots who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as saying 'Good-day.' "

°°°°The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like apparition of the sham Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her boarders so long as she lived.

°°°°In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till close upon eleven o'clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin's first bottle of wine), was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme. Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o'clock, and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested, therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup belonging to Vautrin--it was standing with the others in the bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business. The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen. It ran thus:--

°°°°"I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my friend. Till two o'clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity's sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line will be enough. Say, 'I will hasten to you,' or else, 'I am ill.' But if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have happened? . . ."

°°°°"Yes, indeed, what has happened?" exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any more. "What time is it?"

°°°°"Half-past eleven," said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his coffee.

°°°°The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M. Taillefer's servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," he cried, "your father is asking for you-- something terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious."

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" exclaimed Vautrin. "How can people brawl when they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people have bad manners, and that is a fact."

°°°°"Sir!" cried Eugene.

°°°°"Well, what then, you big baby!" said Vautrin, swallowing down his coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. "Are there not duels every morning in Paris?" added Vautrin.

°°°°"I will go with you, Victorine," said Mme. Couture, and the two women hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance that said--"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me tears!"

°°°°"Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"I am all sorts of things," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Queer, isn't it?" said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession of commonplaces suited to the occasion. "Death takes us off without asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have other complaints that men don't suffer from. We bear children, and it takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her father will have to acknowledge her now!"

°°°°"There!" said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, "yesterday she had not a penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune."

°°°°"I say, M. Eugene!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "you have landed on your feet!"

°°°°At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the crumpled letter still in his hand.

°°°°"You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to be like the rest of them?" he asked.

°°°°"Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine," said Eugene, turning to Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised the onlookers at this scene.

°°°°Father Goriot caught the student's hand and grasped it warmly. He could have kissed it.

°°°°"Oh, ho!" said Vautrin, "the Italians have a good proverb--Col tempo."

°°°°"Is there any answer?" said Mme. de Nucingen's messenger, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Say that I will come directly."

°°°°The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he could not be prudent.

°°°°"What is to be done?" he exclaimed aloud. "There are no proofs!"

°°°°Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, "Luck comes to us while we sleep, young man," and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck dead.

°°°°"So there is a Divine Justice!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?"

°°°°"A stroke!" cried Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor," called the widow. "Oh, M. Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel."

°°°°Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.

°°°°"Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist's and ask for something that's good for the apoplexy."

°°°°Christophe likewise went.

°°°°"Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs."

°°°°Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow staircase, and laid upon his bed.

°°°°"I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter," said M. Goriot.

°°°°"Selfish old thing!" cried Mme. Vauquer. "Yes, go; I wish you may die like a dog."

°°°°"Just go and see if you can find some ether," said Mlle. Michonneau to Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the sick man's clothes.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress of the situation.

°°°°"Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be of some use in sparing my modesty," she said to Poiret, "instead of standing there like a stock."

°°°°Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

°°°°"There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily," exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on the shirt again.--"Ouf! How heavy he is," he added, as he laid the convict down.

°°°°"Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!" said the old maid briskly; her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of the furniture with greedy eyes. "Could we find some excuse for opening that desk?"

°°°°"It mightn't be quite right," responded Poiret to this.

°°°°"Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it doesn't belong to any one now. But we haven't time, there is the Vauquer."

°°°°"Here is the ether," said that lady. "I must say that this is an eventful day. Lord! that man can't have had a stroke; he is as white as curds."

°°°°"White as curds?" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"And his pulse is steady," said the widow, laying her hand on his breast.

°°°°"Steady?" said the astonished Poiret.

°°°°"He is all right."

°°°°"Do you think so?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look, mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears a wig. They say that red- haired people are either the worst or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?"

°°°°"Good to hang," said Poiret.

°°°°"Round a pretty woman's neck, you mean," said Mlle Michonneau, hastily. "Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman's duty to nurse you men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take yourself off," she added. "Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of dear M. Vautrin.

°°°°Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the room by his master.

°°°°Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself might be implicated. Vautrin's coolness still further dismayed him.

°°°°"Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?" Rastignac asked himself.

°°°°He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

°°°°"Well?" shouted Bianchon, "you have seen the Pilote?"

°°°°The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local journals.

°°°°"There is a wonderful history in it," said the house student of the Hopital Cochin. "Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?"

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----"

°°°°"You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master Taillefer's money!"

°°°°"Are all the devils of hell at my heels?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand," said Bianchon, "and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish."

°°°°"Just go to Mother Vauquer's," said Rastignac; "that scoundrel Vautrin has dropped down like one dead."

°°°°"Aha!" said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, "you confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself."

°°°°The law student's long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot's confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue d'Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.

°°°°"Such a love is my anchor of safety," he said to himself. "How the old man's heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!"

°°°°He took out his watch and admired it.

°°°°"I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?"

°°°°Rastignac's battle with himself went on for a long while; and though the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison Vauquer through the gathering dusk.

°°°°Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau's officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer's duel. They were anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the probable change in Victorine's prospects. Father Goriot alone was absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the same look that had read his thoughts before--the look that had such power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.

°°°°"Well, dear boy," said the escaped convict, "I am likely to cheat death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors."

°°°°"A bull you might say," cried the widow.

°°°°"You really might be sorry to see me still alive," said Vautrin in Rastignac's ear, thinking that he guessed the student's thoughts. "You must be mighty sure of yourself."

°°°°"Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort," said Bianchon; "and, upon my word, that name would do very well for you."

°°°°Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle. Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature had dropped from the convict's face; from the unmistakable ferocity of that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the sitting-room.

°°°°"In the name of the King and the Law!" said an officer, but the words were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.

°°°°Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men, who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden, and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin's face was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair, the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines, his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor. Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.

°°°°"You are not in the politest of humors to-day," he remarked to the chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his head.

°°°°"Gentlemen," he said, "put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call on those present to witness that I make no resistance."

°°°°A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally sudden cessation.

°°°°"There's a sell for you, master crusher," the convict added, looking at the famous director of police.

°°°°"Come, strip!" said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.

°°°°"Why?" asked Collin. "There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and surrender."

°°°°He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to overwhelm his audience.

°°°°"Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle," he went on, addressing a little, white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table; and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to draw up a document. "I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin, otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years' penal servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my nickname.--If I had as much as raised my hand," he went on, addressing the other lodgers, "those three sneaking wretches yonder would have drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer's domestic hearth. The rogues have laid their heads together to set a trap for me."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.

°°°°"Good Lord!" she cried, "this does give one a turn; and me at the Gaite with him only last night!" she said to Sylvie.

°°°°"Summon your philosophy, mamma," Collin resumed. "Is it a misfortune to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me." His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his eyes.--"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept any time you like! Do you understand?" And he sang:

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity."

°°°°"Don't you trouble yourself," he went on; "I can get in my money. They are too much afraid of me to swindle me."

°°°°The convicts' prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur, its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the speaker's discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno, wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own evil thoughts.

°°°°"Who betrayed me?" said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"It was you, old cat!" he said. "That sham stroke of apoplexy was your doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs," he shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession of his effects. "The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here," he said tapping his forehead. "Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?" he said, turning to the chief. "It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?" he asked of the police officers. "A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money," he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. "These folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?" he asked proudly. "There is some good there," he said tapping his heart; "I have never betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut," he said to the old maid, "they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them sick. Rake in your gains."

°°°°He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers' faces.

°°°°"What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before? A convict of Collin's stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and I am a match for them all."

°°°°"Ye gods!" cried the painter, "what a magnificent sketch one might make of him!"

°°°°"Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master of ceremonies to the widow" (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given by prisoners to the guillotine), "be a good fellow, and tell me if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don't want him to suffer for some one else, that would not be fair."

°°°°But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Collin, addressing the lodgers, "they will take me away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me to send you figs from Provence."

°°°°He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at Rastignac.

°°°°"Good-bye, Eugene," he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange transition from his previous rough and stern manner. "If you should be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend," and, in spite of his shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, "One, two!" like a fencing-master, and lunged. "If anything goes wrong, apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service."

°°°°The strange speaker's manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the pantomime.

°°°°As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house, Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress' temples with vinegar, looked round at the bewildered lodgers.

°°°°"Well," said she, "he was a man, he was, for all that."

°°°°Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead- alive, mummy-like figure, crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, "If that creature is going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out."

°°°°In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save Poiret, was of the medical student's opinion, so that the latter, strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

°°°°"You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us," he said; "speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at once."

°°°°"At once!" echoed Poiret in amazement.

°°°°Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in her ear.

°°°°"I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here as any one else," she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

°°°°"Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Monsieur is taking Collin's part" she said, with a questioning, malignant glance at the law student; "it is not difficult to guess why."

°°°°Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

°°°°"Let her alone!" cried the boarders.

°°°°Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

°°°°"Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas," said the painter, turning to Mme. Vauquer. "If you don't show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are."

°°°°At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in them.

°°°°"Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness," she cried, interrupting herself, "I can't help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is moving----"

°°°°"Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux's in the Place Sorbonne," cried Bianchon.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Come, now," she said; "you would not be the ruin of my establishment, would you, eh? There's a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening."

°°°°"Never a bit of it!" cried the boarders. "She must go, and go this minute!"

°°°°"But the poor lady has had no dinner," said Poiret, with piteous entreaty.

°°°°"She can go and dine where she likes," shouted several voices.

°°°°"Turn her out, the spy!"

°°°°"Turn them both out! Spies!"

°°°°"Gentlemen," cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love gives to the ovine male, "respect the weaker sex."

°°°°"Spies are of no sex!" said the painter.

°°°°"A precious sexorama!"

°°°°"Turn her into the streetorama!"

°°°°"Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house, it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We have paid our money, and we are not going," said Poiret, putting on his cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer was remonstrating.

°°°°"Naughty boy!" said the painter, with a comical look; "run away, naughty little boy!"

°°°°"Look here," said Bianchon; "if you do not go, all the rest of us will," and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room- door.

°°°°"Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?" cried Mme. Vauquer. "I am a ruined woman. You can't stay here; they will go further, do something violent."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

°°°°"She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn't."

°°°°These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions, borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low voice in her hostess' ear, and then--"I shall go to Mme. Buneaud's," she said, with a threatening look.

°°°°"Go where you please, mademoiselle," said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. "Go and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the food is cheap and nasty."

°°°°The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out laughing at the sight of him.

°°°°"Hist!--st!--st! Poiret," shouted the painter. "Hallo! I say, Poiret, hallo!" The employe from the Museum began to sing:

°°°°"Partant pour la Syrie,   Le jeune et beau Dunois . . ."

°°°°"Get along with you; you must be dying to go, trahit sua quemque voluptas!" said Bianchon.

°°°°"Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil," said the tutor.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret's arm, with an appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together, the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause, followed by peals of laughter.

°°°°"Bravo, Poiret!"

°°°°"Who would have thought it of old Poiret!"

°°°°"Apollo Poiret!"

°°°°"Mars Poiret!"

°°°°"Intrepid Poiret!"

°°°°A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

°°°°"The house might as well be burned down at once," cried she, "if there are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three o'clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those ladies at that poor man's expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me to send their things, because they are going to live with her father. M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone! . . ."

°°°°She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

°°°°"Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think," she cried.

°°°°Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

°°°°"What! another windfall for somebody!" was Sylvie's comment.

°°°°But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

°°°°"Goriot in a cab!" cried the boarders; "the world is coming to an end."

°°°°The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man's arm.

°°°°"Come," he said, with gladness in his eyes.

°°°°"Then you haven't heard the news?" said Eugene. "Vautrin was an escaped convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead."

°°°°"Very well, but what business is it of ours?" replied Father Goriot. "I am going to dine with my daughter in YOUR HOUSE, do you understand? She is expecting you. Come!"

°°°°He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

°°°°"Now, let us have dinner," cried the painter, and every one drew his chair to the table.

°°°°"Well, I never," said the portly Sylvie. "Nothing goes right to- day! The haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it is, more's the pity!"

°°°°Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day's events; but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels, jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day. Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope was the portly Sylvie.

°°°°That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in the cab. The old man's voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears like words spoken in a dream.

°°°°"It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don't know what pretty ways she has; at table she will look after me, 'Here, papa, just try this, it is nice.' And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her."

°°°°"It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down."

°°°°"Upside down?" repeated Father Goriot. "Why, the world has never been so right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood would be as sweet as honey."

°°°°"I feel as if I were coming back to life again," said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, hurry up there!" cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in front. "Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the place I told you of in ten minutes time."

°°°°With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous celerity.

°°°°"How that fellow crawls!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"But where are you taking me?" Eugene asked him.

°°°°"To your own house," said Goriot.

°°°°The cab stopped in the Rue d'Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning to bachelor ways.

°°°°"Come along upstairs," he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard, and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen's maid. Eugene found himself in a charming set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description, the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

°°°°"So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to understand!"

°°°°Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just witnessed was too much for Rastignac's over- wrought nerves, after the day's strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was almost overcome by it.

°°°°"I felt sure myself that he loved you," murmured Father Goriot, while Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring about this final transformation scene.

°°°°"But you must see your rooms," said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed, down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of Delphine's apartment.

°°°°"There is no bed," said Rastignac.

°°°°"No, monsieur," she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene, looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

°°°°"You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for ever," he said in her ear. "Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret."

°°°°"Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose," growled the father.

°°°°"You know quite well that 'we' means you."

°°°°"Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a good idea of mine to say to you, 'There are some nice rooms to let in the Rue d'Artois; let us furnish them for him?' And she would not hear of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers else."

°°°°"Was that how it happened?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----"

°°°°Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low though the sound was.

°°°°The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was wanting there.

°°°°"Have we guessed your wishes rightly?" she asked, as they returned to the drawing-room for dinner.

°°°°"Yes," he said, "only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----"

°°°°"Ah! ah! you say me nay already," she said with arch imperiousness, and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman's way of laughing away scruples.

°°°°But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self- questioning, and Vautrin's arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into abandoning his high- minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled his mind.

°°°°"Do you really mean to refuse?" said Mme. de Nucingen. "And do you know what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying my affection? If you love me, if I-- love you, why should you shrink back from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment, you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this. . . . Ah!" she cried, as Eugene's passionate glance was turned on her, "and you are making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you. Speak!-- Father," she said after a pause, "make him listen to reason. Can he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?"

°°°°Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

°°°°"Child that you are!" she cried again, catching Eugene's hand. "You are just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man finds insurmountable; a woman's hand opens the way and you shrink back! Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to repay me my loan of today? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your garret must be if it is like papa's room! See, dinner is waiting all this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don't you answer?" she said, shaking his hand. "MON DIEU! papa, make up his mind for him, or I will go away and never see him any more."

°°°°"I will make up your mind," said Goriot, coming down from the clouds. "Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews, isn't it?"

°°°°"There is positively no help for it," said Eugene.

°°°°"All right, I will give you credit," said the other, drawing out a cheap leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. "I have turned Jew myself; I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you can return it some time or other."

°°°°Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot's warmly.

°°°°"Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?"

°°°°"Oh! my poor father," said Mme. de Nucingen, "how did you do it?"

°°°°"Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you, and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to myself, 'She will never be able to pay for them.' The attorney says that those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year, and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, 'How happy they are going to be!' and--well, now, are you not happy?"

°°°°"Oh papa! papa!" cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright and radiant.

°°°°"Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel for you now?"

°°°°"Why, children, why Delphinette!" cried Goriot, who had not felt his daughter's heart beat against his breast for ten years, "do you want me to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are quits already." And the old man strained her to his breast with such fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

°°°°"Oh! you are hurting me!" she said.

°°°°"I am hurting you!" He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men. Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his fingers had grasped too roughly.

°°°°"Oh! no, no," he cried. "I have not hurt you, have I?" and his smile seemed to repeat the question. "YOU have hurt me with that cry just now.--The things cost rather more than that," he said in her ear, with another gentle kiss, "but I had to deceive him about it, or he would have been angry."

°°°°Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration which shapes the beliefs of youth.

°°°°"I will be worthy of all this," he cried.

°°°°"Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said," and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law student on the forehead.

°°°°"He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you," said Father Goriot. "Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus."

°°°°"Oh! why did you tell her?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"Eugene," Delphine said in his ear, "I have one regret now this evening. Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!"

°°°°"This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!" cried Goriot. "God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer through you, and I can still say, 'In this short month of February I had more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.'--Look at me, Fifine!" he said to his daughter. "She is very beautiful, is she not? Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell instead. Come, let us have dinner," he added, scarcely knowing what he said, "everything is ours."

°°°°"Poor dear father!"

°°°°He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a kiss on the plaits of hair. "If you only knew, little one, how happy you can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me, say that you will!"

°°°°"Yes, dear father."

°°°°"Say it again."

°°°°"Yes, I will, my kind father."

°°°°"Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed my own wishes. Let us have dinner."

°°°°The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot's spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter's feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more tender.

°°°°"You see!" Delphine said with a look at Eugene, "so long as my father is with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes."

°°°°Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

°°°°"And when will the rooms be ready?" asked Eugene, looking round. "We must all leave them this evening, I suppose."

°°°°"Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me," she answered, with an eloquent glance. "It is our night at the Italiens."

°°°°"I shall go to the pit," said her father.

°°°°It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen's carriage was waiting for her, and Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing that the father's self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her father's adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future of love.

°°°°They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso's lamentations as recorded in Byron's poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force of truth they fall far short of the widow's cry from the depths.

°°°°"Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life, now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people! The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and Christophe will have to go!"

°°°°The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said, "Madame," questioningly.

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Sylvie, "he is like a dog."

°°°°"In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a little dog."

°°°°"Lord!" said Sylvie, flinging up her head, "those old maids are up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"There's that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict," the widow went on. "Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I can't bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny on the nail too."

°°°°"And open-handed he was!" said Christophe.

°°°°"There is some mistake," said Sylvie.

°°°°"Why, no there isn't! he said so himself!" said Mme. Vauquer. "And to think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it's like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap; we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again; there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred, will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that is just what it is!"

°°°°"And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear," cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Don't speak of her, she is a wicked woman!" said Mme. Vauquer. "She is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed and murdered people in her time. SHE ought to be put in jail for life instead of that poor dear----"

°°°°Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

°°°°"Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers," said the widow, sighing.

°°°°But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d'Antin.

°°°°"Sylvie!" cried the widow, "this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There's a weight on my chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow, Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen," and she went.

°°°°"What is the matter now?" Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

°°°°"Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a bit. It's the first time she has cried since I've been with her."

°°°°By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had "made up her mind to it." True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A lover's farewell glance at his lady-love's window is not more mournful than Mme. Vauquer's survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take his (Rastignac's) place; that the official from the Museum had often expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture's rooms; and that in a very few days her household would be on the old footing.

°°°°"God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here. There'll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you'll see," and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining- room. "Whose turn will it be, I wonder?"

°°°°"It is just as well that we are moving out," said Eugene to Father Goriot in a low voice.

°°°°"Madame," said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, "I have not seen Mistigris these three days."

°°°°"Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if HE has gone and left us, I----"

°°°°The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this dreadful portent.

°°°°By twelve o'clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse's great ball, which had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was slipped in with the card.

°°°°"I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to   interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the   card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make   the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud's sister. Pray introduce that   charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your   affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.   "VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT."

°°°°"Well," said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, "Mme. de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de Nucingen."

°°°°He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of Paris--will never have a rival.

°°°°Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country, it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love exist there without that wealth?

°°°°If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water, without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls, waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look with pity upon those of earth.

°°°°Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it. In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one man, but of a whole nation.

°°°°But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a brilliant future.

°°°°So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

°°°°"Madame is in her room," Therese came to tell him. The woman's voice made him start.

°°°°He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid the blossom.

°°°°"Well," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "here you are."

°°°°"Guess what I bring for you," said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He took possession of her arm to kiss her hand

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

°°°°"And I owe this happiness to you--to THEE" (she whispered the more intimate word in his ear); "but Therese is in my dressing- room, let us be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes to me through YOU--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint- Germain, it is because I shall meet you there."

°°°°"Mme. de Beauseant's note seems to say very plainly that she does not expect to see the BARON de Nucingen at her ball; don't you think so?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, yes," said the Baroness as she returned the letter. "Those women have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go. My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully dressed.--Eugene," she went on, lowering her voice, "she will go to dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a woman's character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband's mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant's ball in tissue of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I mean to be perfectly happy."

°°°°At one o'clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In the midst of their lovers' farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to come, she said in a troubled voice, "I am very fearful, superstitious. Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe."

°°°°"Child!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?" she asked, laughingly.

°°°°Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left its sweetness on the lips.

°°°°"Well?" cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene; "I will tell you everything to-morrow."

°°°°"Everything, will you not?" cried the old man. "Go to bed. To- morrow our happy life will begin."

°°°°Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging- house, and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it; but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran lightly upstairs.

°°°°It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d'Artois at four o'clock; but Rastignac's name had been called early on the list at the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this, Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin's signature lying in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot's room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him; but after the first few words, the conversation between the father and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his attention.

°°°°"Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe to talk?" she added.

°°°°"Yes, there is no one in the house," said her father faintly.

°°°°"What is the matter with you?" asked Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!" said the old man. "You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d'Artois."

°°°°"Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the subject with him. Wasn't that what you told me to tell him?"

°°°°"Yes, quite right," answered Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then," Delphine continued, "he told me all about his affairs. He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations; they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes, on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy (in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him."

°°°°"Do you really believe that silly rubbish?" . . . cried her father. "It was all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No, no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them, and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that's holiest in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked! and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers. If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don't give way, don't make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he can't do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once; I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know for certain that your fortune is secure."

°°°°"Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile, it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we drive him to despair, I am lost."

°°°°"Why, then, the man is a rogue?"

°°°°"Well, yes, father," she said, flinging herself into a chair, "I wanted to keep it from you to spare your feelings," and she burst into tears; "I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his stalking- horse."

°°°°"But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons- in-law of that sort," cried her father; "why, I would guillotine him myself if there was no headsman to do it."

°°°°"No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says, stripped of all his circumlocutions--'Take your choice, you and no one else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through myself.' Is that plain speaking? He MUST have my assistance. He is assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to be Eugene's wife in all but name. 'I connive at your errors, and you allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!' Is that sufficiently explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get possession of those bills?"

°°°°Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on his knees.

°°°°"Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child! forgive me!" cried the old man.

°°°°"Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame," said Delphine. "We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us! Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa," she said, kissing him.

°°°°"Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your husband's winding."

°°°°"No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me, well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters. No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant's ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene! . . . Come, let us see his room."

°°°°But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve, and the sound of Mme. de Restaud's voice came from the staircase. "Is my father in?" she asked of Sylvie.

°°°°This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

°°°°"Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?" said Delphine, when she heard her sister speak. "It looks as though some strange things had happened in that family."

°°°°"What sort of things?" asked Goriot. "This is like to be the death of me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune."

°°°°"Good-morning, father," said the Countess from the threshold. "Oh! Delphine, are you here?"

°°°°Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister's presence.

°°°°"Good-morning, Nasie," said the Baroness. "What is there so extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day."

°°°°"Since when?"

°°°°"If you came yourself you would know."

°°°°"Don't tease, Delphine," said the Countess fretfully. "I am very miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!"

°°°°"What is it, Nasie?" cried Goriot. "Tell us all about it, child! How white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will love you even better, if that were possible."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. "We are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see."

°°°°The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

°°°°"This will kill me!" said their father. "There," he went on, stirring the smouldering fire, "come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it, Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----"

°°°°"Well, then, my husband knows everything," said the Countess. "Just imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime's some time ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that. About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled. He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively. Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard; for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I had eaten up all that you had----"

°°°°"No," said Goriot; "I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet."

°°°°The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when the father's love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice, revealed the depths of his despair.

°°°°"I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell," and the Countess burst into tears.

°°°°Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister's shoulder, and cried too.

°°°°"Then it is all true," she said.

°°°°Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her, kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

°°°°"I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie," she said.

°°°°"My angels," murmured Goriot faintly. "Oh, why should it be trouble that draws you together?"

°°°°This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

°°°°"To save Maxime's life," she said, "to save all my own happiness, I went to the money-lender you know of, a man of iron forged in hell-fire; nothing can melt him; I took all the family diamonds that M. de Restaud is so proud of--his and mine too--and sold them to that M. Gobseck. SOLD THEM! Do you understand? I saved Maxime, but I am lost. Restaud found it all out."

°°°°"How? Who told him? I will kill him," cried Goriot.

°°°°"Yesterday he sent to tell me to come to his room. I went. . . . 'Anastasie,' he said in a voice--oh! such a voice; that was enough, it told me everything--'where are your diamonds?'--'In my room----'--'No,' he said, looking straight at me, 'there they are on that chest of drawers----' and he lifted his handkerchief and showed me the casket. 'Do you know where they came from?' he said. I fell at his feet. . . . I cried; I besought him to tell me the death he wished to see me die."

°°°°"You said that!" cried Goriot. "By God in heaven, whoever lays a hand on either of you so long as I am alive may reckon on being roasted by slow fires! Yes, I will cut him in pieces like . . ."

°°°°Goriot stopped; the words died away in his throat.

°°°°"And then, dear, he asked something worse than death of me. Oh! heaven preserve all other women from hearing such words as I heard then!"

°°°°"I will murder that man," said Goriot quietly. "But he has only one life, and he deserves to die twice.--And then, what next?" he added, looking at Anastasie.

°°°°"Then," the Countess resumed, "there was a pause, and he looked at me. 'Anastasie,' he said, 'I will bury this in silence; there shall be no separation; there are the children. I will not kill M. de Trailles. I might miss him if we fought, and as for other ways of getting rid of him, I should come into collision with the law. If I killed him in your arms, it would bring dishonor on THOSE children. But if you do not want to see your children perish, nor their father nor me, you must first of all submit to two conditions. Answer me. Have I a child of my own?' I answered, 'Yes,'--'Which?'--'Ernest, our eldest boy.'--'Very well,' he said, 'and now swear to obey me in this particular from this time forward.' I swore. 'You will make over your property to me when I require you to do so.' "

°°°°"Do nothing of the kind!" cried Goriot. "Aha! M. de Restaud, you could not make your wife happy; she has looked for happiness and found it elsewhere, and you make her suffer for your own ineptitude? He will have to reckon with me. Make yourself easy, Nasie. Aha! he cares about his heir! Good, very good. I will get hold of the boy; isn't he my grandson? What the blazes! I can surely go to see the brat! I will stow him away somewhere; I will take care of him, you may be quite easy. I will bring Restaud to terms, the monster! I shall say to him, 'A word or two with you! If you want your son back again, give my daughter her property, and leave her to do as she pleases.' "

°°°°"Father!"

°°°°"Yes. I am your father, Nasie, a father indeed! That rogue of a great lord had better not ill-treat my daughter. Tonnerre! What is it in my veins? There is the blood of a tiger in me; I could tear those two men to pieces! Oh! children, children! so this is what your lives are! Why, it is death! . . . What will become of you when I shall be here no longer? Fathers ought to live as long as their children. Ah! Lord God in heaven! how ill Thy world is ordered! Thou hast a Son, if what they tell us is true, and yet Thou leavest us to suffer so through our children. My darlings, my darlings! to think that trouble only should bring you to me, that I should only see you with tears on your faces! Ah! yes, yes, you love me, I see that you love me. Come to me and pour out your griefs to me; my heart is large enough to hold them all. Oh! you might rend my heart in pieces, and every fragment would make a father's heart. If only I could bear all your sorrows for you! . . . Ah! you were so happy when you were little and still with me. . . ."

°°°°"We have never been happy since," said Delphine. "Where are the old days when we slid down the sacks in the great granary?"

°°°°"That is not all, father," said Anastasie in Goriot's ear. The old man gave a startled shudder. "The diamonds only sold for a hundred thousand francs. Maxime is hard pressed. There are twelve thousand francs still to pay. He has given me his word that he will be steady and give up play in future. His love is all that I have left in the world. I have paid such a fearful price for it that I should die if I lose him now. I have sacrificed my fortune, my honor, my peace of mind, and my children for him. Oh! do something, so that at the least Maxime may be at large and live undisgraced in the world, where he will assuredly make a career for himself. Something more than my happiness is at stake; the children have nothing, and if he is sent to Sainte-Pelagie all his prospects will be ruined."

°°°°"I haven't the money, Nasie. I have NOTHING--nothing left. This is the end of everything. Yes, the world is crumbling into ruin, I am sure. Fly! Save yourselves! Ah!--I have still my silver buckles left, and half-a-dozen silver spoons and forks, the first I ever had in my life. But I have nothing else except my life annuity, twelve hundred francs . . ."

°°°°"Then what has become of your money in the funds?"

°°°°"I sold out, and only kept a trifle for my wants. I wanted twelve thousand francs to furnish some rooms for Delphine."

°°°°"In your own house?" asked Mme. de Restaud, looking at her sister.

°°°°"What does it matter where they were?" asked Goriot. "The money is spent now."

°°°°"I see how it is," said the Countess. "Rooms for M. de Rastignac. Poor Delphine, take warning by me!"

°°°°"M. de Rastignac is incapable of ruining the woman he loves, dear."

°°°°"Thanks! Delphine. I thought you would have been kinder to me in my troubles, but you never did love me."

°°°°"Yes, yes, she loves you, Nasie," cried Goriot; "she was saying so only just now. We were talking about you, and she insisted that you were beautiful, and that she herself was only pretty!"

°°°°"Pretty!" said the Countess. "She is as hard as a marble statue."

°°°°"And if I am?" cried Delphine, flushing up, "how have you treated me? You would not recognize me; you closed the doors of every house against me; you have never let an opportunity of mortifying me slip by. And when did I come, as you were always doing, to drain our poor father, a thousand francs at a time, till he is left as you see him now? That is all your doing, sister! I myself have seen my father as often as I could. I have not turned him out of the house, and then come and fawned upon him when I wanted money. I did not so much as know that he had spent those twelve thousand francs on me. I am economical, as you know; and when papa has made me presents, it has never been because I came and begged for them."

°°°°"You were better off than I. M. de Marsay was rich, as you have reason to know. You always were as slippery as gold. Good-bye; I have neither sister nor----"

°°°°"Oh! hush, hush, Nasie!" cried her father.

°°°°"Nobody else would repeat what everybody has ceased to believe. You are an unnatural sister!" cried Delphine.

°°°°"Oh, children, children! hush! hush! or I will kill myself before your eyes."

°°°°"There, Nasie, I forgive you," said Mme. de Nucingen; "you are very unhappy. But I am kinder than you are. How could you say THAT just when I was ready to do anything in the world to help you, even to be reconciled with my husband, which for my own sake I---- Oh! it is just like you; you have behaved cruelly to me all through these nine years."

°°°°"Children, children, kiss each other!" cried the father. "You are angels, both of you."

°°°°"No. Let me alone," cried the Countess shaking off the hand that her father had laid on her arm. "She is more merciless than my husband. Any one might think she was a model of all the virtues herself!"

°°°°"I would rather have people think that I owed money to M. de Marsay than own that M. de Trailles had cost me more than two hundred thousand francs," retorted Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"DELPHINE!" cried the Countess, stepping towards her sister.

°°°°"I shall tell you the truth about yourself if you begin to slander me," said the Baroness coldly.

°°°°"Delphine! you are a ----"

°°°°Father Goriot sprang between them, grasped the Countess' hand, and laid his own over her mouth.

°°°°"Good heavens, father! What have you been handling this morning?" said Anastasie.

°°°°"Ah! well, yes, I ought not to have touched you," said the poor father, wiping his hands on his trousers, "but I have been packing up my things; I did not know that you were coming to see me."

°°°°He was glad that he had drawn down her wrath upon himself.

°°°°"Ah!" he sighed, as he sat down, "you children have broken my heart between you. This is killing me. My head feels as if it were on fire. Be good to each other and love each other! This will be the death of me! Delphine! Nasie! come, be sensible; you are both in the wrong. Come, Dedel," he added, looking through his tears at the Baroness, "she must have twelve thousand francs, you see; let us see if we can find them for her. Oh, my girls, do not look at each other like that!" and he sank on his knees beside Delphine. "Ask her to forgive you--just to please me," he said in her ear. "She is more miserable than you are. Come now, Dedel."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Delphine, alarmed at the wild extravagant grief in her father's face, "I was in the wrong, kiss me----"

°°°°"Ah! that is like balm to my heart," cried Father Goriot. "But how are we to find twelve thousand francs? I might offer myself as a substitute in the army----"

°°°°"Oh! father dear!" they both cried, flinging their arms about him. "No, no!"

°°°°"God reward you for the thought. We are not worth it, are we, Nasie?" asked Delphine.

°°°°"And besides, father dear, it would only be a drop in the bucket," observed the Countess.

°°°°"But is flesh and blood worth nothing?" cried the old man in his despair. "I would give body and soul to save you, Nasie. I would do a murder for the man who would rescue you. I would do, as Vautrin did, go to the hulks, go----" he stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and put both hands to his head. "Nothing left!" he cried, tearing his hair. "If I only knew of a way to steal money, but it is so hard to do it, and then you can't set to work by yourself, and it takes time to rob a bank. Yes, it is time I was dead; there is nothing left me to do but to die. I am no good in the world; I am no longer a father! No. She has come to me in her extremity, and, wretch that I am, I have nothing to give her. Ah! you put your money into a life annuity, old scoundrel; and had you not daughters? You did not love them. Die, die in a ditch, like the dog that you are! Yes, I am worse than a dog; a beast would not have done as I have done! Oh! my head . . . it throbs as if it would burst."

°°°°"Papa!" cried both the young women at once, "do, pray, be reasonable!" and they clung to him to prevent him from dashing his head against the wall. There was a sound of sobbing.

°°°°Eugene, greatly alarmed, took the bill that bore Vautrin's signature, saw that the stamp would suffice for a larger sum, altered the figures, made it into a regular bill for twelve thousand francs, payable to Goriot's order, and went to his neighbor's room.

°°°°"Here is the money, madame," he said, handing the piece of paper to her. "I was asleep; your conversation awoke me, and by this means I learned all that I owed to M. Goriot. This bill can be discounted, and I shall meet it punctually at the due date."

°°°°The Countess stood motionless and speechless, but she held the bill in her fingers.

°°°°"Delphine," she said, with a white face, and her whole frame quivering with indignation, anger, and rage, "I forgave you everything; God is my witness that I forgave you, but I cannot forgive this! So this gentleman was there all the time, and you knew it! Your petty spite has let you to wreak your vengeance on me by betraying my secrets, my life, my children's lives, my shame, my honor! There, you are nothing to me any longer. I hate you. I will do all that I can to injure you. I will . . ."

°°°°Anger paralyzed her; the words died in her dry parched throat.

°°°°"Why, he is my son, my child; he is your brother, your preserver!" cried Goriot. "Kiss his hand, Nasie! Stay, I will embrace him myself," he said, straining Eugene to his breast in a frenzied clasp. "Oh my boy! I will be more than a father to you; if I had God's power, I would fling worlds at your feet. Why don't you kiss him, Nasie? He is not a man, but an angel, a angel out of heaven."

°°°°"Never mind her, father; she is mad just now."

°°°°"Mad! am I? And what are you?" cried Mme. de Restaud.

°°°°"Children, children, I shall die if you go on like this," cried the old man, and he staggered and fell on the bed as if a bullet had struck him.--"They are killing me between them," he said to himself.

°°°°The Countess fixed her eyes on Eugene, who stood stock still; all his faculties were numbed by this violent scene.

°°°°"Sir? . . ." she said, doubt and inquiry in her face, tone, and bearing; she took no notice now of her father nor of Delphine, who was hastily unfastening his waistcoat.

°°°°"Madame," said Eugene, answering the question before it was asked, "I will meet the bill, and keep silence about it."

°°°°"You have killed our father, Nasie!" said Delphine, pointing to Goriot, who lay unconscious on the bed. The Countess fled.

°°°°"I freely forgive her," said the old man, opening his eyes; "her position is horrible; it would turn an older head than hers. Comfort Nasie, and be nice to her, Delphine; promise it to your poor father before he dies," he asked, holding Delphine's hand in a convulsive clasp.

°°°°"Oh! what ails you, father?" she cried in real alarm.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing," said Goriot; "it will go off. There is something heavy pressing on my forehead, a little headache. . . . Ah! poor Nasie, what a life lies before her!"

°°°°Just as he spoke, the Countess came back again and flung herself on her knees before him. "Forgive me!" she cried.

°°°°"Come," said her father, "you are hurting me still more."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Countess said, turning to Rastignac, "misery made me unjust to you. You will be a brother to me, will you not?" and she held out her hand. Her eyes were full of tears as she spoke.

°°°°"Nasie," cried Delphine, flinging her arms round her sister, "my little Nasie, let us forget and forgive."

°°°°"No, no," cried Nasie; "I shall never forget!"

°°°°"Dear angels," cried Goriot, "it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won't it?"

°°°°"I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?"

°°°°"There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No, after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in future."

°°°°Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

°°°°"Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper," said Mme. de Nucingen, "but she has a good heart."

°°°°"She came back for the endorsement," said Eugene in Delphine's ear.

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her," he answered, raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did not venture to express.

°°°°"Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent."

°°°°"How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"I should like to go to sleep," he replied.

°°°°Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

°°°°"This evening at the Italiens," she said to Eugene, "and you can let me know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go into your room.--Oh! how frightful!" she cried on the threshold. "Why, you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps of gold."

°°°°A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot's bedside; to all appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, "They are not happy!" Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they were spoken went to his daughter's heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

°°°°"Ah! Delphine!" he said.

°°°°"How are you now?" she asked.

°°°°"Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently. Don't stay with me, children; go, go and be happy."

°°°°Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room, and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

°°°°"Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin," said Eugene.

°°°°Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him next to the old lodger.

°°°°"What is wrong with him?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning."

°°°°"Is there any cure for it?"

°°°°"None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on? There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way."

°°°°"Yes, there was," said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had struck blow on blow at their father's heart.

°°°°"But Delphine at any rate loves her father," he said to himself.

°°°°That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

°°°°"Do not be anxious about him," she said, however, as soon as Eugene began, "our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear. At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake. To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me; what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh! no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in life when everything turns to bitterness."

°°°°Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression on him.

°°°°Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love, they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme. de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

°°°°"What are you thinking about?" she asked.

°°°°"I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me."

°°°°She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more words, and she feared for her self- control.

°°°°"Eugene," she said, changing the conversation, "I wonder whether you know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant's to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d'Ajuda have agreed to keep the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be there. People are wondering what will happen?"

°°°°"The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill Mme. de Beauseant."

°°°°"Oh, no," said Delphine, smiling, "you do not know that kind of woman. Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for your sake."

°°°°"Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set in circulation here."

°°°°"We shall know the truth to-morrow."

°°°°Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d'Artois. Yesterday evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o'clock in the morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot's existence. The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four o'clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

°°°°"Aha!" said the painter as Eugene came in, "Father Goriot has broken down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of its brightest ornaments."

°°°°Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

°°°°"Hey! Monsieur Eugene!"

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you," shouted Sylvie.

°°°°"It is this, sir," said the widow. "You and M. Goriot should by rights have moved out on the 15th of February. That was three days ago; to-day is the 18th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied."

°°°°"Why can't you trust him?"

°°°°"Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died, those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won't fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and forks he has left, I don't know why. He had got himself up to look quite young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks; he looked quite young again."

°°°°"I will be responsible," said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he foresaw the end.

°°°°He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot's room. The old man was tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

°°°°"Good-evening, father," said Eugene.

°°°°The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

°°°°"How is SHE?"

°°°°"She is quite well. But how are you?"

°°°°"There is nothing much the matter."

°°°°"Don't tire him," said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the room.

°°°°"Well?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in; I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are acting."

°°°°"Is it possible to move him?"

°°°°"Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as quiet as possible----"

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," said Eugene, "we will nurse him between us."

°°°°"I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him."

°°°°"And what did he say?"

°°°°"He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went, and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his strength. One of his daughters has been here."

°°°°"Was it the Countess?" asked Eugene. "A tall, dark-haired woman, with large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Leave him to me for a bit," said Rastignac. "I will make him confess; he will tell me all about it."

°°°°"And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is still some hope left."

°°°°"All right."

°°°°"How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow," said Father Goriot when they were alone. "They are going to a grand ball."

°°°°"What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this evening that you have to stop in bed?"

°°°°"Nothing."

°°°°"Did not Anastasie come to see you?" demanded Rastignac.

°°°°"Yes," said Father Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then, don't keep anything from me. What more did she want of you?"

°°°°"Oh, she was very miserable," he answered, gathering up all his strength to speak. "It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds, Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie's waiting-woman advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie's maid saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair. She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that heartless scoundrel and say, 'I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker; pay her for me!' She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there too in a superb toilette, and Anastasie ought not to be outshone by her younger sister. And then--she was drowned in tears, poor girl! I felt so humbled yesterday when I had not the twelve thousand francs, that I would have given the rest of my miserable life to wipe out that wrong. You see, I could have borne anything once, but latterly this want of money has broken my heart. Oh! I did not do it by halves; I titivated myself up a bit, and went out and sold my spoons and forks and buckles for six hundred francs; then I went to old Daddy Gobseck, and sold a year's interest on my annuity for four hundred francs down. Pshaw! I can live on dry bread, as I did when I was a young man; if I have done it before, I can do it again. My Nasie shall have one happy evening, at any rate. She shall be smart. The banknote for a thousand francs is under my pillow; it warms me to have it lying there under my head, for it is going to make my poor Nasie happy. She can turn that bad girl Victoire out of the house. A servant that cannot trust her mistress, did any one ever hear the like! I shall be quite well to-morrow. Nasie is coming at ten o'clock. They must not think that I am ill, or they will not go to the ball; they will stop and take care of me. To-morrow Nasie will come and hold me in her arms as if I were one of her children; her kisses will make me well again. After all, I might have spent the thousand francs on physic; I would far rather give them to my little Nasie, who can charm all the pain away. At any rate, I am some comfort to her in her misery; and that makes up for my unkindness in buying an annuity. She is in the depths, and I cannot draw her out of them now. Oh! I will go into business again, I will buy wheat in Odessa; out there, wheat fetches a quarter of the price it sells for here. There is a law against the importation of grain, but the good folk who made the law forgot to prohibit the introduction of wheat products and food stuffs made from corn. Hey! hey! . . . That struck me this morning. There is a fine trade to be done in starch."

°°°°Eugene, watching the old man's face, thought that his friend was light-headed.

°°°°"Come," he said, "do not talk any more, you must rest----" Just then Bianchon came up, and Eugene went down to dinner.

°°°°The two students sat up with him that night, relieving each other in turn. Bianchon brought up his medical books and studied; Eugene wrote letters home to his mother and sisters. Next morning Bianchon thought the symptoms more hopeful, but the patient's condition demanded continual attention, which the two students alone were willing to give--a task impossible to describe in the squeamish phraseology of the epoch. Leeches must be applied to the wasted body, the poultices and hot foot-baths, and other details of the treatment required the physical strength and devotion of the two young men. Mme. de Restaud did not come; but she sent a messenger for the money.

°°°°"I expected she would come herself; but it would have been a pity for her to come, she would have been anxious about me," said the father, and to all appearances he was well content.

°°°°At seven o'clock that evening Therese came with a letter from Delphine.

°°°°"What are you doing, dear friend? I have been loved for a very   little while, and I am neglected already? In the confidences of   heart and heart, I have learned to know your soul--you are too   noble not to be faithful for ever, for you know that love with   all its infinite subtle changes of feeling is never the same.   Once you said, as we were listening to the Prayer in Mose in   Egitto, 'For some it is the monotony of a single note; for   others, it is the infinite of sound.' Remember that I am   expecting you this evening to take me to Mme. de Beauseant's   ball. Every one knows now that the King signed M. d'Ajuda's   marriage-contract this morning, and the poor Vicomtesse knew   nothing of it until two o'clock this afternoon. All Paris will   flock to her house, of course, just as a crowd fills the Place de   Greve to see an execution. It is horrible, is it not, to go out   of curiosity to see if she will hide her anguish, and whether she   will die courageously? I certainly should not go, my friend, if I   had been at her house before; but, of course, she will not   receive society any more after this, and all my efforts would be   in vain. My position is a very unusual one, and besides, I am   going there partly on your account. I am waiting for you. If you   are not beside me in less than two hours, I do not know whether I   could forgive such treason."

°°°°Rastignac took up a pen and wrote:

°°°°"I am waiting till the doctor comes to know if there is any hope   of your father's life. He is lying dangerously ill. I will come   and bring you the news, but I am afraid it may be a sentence of   death. When I come you can decide whether you can go to the   ball.--Yours a thousand times."

°°°°At half-past eight the doctor arrived. He did not take a very hopeful view of the case, but thought that there was no immediate danger. Improvements and relapses might be expected, and the good man's life and reason hung in the balance.

°°°°"It would be better for him to die at once," the doctor said as he took leave.

°°°°Eugene left Goriot to Bianchon's care, and went to carry the sad news to Mme. de Nucingen. Family feeling lingered in her, and this must put an end for the present to her plans of amusement.

°°°°"Tell her to enjoy her evening as if nothing had happened," cried Goriot. He had been lying in a sort of stupor, but he suddenly sat upright as Eugene went out.

°°°°Eugene, half heartbroken, entered Delphine's. Her hair had been dressed; she wore her dancing slippers; she had only to put on her ball-dress; but when the artist is giving the finishing stroke to his creation, the last touches require more time than the whole groundwork of the picture.

°°°°"Why, you are not dressed!" she cried.

°°°°"Madame, your father----"

°°°°"My father again!" she exclaimed, breaking in upon him. "You need not teach me what is due to my father, I have known my father this long while. Not a word, Eugene. I will hear what you have to say when you are dressed. My carriage is waiting, take it, go round to your rooms and dress, Therese has put out everything in readiness for you. Come back as soon as you can; we will talk about my father on the way to Mme. de Beauseant's. We must go early; if we have to wait our turn in a row of carriages, we shall be lucky if we get there by eleven o'clock."

°°°°"Madame----"

°°°°"Quick! not a word!" she cried, darting into her dressing-room for a necklace.

°°°°"Do go, Monsieur Eugene, or you will vex madame," said Therese, hurrying him away; and Eugene was too horror-stricken by this elegant parricide to resist.

°°°°He went to his rooms and dressed, sad, thoughtful, and dispirited. The world of Paris was like an ocean of mud for him just then; and it seemed that whoever set foot in that black mire must needs sink into it up to the chin.

°°°°"Their crimes are paltry," said Eugene to himself. "Vautrin was greater."

°°°°He had seen society in its three great phases--Obedience, Struggle, and Revolt; the Family, the World, and Vautrin; and he hesitated in his choice. Obedience was dull, Revolt impossible, Struggle hazardous. His thoughts wandered back to the home circle. He thought of the quiet uneventful life, the pure happiness of the days spent among those who loved him there. Those loving and beloved beings passed their lives in obedience to the natural laws of the hearth, and in that obedience found a deep and constant serenity, unvexed by torments such as these. Yet, for all his good impulses, he could not bring himself to make profession of the religion of pure souls to Delphine, nor to prescribe the duties of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was capable of stepping over her father's corpse to go to the ball; and within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the courage to leave her to go alone.

°°°°"She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it," he said to himself. Then he turned the doctor's dictum over in his mind; he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of traitorous excuses for Delphine's conduct. She did not know how ill her father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations; and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family life that excuse the apparent offence.

°°°°Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his, and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, "how is my father?"

°°°°"Very dangerously ill," he answered; "if you will grant me a proof of your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way."

°°°°"Very well," she said. "Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice, and don't preach to me. Come."

°°°°They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

°°°°"What is it now?" she asked.

°°°°"I can hear the death-rattle in your father's throat," he said almost angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of Mme. de Restaud's vanity and cruelty, of her father's final act of self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie's golden embroideries. Delphine cried.

°°°°"I shall look frightful," she thought. She dried her tears.

°°°°"I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside," she said aloud.

°°°°"Ah! now you are as I would have you," exclaimed Rastignac.

°°°°The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the Vicomtesse.

°°°°The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

°°°°Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a last audience of one of its sovereigns.

°°°°"I was afraid that you would not come," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°"Madame," he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a reproach, "I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here."

°°°°"Good," she said, and she took his hand. "You are perhaps the only one I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a woman."

°°°°She took Rastignac's arm, and went towards a sofa in the card- room.

°°°°"I want you to go to the Marquis," she said. "Jacques, my footman, will go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one shall bring me word."

°°°°She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

°°°°Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d'Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide, feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave a casket to the student, saying as he did so, "They are all there."

°°°°He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes, and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

°°°°"Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene." He grasped Rastignac's hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him. Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the Vicomtesse's room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey. He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

°°°°"Ah! my friend! . . ." said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid her hand on Rastignac's shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin's uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it in the fire, and watched it burn.

°°°°"They are dancing," she said. "They all came very early; but death will be long in coming. Hush! my friend," and she laid a finger on Rastignac's lips, seeing that he was about to speak. "I shall never see Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o'clock this morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my arrangements; since three o'clock this afternoon I have been busy signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I could send to . . ."

°°°°She broke off.

°°°°"He was sure to be . . ."

°°°°Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are impossible to utter.

°°°°"And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service this evening," she said. "I should like to give you some pledge of friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay," she said, glancing about her, "there is this box that has held my gloves. Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer. Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to you in the Rue d'Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my tears. One last look round first."

°°°°She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and took the student's arm.

°°°°"Let us go!" she said.

°°°°This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene's arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her husband's eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten Rastignac's sad thougths; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

°°°°"Come," she said, "I must not deprive you of a pleasure."

°°°°Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover's feet the homage she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move henceforth.

°°°°"What do you think of Nasie?" she asked him.

°°°°"She has discounted everything, even her own father's death," said Rastignac.

°°°°Towards four o'clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M. de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, "It is a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among us."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an exclamation broke from her.

°°°°"I saw how it was, Clara," said Mme. de Langeais. "You are going from among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you have heard me, until we have understood each other."

°°°°She took her friend's arm, and they went together into the next room. There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

°°°°"I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself. You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words. One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night; do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night, Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail, I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?"

°°°°"Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!" called the Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was waiting there.

°°°°The student knelt to kiss his cousin's hand.

°°°°"Good-bye, Antoinette!" said Mme. de Beauseant. "May you be happy."--She turned to the student. "You are young," she said; "you have some beliefs still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of this world."

°°°°It was nearly five o'clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

°°°°"There is no hope for poor Father Goriot," said Bianchon, as Rastignac came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then he turned to his friend. "Dear fellow, you are content with the modest career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world, nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden away under the covering of gems and gold."

°°°°At two o'clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

°°°°"Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours," he said; "but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result, nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he had not a farthing of his own. What have you?"

°°°°"I have twenty francs left," said Rastignac; "but I will take them to the roulette table, I shall be sure to win."

°°°°"And if you lose?"

°°°°"Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for money."

°°°°"And suppose they refuse?" Bianchon retorted. "The most pressing thing just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides, Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him till I come back."

°°°°The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying. Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot's face, so livid, distorted, and feeble.

°°°°"How are you, papa?" he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came into his eyes.

°°°°"Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?"

°°°°"No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the smell was something horrible.

°°°°"MON DIEU!" said Rastignac. "To think of those daughters of his."

°°°°"One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this," said the house student, pointing to a large white jar. "If he begins to groan, and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon, a pupil of Gall's came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised; whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here," said Bianchon, touching the back of the head, "very strange things have been known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives."

°°°°"Did they enjoy themselves?" It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had recognized Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters," said Bianchon. "Scores of times last night he said to me, 'They are dancing now! She has her dress.' He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take it, calling with that tone in his voice, for 'Delphine! my little Delphine! and Nasie!' Upon my word," said the medical student, "it was enough to make any one burst out crying."

°°°°"Delphine," said the old man, "she is there, isn't she? I knew she was there," and his eyes sought the door.

°°°°"I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready," said Bianchon. "They ought to go on at once."

°°°°Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was shocking to see.

°°°°"Noble natures cannot dwell in this world," he said; "Mme de Beauseant has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and feelings?"

°°°°Pictures of yesterday's ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

°°°°"I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to the base of the spine, and send round for us."

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," exclaimed Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view," said the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

°°°°"So!" said Eugene. "Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old man for his own sake?"

°°°°"You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning," returned Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. "Doctors who have seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my dear fellow, I can see the patient still."

°°°°He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

°°°°"Ah! dear boy, is that you?" said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

°°°°"Do you feel better?" asked the law student, taking his hand.

°°°°"Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man here, who has burned up all my bark fuel."

°°°°"I can hear Christophe coming upstairs," Eugene answered. "He is bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you."

°°°°"Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!) Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left now."

°°°°Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man's ear, "I will pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble."

°°°°"My daughters told you that they were coming, didn't they, Christophe? Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once again before I die. Tell them that, but don't alarm them more than you can help."

°°°°Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

°°°°"They will come before long," the old man went on. "I know them so well. My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die; and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning. 'Good-morning, papa!' they used to say, and I would take them on my knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they loved me with all their hearts. MON DIEU! why could they not always be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah! forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for you have used me to endure pain. MON DIEU! if only I held their hands in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. HE will see them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked. They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this is! what pain this is! . . . ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they MUST have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make millions. (Oh! this is agony!)"

°°°°Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength to endure the pain.

°°°°"If they were here, I should not complain," he said. "So why should I complain now?"

°°°°He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

°°°°"First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse," he said; "but she and her husband were so busy that I couldn't get to speak to her. When I insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and went on like this: 'M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important business, when it is all finished she can go.' The gentleman looked angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said, 'Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.' As for Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, 'Ah yes, but madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It will be time enough then to tell her bad news!' I begged and I prayed, but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was out."

°°°°"To think that neither of his daughters should come!" exclaimed Rastignac. "I will write to them both."

°°°°"Neither of them!" cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. "They are busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not. Not until you are dying do you know your children. . . . Oh! my friend, do not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it. No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it."

°°°°The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

°°°°"Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and THEY would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money? If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God! who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh! this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was 'My kind father' here, 'My dear father' there. There was always a place for me at their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought. How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening parties. In fact, they acknowleged me their father; publicly they owned that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see, and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence, but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law's ear, 'Who may that gentleman be?'--'The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very rich.'--'The devil, e is!' they would say, and look again at me with the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one thing I did learn thoroughly --I knew that I was not wanted here on earth.

°°°°"The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that was how they both turned me out of the house.

°°°°"Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured; Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to- day? Have I not more than expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

°°°°"Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see, my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! MON DIEU! These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie! Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to ruin if a father's rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see. The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them, my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know what it means to trample on a father's corpse? There is a God in heaven who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

°°°°"Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss; one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault. I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so. It is no one's affair but mine; man's justice and God's justice have nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly; I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch, I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through love.

°°°°"My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should be present at their father's deathbed; the law is on my side. It would only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit, as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine, mine!" and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak spoke of menace.

°°°°"There, there, dear father," said Eugene, "lie down again; I will write to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them myself, if they do not come before."

°°°°"If they do not come?" repeated the old man, sobbing. "Why, I shall be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life; they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one. . . . Go to them; just tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud as I do now, 'Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who has been so kind to you is lying ill!'--Not a sound; no one comes! Then am I do die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them. I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all, my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh? . . . What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister. . . . Eugene, you are my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me nothing but my heart."

°°°°"Christophe!" shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man moaned, and by his cries, "go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to you."

°°°°"Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military, anything and everything, but make them come!" He looked at Eugene, and a last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. "Go to the authorities, to the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!"

°°°°"But you have cursed them."

°°°°"Who said that!" said the old man in dull amazement. "You know quite well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I can see them. . . . Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay their hands there, I think I should get better. . . . MON DIEU! who will recover their money for them when I am gone? . . . I will manufacture vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes."

°°°°"Here is something to drink," said Eugene, supporting the dying man on his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot's lips.

°°°°"How you must love your own father and mother!" said the old man, and grasped the student's hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling grasp. "I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that has been my life for the last ten years. . . . I have no daughters, my sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl's mind and contaminates her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid them! . . . Kill them! . . . Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They have murdered me between them! . . . Death or my daughters! . . . Ah! it is too late, I am dying, and they are not here! . . . Dying without them! . . . Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----"

°°°°"Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest; don't worry yourself, don't think."

°°°°"I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!"

°°°°"You SHALL see them."

°°°°"Really?" cried the old man, still wandering. "Oh! shall I see them; I shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my fingers . . . their hair . . ."

°°°°His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his daughters' hair.

°°°°"My blessing on them . . ." he said, making an effort, "my blessing . . ."

°°°°His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

°°°°"I met Christophe," he said; "he is gone for your cab."

°°°°Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath had grown.

°°°°"He will not get over this, I am sure," said Bianchon. He felt the old man's pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

°°°°"The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be better for him to die."

°°°°"Ah! my word, it would!"

°°°°"What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death."

°°°°"Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard. . . . There is a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

°°°°"We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come from?"

°°°°Rastignac took out his watch.

°°°°"There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall have to pay the cabman when I get home again."

°°°°Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder. The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de Restaud's house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could see no one.

°°°°"But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying," Rastignac told the man.

°°°°"The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----"

°°°°"If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at once."

°°°°The man went out.

°°°°Eugene waited for a long while. "Perhaps her father is dying at this moment," he thought.

°°°°Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte," said Rastignac, "M. Goriot, your father-in- law, is lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter. He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----"

°°°°"I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are aware," the Count answered coolly. "His character has been compromised in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much more important matters to think about than the things that fools and chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a few seconds; it lies entirely with her----"

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct; you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her, and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I ask."

°°°°"You can tell her yourself," the Count answered, impressed by the thrill of indignation in Eugene's voice.

°°°°The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her. Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to speak.

°°°°"I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all he would forgive me. . . . I did not think there was such torture in the world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not give way as long as I live," she said, turning to her husband. "I am a mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of appearances!" she cried aloud in her despair.

°°°°Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess' life. M. de Restaud's manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in bed.

°°°°"Poor dear Eugene, I am ill," she said. "I caught cold after the ball, and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come."

°°°°"If you were at death's door," Eugene broke in, "you must be carried somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer."

°°°°"Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just as you wish. As for HIM, he would die of grief I know if I went out to see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as I have seen the doctor.--Ah!" she cried out, "you are not wearing your watch, how is that?"

°°°°Eugene reddened.

°°°°"Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it. . . . Oh! it would be very wrong of you!"

°°°°The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, "Do you want to know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch has been pawned, for I had nothing either."

°°°°Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

°°°°"I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why, I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before you.--Therese," she called to the waiting-woman, "ask M. de Nucingen to come upstairs at once and speak to me."

°°°°Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve; he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine's purse for money, so as to dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse. He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient's back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of science, and it was tried in vain.

°°°°"Can you feel them?" asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of Rastignac, and answered, "They are coming, are they not?"

°°°°"There is hope yet," said the surgeon; "he can speak."

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene, "Delphine is coming."

°°°°"Oh! that is nothing!" said Bianchon; "he has been talking about his daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for water, they say----"

°°°°"We may as well give up," said the physician, addressing the surgeon. "Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless."

°°°°Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his loathsome bed.

°°°°"But the sheets ought to be changed," added the physician. "Even if there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come back again, Bianchon," he said, turning to the medical student. "If he complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm."

°°°°He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

°°°°"Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy," said Bianchon, as soon as they were alone; "we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help us to make the bed."

°°°°Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a customer.

°°°°"My dear Monsieur Eugene," she said, when he had spoken, "you know quite as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes, you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you; altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make."

°°°°Eugene hurried up to Goriot's room.

°°°°"Bianchon," he cried, "the money or the watch?"

°°°°"There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money."

°°°°Rastignac hurried downstairs.

°°°°"Here, madame" he said in disgust, "let us square accounts. M. Goriot will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----"

°°°°"Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman," she said, counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

°°°°"Let us get this over," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen."

°°°°"You won't forget Sylvie," said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene's ear; "she has been sitting up these two nights."

°°°°As soon as Eugene's back was turned, the old woman hurried after her handmaid.

°°°°"Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number 7. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse," she said in Sylvie's ear.

°°°°Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear the elderly economist.

°°°°"Quick," said Bianchon, "let us change his shirt. Hold him upright."

°°°°Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

°°°°"Ah! yes!" cried Bianchon. "It is the little locket and the chain made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on the chimney-piece."

°°°°Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded golden hair--Mme. Goriot's hair, no doubt. He read the name on the little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other. It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes, the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students, that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a shrill cry of delight.

°°°°"Nasie! Fifine!"

°°°°"There is life in him yet," said Bianchon.

°°°°"What does he go on living for?" said Sylvie.

°°°°"To suffer," answered Rastignac.

°°°°Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the students' heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair, they heard a faint whisper:

°°°°"Ah! my angels!"

°°°°Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which fled forth with them as they left his lips.

°°°°"Poor dear!" cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most ghastly and involuntary of lies.

°°°°The father's last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

°°°°"He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last, that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the throat. The brain must be completely suffused."

°°°°As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman hastened up, panting for breath.

°°°°"She has come too late," said Rastignac.

°°°°But it was not Delphine; it was Therese, her waiting-woman, who stood in the doorway.

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene," she said, "monsieur and madame have had a terrible scene about some money that Madame (poor thing!) wanted for her father. She fainted, and the doctor came, and she had to be bled, calling out all the while, 'My father is dying; I want to see papa!' It was heartbreaking to hear her----"

°°°°"That will do, Therese. If she came now, it would be trouble thrown away. M. Goriot cannot recognize any one now."

°°°°"Poor, dear gentleman, is he as bad at that?" said Therese.

°°°°"You don't want me now, I must go and look after my dinner; it is half-past four," remarked Sylvie. The next instant she all but collided with Mme. de Restaud on the landing outside.

°°°°There was something awful and appalling in the sudden apparition of the Countess. She saw the bed of death by the dim light of the single candle, and her tears flowed at the sight of her father's passive features, from which the life had almost ebbed. Bianchon with thoughtful tact left the room.

°°°°"I could not escape soon enough," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°The student bowed sadly in reply. Mme. de Restaud took her father's hand and kissed it.

°°°°"Forgive me, father! You used to say that my voice would call you back from the grave; ah! come back for one moment to bless your penitent daughter. Do you hear me? Oh! this is fearful! No one on earth will ever bless me henceforth; every one hates me; no one loves me but you in all the world. My own children will hate me. Take me with you, father; I will love you, I will take care of you. He does not hear me . . . I am mad . . ."

°°°°She fell on her knees, and gazed wildly at the human wreck before her.

°°°°"My cup of misery is full," she said, turning her eyes upon Eugene. "M. de Trailles has fled, leaving enormous debts behind him, and I have found out that he was deceiving me. My husband will never forgive me, and I have left my fortune in his hands. I have lost all my illusions. Alas! I have forsaken the one heart that loved me (she pointed to her father as she spoke), and for whom? I have held his kindness cheap, and slighted his affection; many and many a time I have given him pain, ungrateful wretch that I am!"

°°°°"He knew it," said Rastignac.

°°°°Just then Goriot's eyelids unclosed; it was only a muscular contraction, but the Countess' sudden start of reviving hope was no less dreadful than the dying eyes.

°°°°"Is it possible that he can hear me?" cried the Countess. "No," she answered herself, and sat down beside the bed. As Mme. de Restaud seemed to wish to sit by her father, Eugene went down to take a little food. The boarders were already assembled.

°°°°"Well," remarked the painter, as he joined them, "it seems that there is to be a death-orama upstairs."

°°°°"Charles, I think you might find something less painful to joke about," said Eugene.

°°°°"So we may not laugh here?" returned the painter. "What harm does it do? Bianchon said that the old man was quite insensible."

°°°°"Well, then," said the employe from the Museum, "he will die as he has lived."

°°°°"My father is dead!" shrieked the Countess.

°°°°The terrible cry brought Sylvie, Rastignac, and Bianchon; Mme. de Restaud had fainted away. When she recovered they carried her downstairs, and put her into the cab that stood waiting at the door. Eugene sent Therese with her, and bade the maid take the Countess to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Bianchon came down to them.

°°°°"Yes, he is dead," he said.

°°°°"Come, sit down to dinner, gentlemen," said Mme. Vauquer, "or the soup will be cold."

°°°°The two students sat down together.

°°°°"What is the next thing to be done?" Eugene asked of Bianchon.

°°°°"I have closed his eyes and composed his limbs," said Bianchon. "When the certificate has been officially registered at the Mayor's office, we will sew him in his winding sheet and bury him somewhere. What do you think we ought to do?"

°°°°"He will not smell at his bread like this any more," said the painter, mimicking the old man's little trick.

°°°°"Oh, hang it all!" cried the tutor, "let Father Goriot drop, and let us have something else for a change. He is a standing dish, and we have had him with every sauce this hour or more. It is one of the privileges of the good city of Paris that anybody may be born, or live, or die there without attracting any attention whatsoever. Let us profit by the advantages of civilization. There are fifty or sixty deaths every day; if you have a mind to do it, you can sit down at any time and wail over whole hecatombs of dead in Paris. Father Goriot has gone off the hooks, has he? So much the better for him. If you venerate his memory, keep it to yourselves, and let the rest of us feed in peace."

°°°°"Oh, to be sure," said the widow, "it is all the better for him that he is dead. It looks as though he had had trouble enough, poor soul, while he was alive."

°°°°And this was all the funeral oration delivered over him who had been for Eugene the type and embodiment of Fatherhood.

°°°°The fifteen lodgers began to talk as usual. When Bianchon and Eugene had satisfied their hunger, the rattle of spoons and forks, the boisterous conversation, the expressions on the faces that bespoke various degrees of want of feeling, gluttony, or indifference, everything about them made them shiver with loathing. They went out to find a priest to watch that night with the dead. It was necessary to measure their last pious cares by the scanty sum of money that remained. Before nine o'clock that evening the body was laid out on the bare sacking of the bedstead in the desolate room; a lighted candle stood on either side, and the priest watched at the foot. Rastignac made inquiries of this latter as to the expenses of the funeral, and wrote to the Baron de Nucingen and the Comte de Restaud, entreating both gentlemen to authorize their man of business to defray the charges of laying their father-in-law in the grave. He sent Christophe with the letters; then he went to bed, tired out, and slept.

°°°°Next day Bianchon and Rastignac were obliged to take the certificate to the registrar themselves, and by twelve o'clock the formalities were completed. Two hours went by, no word came from the Count nor from the Baron; nobody appeared to act for them, and Rastignac had already been obliged to pay the priest. Sylvie asked ten francs for sewing the old man in his winding- sheet and making him ready for the grave, and Eugene and Bianchon calculated that they had scarcely sufficient to pay for the funeral, if nothing was forthcoming from the dead man's family. So it was the medical student who laid him in a pauper's coffin, despatched from Bianchon's hospital, whence he obtained it at a cheaper rate.

°°°°"Let us play those wretches a trick," said he. "Go to the cemetery, buy a grave for five years at Pere-Lachaise, and arrange with the Church and the undertaker to have a third-class funeral. If the daughters and their husbands decline to repay you, you can carve this on the headstone--'HERE LIES M. GORIOT, FATHER OF THE COMTESSE DE RESTAUD AND THE BARONNE DE NUCINGEN, INTERRED AT THE EXPENSE OF TWO STUDENTS.' "

°°°°Eugene took part of his friend's advice, but only after he had gone in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

°°°°"Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their father, and are in deep grief over their loss."

°°°°Eugene's Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was impossible to reach Delphine.

°°°°"Sell some of your ornaments," he wrote hastily in the porter's room, "so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place."

°°°°He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the lodging-house about three o'clock. In spite of himself, the tears came into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth, was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs. A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

°°°°Bianchon's duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he had made for the burial service. The house student's note told Rastignac that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading Bianchon's scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot's two daughters in Mme. Vauquer's hands.

°°°°"How dared you take it?" he asked.

°°°°"Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?" retorted Sylvie. "It is gold."

°°°°"Of course it shall!" Eugene answered indignantly; "he shall at any rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with him."

°°°°When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man's breast the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were innocent little maidens, before they began "to think for themselves," as he had moaned out in his agony.

°°°°Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker's men were the only followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. When the coffin had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked round in vain for Goriot's two daughters or their husbands. Christophe was his only fellow- mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe's hand. He could not utter a word just then.

°°°°"Yes, Monsieur Eugene," said Christophe, "he was a good and worthy man, who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any harm, and gave nobody any trouble."

°°°°The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

°°°°The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the Libera nos and the De profundis. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with Eugene and Christophe.

°°°°"There is no one else to follow us," remarked the priest, "so we may as well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five."

°°°°But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen, arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o'clock Goriot's coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters' servants standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that fell on Father Goriot's grave, Eugene Rastignac's youth ended. He folded his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

°°°°He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste of its honey, and said magniloquently:

°°°°"Henceforth there is war between us."

°°°°And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine with Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°ADDENDUM

°°°°The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

°°°°Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d'   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Secrets of a Princess   Beatrix

°°°°Beauseant, Marquis   An Episode under the Terror

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomte de   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomtesse de   The Deserted Woman   Albert Savarus

°°°°Bianchon, Horace   The Atheist's Mass   Cesar Birotteau   The Commission in Lunacy   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   A Bachelor's Establishment   The Secrets of a Princess   The Government Clerks   Pierrette   A Study of Woman   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Honorine   The Seamy Side of History   The Magic Skin   A Second Home   A Prince of Bohemia   Letters of Two Brides   The Muse of the Department   The Imaginary Mistress   The Middle Classes   Cousin Betty   The Country Parson In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:   Another Study of Woman   La Grande Breteche

°°°°Bibi-Lupin (chief of secret police, called himself Gondureau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de   Sarrasine

°°°°Collin, Jacques   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Derville   Gobseck   A Start in Life   The Gondreville Mystery   Colonel Chabert   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Franchessini, Colonel   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Galathionne, Princess   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van   Gobseck   Cesar Birotteau   The Government Clerks   The Unconscious Humoriists

°°°°Jacques (M. de Beauseant's butler)   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Langeais, Duchesse Antoinette de   The Thirteen

°°°°Marsay, Henri de   The Thirteen   The Unconscious Humorists   Another Study of Woman   The Lily of the Valley   Jealousies of a Country Town   Ursule Mirouet   A Marriage Settlement   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Letters of Two Brides   The Ball at Sceaux   Modest Mignon   The Secrets of a Princess   The Gondreville Mystery   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Maurice (de Restaud's valet)   Gobseck

°°°°Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de   The Thirteen   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Another Study of Woman   Pierrette   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Nucingen, Baron Frederic de   The Firm of Nucingen   Pierrette   Cesar Birotteau   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Another Study of Woman   The Secrets of a Princess   A Man of Business   Cousin Betty   The Muse of the Department   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de   The Thirteen   Eugenie Grandet   Cesar Birotteau   Melmoth Reconciled   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   The Commission in Lunacy   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Modeste Mignon   The Firm of Nucingen   Another Study of Woman   A Daughter of Eve   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Poiret   The Government Clerks   A Start in Life   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Poiret, Madame (nee Christine-Michelle Michonneau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de (Eugene's parents)   Lost Illusions

°°°°Rastignac, Eugene de   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Ball at Sceaux   The Interdiction   A Study of Woman   Another Study of Woman   The Magic Skin   The Secrets of a Princess   A Daughter of Eve   The Gondreville Mystery   The Firm of Nucingen   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Rastignac, Laure-Rose and Agathe de   Lost Illusions   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Rastignac, Monseigneur Gabriel de   The Country Parson   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Restaud, Comte de   Gobseck

°°°°Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de   Gobseck

°°°°Selerier   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Taillefer, Jean-Frederic   The Firm of Nucingen   The Magic Skin   The Red Inn

°°°°Taillefer, Victorine   The Red Inn

°°°°Therese   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Tissot, Pierre-Francois   A Prince of Bohemia

°°°°Trailles, Comte Maxime de   Cesar Birotteau   Gobseck   Ursule Mirouet   A Man of Business   The Member for Arcis   The Secrets of a Princess   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   Beatrix   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°End

°°°°Eugenie Grandet

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Maria.

°°°°May your name, that of one whose portrait is the noblest ornament

°°°°of this work, lie on its opening pages like a branch of sacred

°°°°box, taken from an unknown tree, but sanctified by religion, and

°°°°kept ever fresh and green by pious hands to bless the house.De Balzac.

°°°°EUGENIE GRANDET

°°°°I

°°°°There are houses in certain provincial towns whose aspect inspiresmelancholy, akin to that called forth by sombre cloisters, drearymoorlands, or the desolation of ruins. Within these houses there is,perhaps, the silence of the cloister, the barrenness of moors, theskeleton of ruins; life and movement are so stagnant there that astranger might think them uninhabited, were it not that he encounterssuddenly the pale, cold glance of a motionless person, whose half-monastic face peers beyond the window-casing at the sound of anunaccustomed step.

°°°°Such elements of sadness formed the physiognomy, as it were, of adwelling-house in Saumur which stands at the end of the steep streetleading to the chateau in the upper part of the town. This street--nowlittle frequented, hot in summer, cold in winter, dark in certainsections--is remarkable for the resonance of its little pebblypavement, always clean and dry, for the narrowness of its tortuousroad-way, for the peaceful stillness of its houses, which belong tothe Old town and are over-topped by the ramparts. Houses threecenturies old are still solid, though built of wood, and their diversaspects add to the originality which commends this portion of Saumurto the attention of artists and antiquaries.

°°°°It is difficult to pass these houses without admiring the enormousoaken beams, their ends carved into fantastic figures, which crownwith a black bas-relief the lower floor of most of them. In one placethese transverse timbers are covered with slate and mark a bluish linealong the frail wall of a dwelling covered by a roof /en colombage/which bends beneath the weight of years, and whose rotting shinglesare twisted by the alternate action of sun and rain. In another placeblackened, worn-out window-sills, with delicate sculptures nowscarcely discernible, seem too weak to bear the brown clay pots fromwhich springs the heart's-ease or the rose-bush of some poor working-woman. Farther on are doors studded with enormous nails, where thegenius of our forefathers has traced domestic hieroglyphics, of whichthe meaning is now lost forever. Here a Protestant attested hisbelief; there a Leaguer cursed Henry IV.; elsewhere some bourgeois hascarved the insignia of his /noblesse de cloches/, symbols of his long-forgotten magisterial glory. The whole history of France is there.Next to a tottering house with roughly plastered walls, where anartisan enshrines his tools, rises the mansion of a country gentleman,on the stone arch of which above the door vestiges of armorialbearings may still be seen, battered by the many revolutions that haveshaken France since 1789. In this hilly street the ground-floors ofthe merchants are neither shops nor warehouses; lovers of the MiddleAges will here find the /ouvrouere/ of our forefathers in all itsnaive simplicity. These low rooms, which have no shop-frontage, noshow-windows, in fact no glass at all, are deep and dark and withoutinterior or exterior decoration. Their doors open in two parts, eachroughly iron-bound; the upper half is fastened back within the room,the lower half, fitted with a spring-bell, swings continually to andfro. Air and light reach the damp den within, either through the upperhalf of the door, or through an open space between the ceiling and alow front wall, breast-high, which is closed by solid shutters thatare taken down every morning, put up every evening, and held in placeby heavy iron bars.

°°°°This wall serves as a counter for the merchandise. No delusive displayis there; only samples of the business, whatever it may chance to be,--such, for instance, as three or four tubs full of codfish and salt,a few bundles of sail-cloth, cordage, copper wire hanging from thejoists above, iron hoops for casks ranged along the wall, or a fewpieces of cloth upon the shelves. Enter. A neat girl, glowing withyouth, wearing a white kerchief, her arms red and bare, drops herknitting and calls her father or her mother, one of whom comes forwardand sells you what you want, phlegmatically, civilly, or arrogantly,according to his or her individual character, whether it be a matterof two sous' or twenty thousand francs' worth of merchandise. You maysee a cooper, for instance, sitting in his doorway and twirling histhumbs as he talks with a neighbor. To all appearance he owns nothingmore than a few miserable boat-ribs and two or three bundles of laths;but below in the port his teeming wood-yard supplies all the cooperagetrade of Anjou. He knows to a plank how many casks are needed if thevintage is good. A hot season makes him rich, a rainy season ruinshim; in a single morning puncheons worth eleven francs have been knownto drop to six. In this country, as in Touraine, atmosphericvicissitudes control commercial life. Wine-growers, proprietors, wood-merchants, coopers, inn-keepers, mariners, all keep watch of the sun.They tremble when they go to bed lest they should hear in the morningof a frost in the night; they dread rain, wind, drought, and wantwater, heat, and clouds to suit their fancy. A perpetual duel goes onbetween the heavens and their terrestrial interests. The barometersmooths, saddens, or makes merry their countenances, turn and turnabout. From end to end of this street, formerly the Grand'Rue deSaumur, the words: "Here's golden weather," are passed from door todoor; or each man calls to his neighbor: "It rains louis," knowingwell what a sunbeam or the opportune rainfall is bringing him.On Saturdays after midday, in the fine season, not one sou's worth ofmerchandise can be bought from these worthy traders. Each has hisvineyard, his enclosure of fields, and all spend two days in thecountry. This being foreseen, and purchases, sales, and profitsprovided for, the merchants have ten or twelve hours to spend inparties of pleasure, in making observations, in criticisms, and incontinual spying. A housewife cannot buy a partridge without theneighbors asking the husband if it were cooked to a turn. A young girlnever puts her head near a window that she is not seen by idlinggroups in the street. Consciences are held in the light; and thehouses, dark, silent, impenetrable as they seem, hide no mysteries.Life is almost wholly in the open air; every household sits at its ownthreshold, breakfasts, dines, and quarrels there. No one can passalong the street without being examined; in fact formerly, when astranger entered a provincial town he was bantered and made game offrom door to door. From this came many good stories, and the nickname/copieux/, which was applied to the inhabitants of Angers, whoexcelled in such urban sarcasms.

°°°°The ancient mansions of the old town of Saumur are at the top of thishilly street, and were formerly occupied by the nobility of theneighborhood. The melancholy dwelling where the events of thefollowing history took place is one of these mansions,--venerablerelics of a century in which men and things bore the characteristicsof simplicity which French manners and customs are losing day by day.Follow the windings of the picturesque thoroughfare, whoseirregularities awaken recollections that plunge the mind mechanicallyinto reverie, and you will see a somewhat dark recess, in the centreof which is hidden the door of the house of Monsieur Grandet. It isimpossible to understand the force of this provincial expression--thehouse of Monsieur Grandet--without giving the biography of MonsieurGrandet himself.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet enjoyed a reputation in Saumur whose causes andeffects can never be fully understood by those who have not, at onetime or another, lived in the provinces. In 1789 Monsieur Grandet--still called by certain persons le Pere Grandet, though the number ofsuch old persons has perceptibly diminished--was a master-cooper, ableto read, write, and cipher. At the period when the French Republicoffered for sale the church property in the arrondissement of Saumur,the cooper, then forty years of age, had just married the daughter ofa rich wood-merchant. Supplied with the ready money of his own fortuneand his wife's /dot/, in all about two thousand louis-d'or, Grandetwent to the newly established "district," where, with the help of twohundred double louis given by his father-in-law to the surlyrepublican who presided over the sales of the national domain, heobtained for a song, legally if not legitimately, one of the finestvineyards in the arrondissement, an old abbey, and several farms. Theinhabitants of Saumur were so little revolutionary that they thoughtPere Grandet a bold man, a republican, and a patriot with a mind opento all the new ideas; though in point of fact it was open only tovineyards. He was appointed a member of the administration of Saumur,and his pacific influence made itself felt politically andcommercially. Politically, he protected the ci-devant nobles, andprevented, to the extent of his power, the sale of the lands andproperty of the /emigres/; commercially, he furnished the Republicanarmies with two or three thousand puncheons of white wine, and tookhis pay in splendid fields belonging to a community of women whoselands had been reserved for the last lot.

°°°°Under the Consulate Grandet became mayor, governed wisely, andharvested still better pickings. Under the Empire he was calledMonsieur Grandet. Napoleon, however, did not like republicans, andsuperseded Monsieur Grandet (who was supposed to have worn thePhrygian cap) by a man of his own surroundings, a future baron of theEmpire. Monsieur Grandet quitted office without regret. He hadconstructed in the interests of the town certain fine roads which ledto his own property; his house and lands, very advantageouslyassessed, paid moderate taxes; and since the registration of hisvarious estates, the vineyards, thanks to his constant care, hadbecome the "head of the country,"--a local term used to denote thosethat produced the finest quality of wine. He might have asked for thecross of the Legion of honor.

°°°°This event occurred in 1806. Monsieur Grandet was then fifty-sevenyears of age, his wife thirty-six, and an only daughter, the fruit oftheir legitimate love, was ten years old. Monsieur Grandet, whomProvidence no doubt desired to compensate for the loss of hismunicipal honors, inherited three fortunes in the course of this year,--that of Madame de la Gaudiniere, born de la Bertelliere, the motherof Madame Grandet; that of old Monsieur de la Bertelliere, hergrandfather; and, lastly, that of Madame Gentillet, her grandmother onthe mother's side: three inheritances, whose amount was not known toany one. The avarice of the deceased persons was so keen that for along time they had hoarded their money for the pleasure of secretlylooking at it. Old Monsieur de la Bertelliere called an investment anextravagance, and thought he got better interest from the sight of hisgold than from the profits of usury. The inhabitants of Saumurconsequently estimated his savings according to "the revenues of thesun's wealth," as they said.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet thus obtained that modern title of nobility which ourmania for equality can never rub out. He became the most imposingpersonage in the arrondissement. He worked a hundred acres ofvineyard, which in fruitful years yielded seven or eight hundredhogsheads of wine. He owned thirteen farms, an old abbey, whosewindows and arches he had walled up for the sake of economy,--ameasure which preserved them,--also a hundred and twenty-seven acresof meadow-land, where three thousand poplars, planted in 1793, grewand flourished; and finally, the house in which he lived. Such was hisvisible estate; as to his other property, only two persons could giveeven a vague guess at its value: one was Monsieur Cruchot, a notaryemployed in the usurious investments of Monsieur Grandet; the otherwas Monsieur des Grassins, the richest banker in Saumur, in whoseprofits Grandet had a certain covenanted and secret share.Although old Cruchot and Monsieur des Grassins were both gifted withthe deep discretion which wealth and trust beget in the provinces,they publicly testified so much respect to Monsieur Grandet thatobservers estimated the amount of his property by the obsequiousattention which they bestowed upon him. In all Saumur there was no onenot persuaded that Monsieur Grandet had a private treasure, somehiding-place full of louis, where he nightly took ineffable delight ingazing upon great masses of gold. Avaricious people gathered proof ofthis when they looked at the eyes of the good man, to which the yellowmetal seemed to have conveyed its tints. The glance of a manaccustomed to draw enormous interest from his capital acquires, likethat of the libertine, the gambler, or the sycophant, certainindefinable habits,--furtive, eager, mysterious movements, which neverescape the notice of his co-religionists. This secret language is in acertain way the freemasonry of the passions. Monsieur Grandet inspiredthe respectful esteem due to one who owed no man anything, who,skilful cooper and experienced wine-grower that he was, guessed withthe precision of an astronomer whether he ought to manufacture athousand puncheons for his vintage, or only five hundred, who neverfailed in any speculation, and always had casks for sale when caskswere worth more than the commodity that filled them, who could storehis whole vintage in his cellars and bide his time to put thepuncheons on the market at two hundred francs, when the littleproprietors had been forced to sell theirs for five louis. His famousvintage of 1811, judiciously stored and slowly disposed of, broughthim in more than two hundred and forty thousand francs.

°°°°Financially speaking, Monsieur Grandet was something between a tigerand a boa-constrictor. He could crouch and lie low, watch his prey along while, spring upon it, open his jaws, swallow a mass of louis,and then rest tranquilly like a snake in process of digestion,impassible, methodical, and cold. No one saw him pass without afeeling of admiration mingled with respect and fear; had not every manin Saumur felt the rending of those polished steel claws? For thisone, Maitre Cruchot had procured the money required for the purchaseof a domain, but at eleven per cent. For that one, Monsieur desGrassins discounted bills of exchange, but at a frightful deduction ofinterest. Few days ever passed that Monsieur Grandet's name was notmentioned either in the markets or in social conversations at theevening gatherings. To some the fortune of the old wine-grower was anobject of patriotic pride. More than one merchant, more than oneinnkeeper, said to strangers with a certain complacency: "Monsieur, wehave two or three millionaire establishments; but as for MonsieurGrandet, he does not himself know how much he is worth."

°°°°In 1816 the best reckoners in Saumur estimated the landed property ofthe worthy man at nearly four millions; but as, on an average, he hadmade yearly, from 1793 to 1817, a hundred thousand francs out of thatproperty, it was fair to presume that he possessed in actual money asum nearly equal to the value of his estate. So that when, after agame of boston or an evening discussion on the matter of vines, thetalk fell upon Monsieur Grandet, knowing people said: "Le PereGrandet? le Pere Grandet must have at least five or six millions.""You are cleverer than I am; I have never been able to find out theamount," answered Monsieur Cruchot or Monsieur des Grassins, wheneither chanced to overhear the remark.

°°°°If some Parisian mentioned Rothschild or Monsieur Lafitte, the peopleof Saumur asked if he were as rich as Monsieur Grandet. When theParisian, with a smile, tossed them a disdainful affirmative, theylooked at each other and shook their heads with an incredulous air. Solarge a fortune covered with a golden mantle all the actions of thisman. If in early days some peculiarities of his life gave occasion forlaughter or ridicule, laughter and ridicule had long since died away.His least important actions had the authority of results repeatedlyshown. His speech, his clothing, his gestures, the blinking of hiseyes, were law to the country-side, where every one, after studyinghim as a naturalist studies the result of instinct in the loweranimals, had come to understand the deep mute wisdom of his slightestactions.

°°°°"It will be a hard winter," said one; "Pere Grandet has put on his furgloves."

°°°°"Pere Grandet is buying quantities of staves; there will be plenty ofwine this year."

°°°°Monsieur Grandet never bought either bread or meat. His farmerssupplied him weekly with a sufficiency of capons, chickens, eggs,butter, and his tithe of wheat. He owned a mill; and the tenant wasbound, over and above his rent, to take a certain quantity of grainand return him the flour and bran. La Grande Nanon, his only servant,though she was no longer young, baked the bread of the householdherself every Saturday. Monsieur Grandet arranged with kitchen-gardeners who were his tenants to supply him with vegetables. As tofruits, he gathered such quantities that he sold the greater part inthe market. His fire-wood was cut from his own hedgerows or taken fromthe half-rotten old sheds which he built at the corners of his fields,and whose planks the farmers carted into town for him, all cut up, andobligingly stacked in his wood-house, receiving in return his thanks.His only known expenditures were for the consecrated bread, theclothing of his wife and daughter, the hire of their chairs in church,the wages of la Grand Nanon, the tinning of the saucepans, lights,taxes, repairs on his buildings, and the costs of his variousindustries. He had six hundred acres of woodland, lately purchased,which he induced a neighbor's keeper to watch, under the promise of anindemnity. After the acquisition of this property he ate game for thefirst time.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet's manners were very simple. He spoke little. Heusually expressed his meaning by short sententious phrases uttered ina soft voice. After the Revolution, the epoch at which he first cameinto notice, the good man stuttered in a wearisome way as soon as hewas required to speak at length or to maintain an argument. Thisstammering, the incoherence of his language, the flux of words inwhich he drowned his thought, his apparent lack of logic, attributedto defects of education, were in reality assumed, and will besufficiently explained by certain events in the following history.Four sentences, precise as algebraic formulas, sufficed him usually tograsp and solve all difficulties of life and commerce: "I don't know;I cannot; I will not; I will see about it." He never said yes, or no,and never committed himself to writing. If people talked to him helistened coldly, holding his chin in his right hand and resting hisright elbow in the back of his left hand, forming in his own mindopinions on all matters, from which he never receded. He reflectedlong before making any business agreement. When his opponent, aftercareful conversation, avowed the secret of his own purposes, confidentthat he had secured his listener's assent, Grandet answered: "I candecide nothing without consulting my wife." His wife, whom he hadreduced to a state of helpless slavery, was a useful screen to him inbusiness. He went nowhere among friends; he neither gave nor accepteddinners; he made no stir or noise, seeming to economize in everything,even movement. He never disturbed or disarranged the things of otherpeople, out of respect for the rights of property. Nevertheless, inspite of his soft voice, in spite of his circumspect bearing, thelanguage and habits of a coarse nature came to the surface, especiallyin his own home, where he controlled himself less than elsewhere.Physically, Grandet was a man five feet high, thick-set, square-built,with calves twelve inches in circumference, knotted knee-joints, andbroad shoulders; his face was round, tanned, and pitted by the small-pox; his chin was straight, his lips had no curves, his teeth werewhite; his eyes had that calm, devouring expression which peopleattribute to the basilisk; his forehead, full of transverse wrinkles,was not without certain significant protuberances; his yellow-grayishhair was said to be silver and gold by certain young people who didnot realize the impropriety of making a jest about Monsieur Grandet.His nose, thick at the end, bore a veined wen, which the common peoplesaid, not without reason, was full of malice. The whole countenanceshowed a dangerous cunning, an integrity without warmth, the egotismof a man long used to concentrate every feeling upon the enjoyments ofavarice and upon the only human being who was anything whatever tohim,--his daughter and sole heiress, Eugenie. Attitude, manners,bearing, everything about him, in short, testified to that belief inhimself which the habit of succeeding in all enterprises never failsto give to a man.

°°°°Thus, though his manners were unctuous and soft outwardly, MonsieurGrandet's nature was of iron. His dress never varied; and those whosaw him to-day saw him such as he had been since 1791. His stout shoeswere tied with leathern thongs; he wore, in all weathers, thickwoollen stockings, short breeches of coarse maroon cloth with silverbuckles, a velvet waistcoat, in alternate stripes of yellow and puce,buttoned squarely, a large maroon coat with wide flaps, a blackcravat, and a quaker's hat. His gloves, thick as those of a gendarme,lasted him twenty months; to preserve them, he always laid themmethodically on the brim of his hat in one particular spot. Saumurknew nothing further about this personage.

°°°°Only six individuals had a right of entrance to Monsieur Grandet'shouse. The most important of the first three was a nephew of MonsieurCruchot. Since his appointment as president of the Civil courts ofSaumur this young man had added the name of Bonfons to that ofCruchot. He now signed himself C. de Bonfons. Any litigant so ill-advised as to call him Monsieur Cruchot would soon be made to feel hisfolly in court. The magistrate protected those who called him Monsieurle president, but he favored with gracious smiles those who addressedhim as Monsieur de Bonfons. Monsieur le president was thirty-threeyears old, and possessed the estate of Bonfons (Boni Fontis), worthseven thousand francs a year; he expected to inherit the property ofhis uncle the notary and that of another uncle, the Abbe Cruchot, adignitary of the chapter of Saint-Martin de Tours, both of whom werethought to be very rich. These three Cruchots, backed by a goodlynumber of cousins, and allied to twenty families in the town, formed aparty, like the Medici in Florence; like the Medici, the Cruchots hadtheir Pazzi.

°°°°Madame des Grassins, mother of a son twenty-three years of age, cameassiduously to play cards with Madame Grandet, hoping to marry herdear Adolphe to Mademoiselle Eugenie. Monsieur des Grassins, thebanker, vigorously promoted the schemes of his wife by means of secretservices constantly rendered to the old miser, and always arrived intime upon the field of battle. The three des Grassins likewise hadtheir adherents, their cousins, their faithful allies. On the Cruchotside the abbe, the Talleyrand of the family, well backed-up by hisbrother the notary, sharply contested every inch of ground with hisfemale adversary, and tried to obtain the rich heiress for his nephewthe president.

°°°°This secret warfare between the Cruchots and des Grassins, the prizethereof being the hand in marriage of Eugenie Grandet, kept thevarious social circles of Saumur in violent agitation. WouldMademoiselle Grandet marry Monsieur le president or Monsieur Adolphedes Grassins? To this problem some replied that Monsieur Grandet wouldnever give his daughter to the one or to the other. The old cooper,eaten up with ambition, was looking, they said, for a peer of France,to whom an income of three hundred thousand francs would make all thepast, present, and future casks of the Grandets acceptable. Othersreplied that Monsieur and Madame des Grassins were nobles, andexceedingly rich; that Adolphe was a personable young fellow; and thatunless the old man had a nephew of the pope at his beck and call, sucha suitable alliance ought to satisfy a man who came from nothing,--aman whom Saumur remembered with an adze in his hand, and who had,moreover, worn the /bonnet rouge/. Certain wise heads called attentionto the fact that Monsieur Cruchot de Bonfons had the right of entry tothe house at all times, whereas his rival was received only onSundays. Others, however, maintained that Madame des Grassins was moreintimate with the women of the house of Grandet than the Cruchotswere, and could put into their minds certain ideas which would lead,sooner or later, to success. To this the former retorted that the AbbeCruchot was the most insinuating man in the world: pit a woman againsta monk, and the struggle was even. "It is diamond cut diamond," said aSaumur wit.

°°°°The oldest inhabitants, wiser than their fellows, declared that theGrandets knew better than to let the property go out of the family,and that Mademoiselle Eugenie Grandet of Saumur would be married tothe son of Monsieur Grandet of Paris, a wealthy wholesale wine-merchant. To this the Cruchotines and the Grassinists replied: "In thefirst place, the two brothers have seen each other only twice inthirty years; and next, Monsieur Grandet of Paris has ambitiousdesigns for his son. He is mayor of an arrondissement, a deputy,colonel of the National Guard, judge in the commercial courts; hedisowns the Grandets of Saumur, and means to ally himself with someducal family,--ducal under favor of Napoleon." In short, was thereanything not said of an heiress who was talked of through acircumference of fifty miles, and even in the public conveyances fromAngers to Blois, inclusively!

°°°°At the beginning of 1811, the Cruchotines won a signal advantage overthe Grassinists. The estate of Froidfond, remarkable for its park, itsmansion, its farms, streams, ponds, forests, and worth about threemillions, was put up for sale by the young Marquis de Froidfond, whowas obliged to liquidate his possessions. Maitre Cruchot, thepresident, and the abbe, aided by their adherents, were able toprevent the sale of the estate in little lots. The notary concluded abargain with the young man for the whole property, payable in gold,persuading him that suits without number would have to be broughtagainst the purchasers of small lots before he could get the money forthem; it was better, therefore, to sell the whole to Monsieur Grandet,who was solvent and able to pay for the estate in ready money. Thefine marquisate of Froidfond was accordingly conveyed down the gulletof Monsieur Grandet, who, to the great astonishment of Saumur, paidfor it, under proper discount, with the usual formalities.This affair echoed from Nantes to Orleans. Monsieur Grandet tookadvantage of a cart returning by way of Froidfond to go and see hischateau. Having cast a master's eye over the whole property, hereturned to Saumur, satisfied that he had invested his money at fiveper cent, and seized by the stupendous thought of extending andincreasing the marquisate of Froidfond by concentrating all hisproperty there. Then, to fill up his coffers, now nearly empty, heresolved to thin out his woods and his forests, and to sell off thepoplars in the meadows.

°°°°II

°°°°It is now easy to understand the full meaning of the term, "the houseof Monsieur Grandet,"--that cold, silent, pallid dwelling, standingabove the town and sheltered by the ruins of the ramparts. The twopillars and the arch, which made the porte-cochere on which the dooropened, were built, like the house itself, of tufa,--a white stonepeculiar to the shores of the Loire, and so soft that it lasts hardlymore than two centuries. Numberless irregular holes, capriciouslybored or eaten out by the inclemency of the weather, gave anappearance of the vermiculated stonework of French architecture to thearch and the side walls of this entrance, which bore some resemblanceto the gateway of a jail. Above the arch was a long bas-relief, inhard stone, representing the four seasons, the faces already crumblingaway and blackened. This bas-relief was surmounted by a projectingplinth, upon which a variety of chance growths had sprung up,--yellowpellitory, bindweed, convolvuli, nettles, plantain, and even a littlecherry-tree, already grown to some height.

°°°°The door of the archway was made of solid oak, brown, shrunken, andsplit in many places; though frail in appearance, it was firmly heldin place by a system of iron bolts arranged in symmetrical patterns. Asmall square grating, with close bars red with rust, filled up themiddle panel and made, as it were, a motive for the knocker, fastenedto it by a ring, which struck upon the grinning head of a huge nail.This knocker, of the oblong shape and kind which our ancestors called/jaquemart/, looked like a huge note of exclamation; an antiquary whoexamined it attentively might have found indications of the figure,essentially burlesque, which it once represented, and which long usagehad now effaced. Through this little grating--intended in olden timesfor the recognition of friends in times of civil war--inquisitivepersons could perceive, at the farther end of the dark and slimyvault, a few broken steps which led to a garden, picturesquely shut inby walls that were thick and damp, and through which oozed a moisturethat nourished tufts of sickly herbage. These walls were the ruins ofthe ramparts, under which ranged the gardens of several neighboringhouses.

°°°°The most important room on the ground-floor of the house was a largehall, entered directly from beneath the vault of the porte-cochere.Few people know the importance of a hall in the little towns of Anjou,Touraine, and Berry. The hall is at one and the same time antechamber,salon, office, boudoir, and dining-room; it is the theatre of domesticlife, the common living-room. There the barber of the neighborhoodcame, twice a year, to cut Monsieur Grandet's hair; there the farmers,the cure, the under-prefect, and the miller's boy came on business.This room, with two windows looking on the street, was entirely ofwood. Gray panels with ancient mouldings covered the walls from top tobottom; the ceiling showed all its beams, which were likewise paintedgray, while the space between them had been washed over in white, nowyellow with age. An old brass clock, inlaid with arabesques, adornedthe mantel of the ill-cut white stone chimney-piece, above which was agreenish mirror, whose edges, bevelled to show the thickness of theglass, reflected a thread of light the whole length of a gothic framein damascened steel-work. The two copper-gilt candelabra whichdecorated the corners of the chimney-piece served a double purpose: bytaking off the side-branches, each of which held a socket, the mainstem--which was fastened to a pedestal of bluish marble tipped withcopper--made a candlestick for one candle, which was sufficient forordinary occasions. The chairs, antique in shape, were covered withtapestry representing the fables of La Fontaine; it was necessary,however, to know that writer well to guess at the subjects, for thefaded colors and the figures, blurred by much darning, were difficultto distinguish.

°°°°At the four corners of the hall were closets, or rather buffets,surmounted by dirty shelves. An old card-table in marquetry, of whichthe upper part was a chess-board, stood in the space between the twowindows. Above this table was an oval barometer with a black borderenlivened with gilt bands, on which the flies had so licentiouslydisported themselves that the gilding had become problematical. On thepanel opposite to the chimney-piece were two portraits in pastel,supposed to represent the grandfather of Madame Grandet, old Monsieurde la Bertelliere, as a lieutenant in the French guard, and thedeceased Madame Gentillet in the guise of a shepherdess. The windowswere draped with curtains of red /gros de Tours/ held back by silkencords with ecclesiastical tassels. This luxurious decoration, littlein keeping with the habits of Monsieur Grandet, had been, togetherwith the steel pier-glass, the tapestries, and the buffets, which wereof rose-wood, included in the purchase of the house.

°°°°By the window nearest to the door stood a straw chair, whose legs wereraised on castors to lift its occupant, Madame Grandet, to a heightfrom which she could see the passers-by. A work-table of stainedcherry-wood filled up the embrasure, and the little armchair ofEugenie Grandet stood beside it. In this spot the lives had flowedpeacefully onward for fifteen years, in a round of constant work fromthe month of April to the month of November. On the first day of thelatter month they took their winter station by the chimney. Not untilthat day did Grandet permit a fire to be lighted; and on the thirty-first of March it was extinguished, without regard either to thechills of the early spring or to those of a wintry autumn. A foot-warmer, filled with embers from the kitchen fire, which la GrandeNanon contrived to save for them, enabled Madame and MademoiselleGrandet to bear the chilly mornings and evenings of April and October.Mother and daughter took charge of the family linen, and spent theirdays so conscientiously upon a labor properly that of working-women,that if Eugenie wished to embroider a collar for her mother she wasforced to take the time from sleep, and deceive her father to obtainthe necessary light. For a long time the miser had given out thetallow candle to his daughter and la Grande Nanon just as he gave outevery morning the bread and other necessaries for the dailyconsumption.

°°°°La Grande Nanon was perhaps the only human being capable of acceptingwillingly the despotism of her master. The whole town envied Monsieurand Madame Grandet the possession of her. La Grande Nanon, so calledon account of her height, which was five feet eight inches, had livedwith Monsieur Grandet for thirty-five years. Though she received onlysixty francs a year in wages, she was supposed to be one of therichest serving-women in Saumur. Those sixty francs, accumulatingthrough thirty-five years, had recently enabled her to invest fourthousand francs in an annuity with Maitre Cruchot. This result of herlong and persistent economy seemed gigantic. Every servant in thetown, seeing that the poor sexagenarian was sure of bread for her oldage, was jealous of her, and never thought of the hard slavery throughwhich it had been won.

°°°°At twenty-two years of age the poor girl had been unable to find asituation, so repulsive was her face to almost every one. Yet thefeeling was certainly unjust: the face would have been much admired onthe shoulders of a grenadier of the guard; but all things, so theysay, should be in keeping. Forced to leave a farm where she kept thecows, because the dwelling-house was burned down, she came to Saumurto find a place, full of the robust courage that shrinks from nolabor. Le Pere Grandet was at that time thinking of marriage and aboutto set up his household. He espied the girl, rejected as she was fromdoor to door. A good judge of corporeal strength in his trade as acooper, he guessed the work that might be got out of a female creatureshaped like a Hercules, as firm on her feet as an oak sixty years oldon its roots, strong in the hips, square in the back, with the handsof a cartman and an honesty as sound as her unblemished virtue.Neither the warts which adorned her martial visage, nor the red-bricktints of her skin, nor the sinewy arms, nor the ragged garments of laGrande Nanon, dismayed the cooper, who was at that time still of anage when the heart shudders. He fed, shod, and clothed the poor girl,gave her wages, and put her to work without treating her too roughly.Seeing herself thus welcomed, la Grande Nanon wept secretly tears ofjoy, and attached herself in all sincerity to her master, who fromthat day ruled her and worked her with feudal authority. Nanon dideverything. She cooked, she made the lye, she washed the linen in theLoire and brought it home on her shoulders; she got up early, she wentto bed late; she prepared the food of the vine-dressers during theharvest, kept watch upon the market-people, protected the property ofher master like a faithful dog, and even, full of blind confidence,obeyed without a murmur his most absurd exactions.

°°°°In the famous year of 1811, when the grapes were gathered withunheard-of difficulty, Grandet resolved to give Nanon his old watch,--the first present he had made her during twenty years of service.Though he turned over to her his old shoes (which fitted her), it isimpossible to consider that quarterly benefit as a gift, for the shoeswere always thoroughly worn-out. Necessity had made the poor girl soniggardly that Grandet had grown to love her as we love a dog, andNanon had let him fasten a spiked collar round her throat, whosespikes no longer pricked her. If Grandet cut the bread with rather toomuch parsimony, she made no complaint; she gaily shared the hygienicbenefits derived from the severe regime of the household, in which noone was ever ill. Nanon was, in fact, one of the family; she laughedwhen Grandet laughed, felt gloomy or chilly, warmed herself, andtoiled as he did. What pleasant compensations there were in suchequality! Never did the master have occasion to find fault with theservant for pilfering the grapes, nor for the plums and nectarineseaten under the trees. "Come, fall-to, Nanon!" he would say in yearswhen the branches bent under the fruit and the farmers were obliged togive it to the pigs.

°°°°To the poor peasant who in her youth had earned nothing but harshtreatment, to the pauper girl picked up by charity, Grandet'sambiguous laugh was like a sunbeam. Moreover, Nanon's simple heart andnarrow head could hold only one feeling and one idea. For thirty-fiveyears she had never ceased to see herself standing before the wood-yard of Monsieur Grandet, ragged and barefooted, and to hear him say:"What do you want, young one?" Her gratitude was ever new. SometimesGrandet, reflecting that the poor creature had never heard aflattering word, that she was ignorant of all the tender sentimentsinspired by women, that she might some day appear before the throne ofGod even more chaste than the Virgin Mary herself,--Grandet, struckwith pity, would say as he looked at her, "Poor Nanon!" Theexclamation was always followed by an undefinable look cast upon himin return by the old servant. The words, uttered from time to time,formed a chain of friendship that nothing ever parted, and to whicheach exclamation added a link. Such compassion arising in the heart ofthe miser, and accepted gratefully by the old spinster, had somethinginconceivably horrible about it. This cruel pity, recalling, as itdid, a thousand pleasures to the heart of the old cooper, was forNanon the sum total of happiness. Who does not likewise say, "PoorNanon!" God will recognize his angels by the inflexions of theirvoices and by their secret sighs.

°°°°There were very many households in Saumur where the servants werebetter treated, but where the masters received far less satisfactionin return. Thus it was often said: "What have the Grandets ever doneto make their Grande Nanon so attached to them? She would go throughfire and water for their sake!" Her kitchen, whose barred windowslooked into the court, was always clean, neat, cold,--a true miser'skitchen, where nothing went to waste. When Nanon had washed herdishes, locked up the remains of the dinner, and put out her fire, sheleft the kitchen, which was separated by a passage from the living-room, and went to spin hemp beside her masters. One tallow candlesufficed the family for the evening. The servant slept at the end ofthe passage in a species of closet lighted only by a fan-light. Herrobust health enabled her to live in this hole with impunity; thereshe could hear the slightest noise through the deep silence whichreigned night and day in that dreary house. Like a watch-dog, sheslept with one ear open, and took her rest with a mind alert.A description of the other parts of the dwelling will be foundconnected with the events of this history, though the foregoing sketchof the hall, where the whole luxury of the household appears, mayenable the reader to surmise the nakedness of the upper floors.In 1819, at the beginning of an evening in the middle of November, laGrande Nanon lighted the fire for the first time. The autumn had beenvery fine. This particular day was a fete-day well known to theCruchotines and the Grassinists. The six antagonists, armed at allpoints, were making ready to meet at the Grandets and surpass eachother in testimonials of friendship. That morning all Saumur had seenMadame and Mademoiselle Grandet, accompanied by Nanon, on their way tohear Mass at the parish church, and every one remembered that the daywas the anniversary of Mademoiselle Eugenie's birth. Calculating thehour at which the family dinner would be over, Maitre Cruchot, theAbbe Cruchot, and Monsieur C. de Bonfons hastened to arrive before thedes Grassins, and be the first to pay their compliments toMademoiselle Eugenie. All three brought enormous bouquets, gathered intheir little green-houses. The stalks of the flowers which thepresident intended to present were ingeniously wound round with awhite satin ribbon adorned with gold fringe. In the morning MonsieurGrandet, following his usual custom on the days that commemorated thebirth and the fete of Eugenie, went to her bedside and solemnlypresented her with his paternal gift,--which for the last thirteenyears had consisted regularly of a curious gold-piece. Madame Grandetgave her daughter a winter dress or a summer dress, as the case mightbe. These two dresses and the gold-pieces, of which she received twoothers on New Year's day and on her father's fete-day, gave Eugenie alittle revenue of a hundred crowns or thereabouts, which Grandet lovedto see her amass. Was it not putting his money from one strong-box toanother, and, as it were, training the parsimony of his heiress? fromwhom he sometimes demanded an account of her treasure (formerlyincreased by the gifts of the Bertellieres), saying: "It is to be yourmarriage dozen."

°°°°The "marriage dozen" is an old custom sacredly preserved and still inforce in many parts of central France. In Berry and in Anjou, when ayoung girl marries, her family, or that of the husband, must give hera purse, in which they place, according to their means, twelve pieces,or twelve dozen pieces, or twelve hundred pieces of gold. The poorestshepherd-girl never marries without her dozen, be it only a dozencoppers. They still tell in Issoudun of a certain "dozen" presented toa rich heiress, which contained a hundred and forty-four /portugaisesd'or/. Pope Clement VII., uncle of Catherine de' Medici, gave her whenhe married her to Henri II. a dozen antique gold medals of pricelessvalue.

°°°°During dinner the father, delighted to see his Eugenie looking well ina new gown, exclaimed: "As it is Eugenie's birthday let us have afire; it will be a good omen."

°°°°"Mademoiselle will be married this year, that's certain," said laGrande Nanon, carrying away the remains of the goose,--the pheasant oftradesmen.

°°°°"I don't see any one suitable for her in Saumur," said Madame Grandet,glancing at her husband with a timid look which, considering heryears, revealed the conjugal slavery under which the poor womanlanguished.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter and exclaimed gaily,--

°°°°"She is twenty-three years old to-day, the child; we must soon beginto think of it."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother silently exchanged a glance of intelligence.Madame Grandet was a dry, thin woman, as yellow as a quince, awkward,slow, one of those women who are born to be down-trodden. She had bigbones, a big nose, a big forehead, big eyes, and presented at firstsight a vague resemblance to those mealy fruits that have neithersavor nor succulence. Her teeth were black and few in number, hermouth was wrinkled, her chin long and pointed. She was an excellentwoman, a true la Bertelliere. L'abbe Cruchot found occasionalopportunity to tell her that she had not done ill; and she believedhim. Angelic sweetness, the resignation of an insect tortured bychildren, a rare piety, a good heart, an unalterable equanimity ofsoul, made her universally pitied and respected. Her husband nevergave her more than six francs at a time for her personal expenses.Ridiculous as it may seem, this woman, who by her own fortune and hervarious inheritances brought Pere Grandet more than three hundredthousand francs, had always felt so profoundly humiliated by herdependence and the slavery in which she lived, against which thegentleness of her spirit prevented her from revolting, that she hadnever asked for one penny or made a single remark on the deeds whichMaitre Cruchot brought for her signature. This foolish secret pride,this nobility of soul perpetually misunderstood and wounded byGrandet, ruled the whole conduct of the wife.

°°°°Madame Grandet was attired habitually in a gown of greenish levantinesilk, endeavoring to make it last nearly a year; with it she wore alarge kerchief of white cotton cloth, a bonnet made of plaited strawssewn together, and almost always a black-silk apron. As she seldomleft the house she wore out very few shoes. She never asked anythingfor herself. Grandet, seized with occasional remorse when heremembered how long a time had elapsed since he gave her the last sixfrancs, always stipulated for the "wife's pin-money" when he sold hisyearly vintage. The four or five louis presented by the Belgian or theDutchman who purchased the wine were the chief visible signs of MadameGrandet's annual revenues. But after she had received the five louis,her husband would often say to her, as though their purse were held incommon: "Can you lend me a few sous?" and the poor woman, glad to beable to do something for a man whom her confessor held up to her asher lord and master, returned him in the course of the winter severalcrowns out of the "pin-money." When Grandet drew from his pocket thefive-franc piece which he allowed monthly for the minor expenses,--thread, needles, and toilet,--of his daughter, he never failed to sayas he buttoned his breeches' pocket: "And you, mother, do you wantanything?"

°°°°"My friend," Madame Grandet would answer, moved by a sense of maternaldignity, "we will see about that later."

°°°°Wasted dignity! Grandet thought himself very generous to his wife.Philosophers who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, ofEugenie, have surely a right to say that irony is at the bottom of theways of Providence.

°°°°After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made toEugenie's marriage, Nanon went to fetch a bottle of black-currantratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly fell as shecame down the stairs.

°°°°"You great stupid!" said her master; "are you going to tumble aboutlike other people, hey?"

°°°°"Monsieur, it was that step on your staircase which has given way.""She is right," said Madame Grandet; "it ought to have been mendedlong ago. Yesterday Eugenie nearly twisted her ankle."

°°°°"Here," said Grandet to Nanon, seeing that she looked quite pale, "asit is Eugenie's birthday, and you came near falling, take a littleglass of ratafia to set you right."

°°°°"Faith! I've earned it," said Nanon; "most people would have brokenthe bottle; but I'd sooner have broken my elbow holding it up high.""Poor Nanon!" said Grandet, filling a glass.

°°°°"Did you hurt yourself?" asked Eugenie, looking kindly at her."No, I didn't fall; I threw myself back on my haunches."

°°°°"Well! as it is Eugenie's birthday," said Grandet, "I'll have the stepmended. You people don't know how to set your foot in the corner wherethe wood is still firm."

°°°°Grandet took the candle, leaving his wife, daughter, and servantwithout any other light than that from the hearth, where the flameswere lively, and went into the bakehouse to fetch planks, nails, andtools.

°°°°"Can I help you?" cried Nanon, hearing him hammer on the stairs."No, no! I'm an old hand at it," answered the former cooper.At the moment when Grandet was mending his worm-eaten staircase andwhistling with all his might, in remembrance of the days of his youth,the three Cruchots knocked at the door.

°°°°"Is it you, Monsieur Cruchot?" asked Nanon, peeping through the littlegrating.

°°°°"Yes," answered the president.

°°°°Nanon opened the door, and the light from the hearth, reflected on theceiling, enabled the three Cruchots to find their way into the room."Ha! you've come a-greeting," said Nanon, smelling the flowers."Excuse me, messieurs," cried Grandet, recognizing their voices; "I'llbe with you in a moment. I'm not proud; I am patching up a step on mystaircase."

°°°°"Go on, go on, Monsieur Grandet; a man's house is his castle," saidthe president sententiously.

°°°°Madame and Mademoiselle Grandet rose. The president, profiting by thedarkness, said to Eugenie:

°°°°"Will you permit me, mademoiselle, to wish you, on this the day ofyour birth, a series of happy years and the continuance of the healthwhich you now enjoy?"

°°°°He offered her a huge bouquet of choice flowers which were rare inSaumur; then, taking the heiress by the elbows, he kissed her on eachside of her neck with a complacency that made her blush. Thepresident, who looked like a rusty iron nail, felt that his courtshipwas progressing.

°°°°"Don't stand on ceremony," said Grandet, entering. "How well you dothings on fete-days, Monsieur le president!"

°°°°"When it concerns mademoiselle," said the abbe, armed with his ownbouquet, "every day is a fete-day for my nephew."

°°°°The abbe kissed Eugenie's hand. As for Maitre Cruchot, he boldlykissed her on both cheeks, remarking: "How we sprout up, to be sure!Every year is twelve months."

°°°°As he replaced the candlestick beside the clock, Grandet, who neverforgot his own jokes, and repeated them to satiety when he thoughtthem funny, said,--

°°°°"As this is Eugenie's birthday let us illuminate."

°°°°He carefully took off the branches of the candelabra, put a socket oneach pedestal, took from Nanon a new tallow candle with paper twistedround the end of it, put it into the hollow, made it firm, lit it, andthen sat down beside his wife, looking alternately at his friends, hisdaughter, and the two candles. The Abbe Cruchot, a plump, puffy littleman, with a red wig plastered down and a face like an old femalegambler, said as he stretched out his feet, well shod in stout shoeswith silver buckles: "The des Grassins have not come?"

°°°°"Not yet," said Grandet.

°°°°"But are they coming?" asked the old notary, twisting his face, whichhad as many holes as a collander, into a queer grimace.

°°°°"I think so," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Are your vintages all finished?" said Monsieur de Bonfons to Grandet."Yes, all of them," said the old man, rising to walk up and down theroom, his chest swelling with pride as he said the words, "all ofthem." Through the door of the passage which led to the kitchen he sawla Grande Nanon sitting beside her fire with a candle and preparing tospin there, so as not to intrude among the guests.

°°°°"Nanon," he said, going into the passage, "put out that fire and thatcandle, and come and sit with us. Pardieu! the hall is big enough forall."

°°°°"But monsieur, you are to have the great people."

°°°°"Are not you as good as they? They are descended from Adam, and so areyou."

°°°°Grandet came back to the president and said,--

°°°°"Have you sold your vintage?"

°°°°"No, not I; I shall keep it. If the wine is good this year, it will bebetter two years hence. The proprietors, you know, have made anagreement to keep up the price; and this year the Belgians won't getthe better of us. Suppose they are sent off empty-handed for once,faith! they'll come back."

°°°°"Yes, but let us mind what we are about," said Grandet in a tone whichmade the president tremble.

°°°°"Is he driving some bargain?" thought Cruchot.

°°°°At this moment the knocker announced the des Grassins family, andtheir arrival interrupted a conversation which had begun betweenMadame Grandet and the abbe.

°°°°Madame des Grassins was one of those lively, plump little women, withpink-and-white skins, who, thanks to the claustral calm of theprovinces and the habits of a virtuous life, keep their youth untilthey are past forty. She was like the last rose of autumn,--pleasantto the eye, though the petals have a certain frostiness, and theirperfume is slight. She dressed well, got her fashions from Paris, setthe tone to Saumur, and gave parties. Her husband, formerly aquartermaster in the Imperial guard, who had been desperately woundedat Austerlitz, and had since retired, still retained, in spite of hisrespect for Grandet, the seeming frankness of an old soldier."Good evening, Grandet," he said, holding out his hand and affecting asort of superiority, with which he always crushed the Cruchots."Mademoiselle," he added, turning to Eugenie, after bowing to MadameGrandet, "you are always beautiful and good, and truly I do not knowwhat to wish you." So saying, he offered her a little box which hisservant had brought and which contained a Cape heather,--a flowerlately imported into Europe and very rare.

°°°°Madame des Grassins kissed Eugenie very affectionately, pressed herhand, and said: "Adolphe wishes to make you my little offering."A tall, blond young man, pale and slight, with tolerable manners andseemingly rather shy, although he had just spent eight or ten thousandfrancs over his allowance in Paris, where he had been sent to studylaw, now came forward and kissed Eugenie on both cheeks, offering hera workbox with utensils in silver-gilt,--mere show-case trumpery, inspite of the monogram E.G. in gothic letters rather well engraved,which belonged properly to something in better taste. As she openedit, Eugenie experienced one of those unexpected and perfect delightswhich make a young girl blush and quiver and tremble with pleasure.She turned her eyes to her father as if to ask permission to acceptit, and Monsieur Grandet replied: "Take it, my daughter," in a tonewhich would have made an actor illustrious.

°°°°The three Cruchots felt crushed as they saw the joyous, animated lookcast upon Adolphe des Grassins by the heiress, to whom such richeswere unheard-of. Monsieur des Grassins offered Grandet a pinch ofsnuff, took one himself, shook off the grains as they fell on theribbon of the Legion of honor which was attached to the button-hole ofhis blue surtout; then he looked at the Cruchots with an air thatseemed to say, "Parry that thrust if you can!" Madame des Grassinscast her eyes on the blue vases which held the Cruchot bouquets,looking at the enemy's gifts with the pretended interest of asatirical woman. At this delicate juncture the Abbe Cruchot left thecompany seated in a circle round the fire and joined Grandet at thelower end of the hall. As the two men reached the embrasure of thefarthest window the priest said in the miser's ear: "Those peoplethrow money out of the windows."

°°°°"What does that matter if it gets into my cellar?" retorted the oldwine-grower.

°°°°"If you want to give gilt scissors to your daughter, you have themeans," said the abbe.

°°°°"I give her something better than scissors," answered Grandet."My nephew is a blockhead," thought the abbe as he looked at thepresident, whose rumpled hair added to the ill grace of his browncountenance. "Couldn't he have found some little trifle which costmoney?"

°°°°"We will join you at cards, Madame Grandet," said Madame des Grassins."We might have two tables, as we are all here."

°°°°"As it is Eugenie's birthday you had better play loto all together,"said Pere Grandet: "the two young ones can join"; and the old cooper,who never played any game, motioned to his daughter and Adolphe."Come, Nanon, set the tables."

°°°°"We will help you, Mademoiselle Nanon," said Madame des Grassinsgaily, quite joyous at the joy she had given Eugenie.

°°°°"I have never in my life been so pleased," the heiress said to her; "Ihave never seen anything so pretty."

°°°°"Adolphe brought it from Paris, and he chose it," Madame des Grassinswhispered in her ear.

°°°°"Go on! go on! damned intriguing thing!" thought the president. "Ifyou ever have a suit in court, you or your husband, it shall go hardwith you."

°°°°The notary, sitting in his corner, looked calmly at the abbe, sayingto himself: "The des Grassins may do what they like; my property andmy brother's and that of my nephew amount in all to eleven hundredthousand francs. The des Grassins, at the most, have not half that;besides, they have a daughter. They may give what presents they like;heiress and presents too will be ours one of these days."At half-past eight in the evening the two card-tables were set out.Madame des Grassins succeeded in putting her son beside Eugenie. Theactors in this scene, so full of interest, commonplace as it seems,were provided with bits of pasteboard striped in many colors andnumbered, and with counters of blue glass, and they appeared to belistening to the jokes of the notary, who never drew a number withoutmaking a remark, while in fact they were all thinking of MonsieurGrandet's millions. The old cooper, with inward self-conceit, wascontemplating the pink feathers and the fresh toilet of Madame desGrassins, the martial head of the banker, the faces of Adolphe, thepresident, the abbe, and the notary, saying to himself:--"They are all after my money. Hey! neither the one nor the other shallhave my daughter; but they are useful--useful as harpoons to fishwith."

°°°°This family gaiety in the old gray room dimly lighted by two tallowcandles; this laughter, accompanied by the whirr of Nanon's spinning-wheel, sincere only upon the lips of Eugenie or her mother; thistriviality mingled with important interests; this young girl, who,like certain birds made victims of the price put upon them, was nowlured and trapped by proofs of friendship of which she was the dupe,--all these things contributed to make the scene a melancholy comedy. Isit not, moreover, a drama of all times and all places, though herebrought down to its simplest expression? The figure of Grandet,playing his own game with the false friendship of the two families andgetting enormous profits from it, dominates the scene and throws lightupon it. The modern god,--the only god in whom faith is preserved,--money, is here, in all its power, manifested in a single countenance.The tender sentiments of life hold here but a secondary place; onlythe three pure, simple hearts of Nanon, of Eugenie, and of her motherwere inspired by them. And how much of ignorance there was in thesimplicity of these poor women! Eugenie and her mother knew nothing ofGrandet's wealth; they could only estimate the things of life by theglimmer of their pale ideas, and they neither valued nor despisedmoney, because they were accustomed to do without it. Their feelings,bruised, though they did not know it, but ever-living, were the secretspring of their existence, and made them curious exceptions in themidst of these other people whose lives were purely material.Frightful condition of the human race! there is no one of its joysthat does not come from some species of ignorance.

°°°°At the moment when Madame Grandet had won a loto of sixteen sous,--thelargest ever pooled in that house,--and while la Grande Nanon waslaughing with delight as she watched madame pocketing her riches, theknocker resounded on the house-door with such a noise that the womenall jumped in their chairs.

°°°°"There is no man in Saumur who would knock like that," said thenotary.

°°°°"How can they bang in that way!" exclaimed Nanon; "do they want tobreak in the door?"

°°°°"Who the devil is it?" cried Grandet.

°°°°III

°°°°Nanon took one of the candles and went to open the door, followed byher master.

°°°°"Grandet! Grandet!" cried his wife, moved by a sudden impulse of fear,and running to the door of the room.

°°°°All the players looked at each other.

°°°°"Suppose we all go?" said Monsieur des Grassins; "that knock strikesme as evil-intentioned."

°°°°Hardly was Monsieur des Grassins allowed to see the figure of a youngman, accompanied by a porter from the coach-office carrying two largetrunks and dragging a carpet-bag after him, than Monsieur Grandetturned roughly on his wife and said,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, go back to your loto; leave me to speak withmonsieur."

°°°°Then he pulled the door quickly to, and the excited players returnedto their seats, but did not continue the game.

°°°°"Is it any one belonging to Saumur, Monsieur des Grassins?" asked hiswife.

°°°°"No, it is a traveller."

°°°°"He must have come from Paris."

°°°°"Just so," said the notary, pulling out his watch, which was twoinches thick and looked like a Dutch man-of-war; "it's nine o'clock;the diligence of the Grand Bureau is never late."

°°°°"Is the gentleman young?" inquired the Abbe Cruchot.

°°°°"Yes," answered Monsieur des Grassins, "and he has brought luggagewhich must weigh nearly three tons."

°°°°"Nanon does not come back," said Eugenie.

°°°°"It must be one of your relations," remarked the president."Let us go on with our game," said Madame Grandet gently. "I know fromMonsieur Grandet's tone of voice that he is annoyed; perhaps he wouldnot like to find us talking of his affairs."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said Adolphe to his neighbor, "it is no doubt yourcousin Grandet,--a very good-looking young man; I met him at the ballof Monsieur de Nucingen." Adolphe did not go on, for his mother trodon his toes; and then, asking him aloud for two sous to put on herstake, she whispered: "Will you hold your tongue, you great goose!"At this moment Grandet returned, without la Grande Nanon, whose steps,together with those of the porter, echoed up the staircase; and he wasfollowed by the traveller who had excited such curiosity and so filledthe lively imaginations of those present that his arrival at thisdwelling, and his sudden fall into the midst of this assembly, canonly be likened to that of a snail into a beehive, or the introductionof a peacock into some village poultry-yard.

°°°°"Sit down near the fire," said Grandet.

°°°°Before seating himself, the young stranger saluted the assembledcompany very gracefully. The men rose to answer by a courteousinclination, and the women made a ceremonious bow.

°°°°"You are cold, no doubt, monsieur," said Madame Grandet; "you have,perhaps, travelled from--"

°°°°"Just like all women!" said the old wine-grower, looking up from aletter he was reading. "Do let monsieur rest himself!"

°°°°"But, father, perhaps monsieur would like to take something," saidEugenie.

°°°°"He has got a tongue," said the old man sternly.

°°°°The stranger was the only person surprised by this scene; all theothers were well-used to the despotic ways of the master. However,after the two questions and the two replies had been exchanged, thenewcomer rose, turned his back towards the fire, lifted one foot so asto warm the sole of its boot, and said to Eugenie,--

°°°°"Thank you, my cousin, but I dined at Tours. And," he added, lookingat Grandet, "I need nothing; I am not even tired."

°°°°"Monsieur has come from the capital?" asked Madame des Grassins.Monsieur Charles,--such was the name of the son of Monsieur Grandet ofParis,--hearing himself addressed, took a little eye-glass, suspendedby a chain from his neck, applied it to his right eye to examine whatwas on the table, and also the persons sitting round it. He ogledMadame des Grassins with much impertinence, and said to her, after hehad observed all he wished,--

°°°°"Yes, madame. You are playing at loto, aunt," he added. "Do not let meinterrupt you, I beg; go on with your game: it is too amusing toleave."

°°°°"I was certain it was the cousin," thought Madame des Grassins,casting repeated glances at him.

°°°°"Forty-seven!" cried the old abbe. "Mark it down, Madame des Grassins.Isn't that your number?"

°°°°Monsieur des Grassins put a counter on his wife's card, who satwatching first the cousin from Paris and then Eugenie, withoutthinking of her loto, a prey to mournful presentiments. From time totime the young the heiress glanced furtively at her cousin, and thebanker's wife easily detected a /crescendo/ of surprise and curiosityin her mind.

°°°°Monsieur Charles Grandet, a handsome young man of twenty-two,presented at this moment a singular contrast to the worthyprovincials, who, considerably disgusted by his aristocratic manners,were all studying him with sarcastic intent. This needs anexplanation. At twenty-two, young people are still so near childhoodthat they often conduct themselves childishly. In all probability, outof every hundred of them fully ninety-nine would have behavedprecisely as Monsieur Charles Grandet was now behaving.

°°°°Some days earlier than this his father had told him to go and spendseveral months with his uncle at Saumur. Perhaps Monsieur Grandet wasthinking of Eugenie. Charles, sent for the first time in his life intothe provinces, took a fancy to make his appearance with thesuperiority of a man of fashion, to reduce the whole arrondissement todespair by his luxury, and to make his visit an epoch, importing intothose country regions all the refinements of Parisian life. In short,to explain it in one word, he mean to pass more time at Saumur inbrushing his nails than he ever thought of doing in Paris, and toassume the extra nicety and elegance of dress which a young man offashion often lays aside for a certain negligence which in itself isnot devoid of grace. Charles therefore brought with him a completehunting-costume, the finest gun, the best hunting-knife in theprettiest sheath to be found in all Paris. He brought his wholecollection of waistcoats. They were of all kinds,--gray, black, white,scarabaeus-colored: some were shot with gold, some spangled, some/chined/; some were double-breasted and crossed like a shawl, otherswere straight in the collar; some had turned-over collars, somebuttoned up to the top with gilt buttons. He brought every variety ofcollar and cravat in fashion at that epoch. He brought two ofBuisson's coats and all his finest linen He brought his pretty goldtoilet-set,--a present from his mother. He brought all his dandyknick-knacks, not forgetting a ravishing little desk presented to himby the most amiable of women,--amiable for him, at least,--a fine ladywhom he called Annette and who at this moment was travelling,matrimonially and wearily, in Scotland, a victim to certain suspicionswhich required a passing sacrifice of happiness; in the desk was muchpretty note-paper on which to write to her once a fortnight.In short, it was as complete a cargo of Parisian frivolities as it waspossible for him to get together,--a collection of all the implementsof husbandry with which the youth of leisure tills his life, from thelittle whip which helps to begin a duel, to the handsomely chasedpistols which end it. His father having told him to travel alone andmodestly, he had taken the coupe of the diligence all to himself,rather pleased at not having to damage a delightful travelling-carriage ordered for a journey on which he was to meet his Annette,the great lady who, etc.,--whom he intended to rejoin at Baden in thefollowing June. Charles expected to meet scores of people at hisuncle's house, to hunt in his uncle's forests,--to live, in short, theusual chateau life; he did not know that his uncle was in Saumur, andhad only inquired about him incidentally when asking the way toFroidfond. Hearing that he was in town, he supposed that he shouldfind him in a suitable mansion.

°°°°In order that he might make a becoming first appearance before hisuncle either at Saumur or at Froidfond, he had put on his most eleganttravelling attire, simple yet exquisite,--"adorable," to use the wordwhich in those days summed up the special perfections of a man or athing. At Tours a hairdresser had re-curled his beautiful chestnutlocks; there he changed his linen and put on a black satin cravat,which, combined with a round shirt-collar, framed his fair and smilingcountenance agreeably. A travelling great-coat, only half buttoned up,nipped in his waist and disclosed a cashmere waistcoat crossed infront, beneath which was another waistcoat of white material. Hiswatch, negligently slipped into a pocket, was fastened by a short goldchain to a buttonhole. His gray trousers, buttoned up at the sides,were set off at the seams with patterns of black silk embroidery. Hegracefully twirled a cane, whose chased gold knob did not mar thefreshness of his gray gloves. And to complete all, his cap was inexcellent taste. None but a Parisian, and a Parisian of the upperspheres, could thus array himself without appearing ridiculous; noneother could give the harmony of self-conceit to all these fopperies,which were carried off, however, with a dashing air,--the air of ayoung man who has fine pistols, a sure aim, and Annette.

°°°°Now if you wish to understand the mutual amazement of the provincialparty and the young Parisian; if you would clearly see the brilliancewhich the traveller's elegance cast among the gray shadows of the roomand upon the faces of this family group,--endeavor to picture to yourminds the Cruchots. All three took snuff, and had long ceased torepress the habit of snivelling or to remove the brown blotches whichstrewed the frills of their dingy shirts and the yellowing creases oftheir crumpled collars. Their flabby cravats were twisted into ropesas soon as they wound them about their throats. The enormous quantityof linen which allowed these people to have their clothing washed onlyonce in six months, and to keep it during that time in the depths oftheir closets, also enabled time to lay its grimy and decaying stainsupon it. There was perfect unison of ill-grace and senility aboutthem; their faces, as faded as their threadbare coats, as creased astheir trousers, were worn-out, shrivelled-up, and puckered. As for theothers, the general negligence of their dress, which was incompleteand wanting in freshness,--like the toilet of all country places,where insensibly people cease to dress for others and come to thinkseriously of the price of a pair of gloves,--was in keeping with thenegligence of the Cruchots. A horror of fashion was the only point onwhich the Grassinists and the Cruchotines agreed.

°°°°When the Parisian took up his eye-glass to examine the strangeaccessories of this dwelling,--the joists of the ceiling, the color ofthe woodwork, and the specks which the flies had left there insufficient number to punctuate the "Moniteur" and the "Encyclopaediaof Sciences,"--the loto-players lifted their noses and looked at himwith as much curiosity as they might have felt about a giraffe.Monsieur des Grassins and his son, to whom the appearance of a man offashion was not wholly unknown, were nevertheless as much astonishedas their neighbors, whether it was that they fell under theindefinable influence of the general feeling, or that they reallyshared it as with satirical glances they seemed to say to theircompatriots,--

°°°°"That is what you see in Paris!"

°°°°They were able to examine Charles at their leisure without fearing todisplease the master of the house. Grandet was absorbed in the longletter which he held in his hand; and to read it he had taken the onlycandle upon the card-table, paying no heed to his guests or theirpleasure. Eugenie, to whom such a type of perfection, whether of dressor of person, was absolutely unknown, thought she beheld in her cousina being descended from seraphic spheres. She inhaled with delight thefragrance wafted from the graceful curls of that brilliant head. Shewould have liked to touch the soft kid of the delicate gloves. Sheenvied Charles his small hands, his complexion, the freshness andrefinement of his features. In short,--if it is possible to sum up theeffect this elegant being produced upon an ignorant young girlperpetually employed in darning stockings or in mending her father'sclothes, and whose life flowed on beneath these unclean rafters,seeing none but occasional passers along the silent street,--thisvision of her cousin roused in her soul an emotion of delicate desirelike that inspired in a young man by the fanciful pictures of womendrawn by Westall for the English "Keepsakes," and that engraved by theFindens with so clever a tool that we fear, as we breathe upon thepaper, that the celestial apparitions may be wafted away. Charles drewfrom his pocket a handkerchief embroidered by the great lady nowtravelling in Scotland. As Eugenie saw this pretty piece of work, donein the vacant hours which were lost to love, she looked at her cousinto see if it were possible that he meant to make use of it. Themanners of the young man, his gestures, the way in which he took uphis eye-glass, his affected superciliousness, his contemptuous glanceat the coffer which had just given so much pleasure to the richheiress, and which he evidently regarded as without value, or even asridiculous,--all these things, which shocked the Cruchots and the desGrassins, pleased Eugenie so deeply that before she slept she dreamedlong dreams of her phoenix cousin.

°°°°The loto-numbers were drawn very slowly, and presently the game camesuddenly to an end. La Grand Nanon entered and said aloud: "Madame, Iwant the sheets for monsieur's bed."

°°°°Madame Grandet followed her out. Madame des Grassins said in a lowvoice: "Let us keep our sous and stop playing." Each took his or hertwo sous from the chipped saucer in which they had been put; then theparty moved in a body toward the fire.

°°°°"Have you finished your game?" said Grandet, without looking up fromhis letter.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" replied Madame des Grassins, taking a seat near Charles.Eugenie, prompted by a thought often born in the heart of a young girlwhen sentiment enters it for the first time, left the room to go andhelp her mother and Nanon. Had an able confessor then questioned hershe would, no doubt, have avowed to him that she thought neither ofher mother nor of Nanon, but was pricked by a poignant desire to lookafter her cousin's room and concern herself with her cousin; to supplywhat might be needed, to remedy any forgetfulness, to see that all wasdone to make it, as far as possible, suitable and elegant; and, infact, she arrived in time to prove to her mother and Nanon thateverything still remained to be done. She put into Nanon's head thenotion of passing a warming-pan between the sheets. She herselfcovered the old table with a cloth and requested Nanon to change itevery morning; she convinced her mother that it was necessary to lighta good fire, and persuaded Nanon to bring up a great pile of wood intothe corridor without saying anything to her father. She ran to get,from one of the corner-shelves of the hall, a tray of old lacquerwhich was part of the inheritance of the late Monsieur de laBertelliere, catching up at the same time a six-sided crystal goblet,a little tarnished gilt spoon, an antique flask engraved with cupids,all of which she put triumphantly on the corner of her cousin'schimney-piece. More ideas surged through her head in one quarter of anhour than she had ever had since she came into the world."Mamma," she said, "my cousin will never bear the smell of a tallowcandle; suppose we buy a wax one?" And she darted, swift as a bird, toget the five-franc piece which she had just received for her monthlyexpenses. "Here, Nanon," she cried, "quick!"

°°°°"What will your father say?" This terrible remonstrance was uttered byMadame Grandet as she beheld her daughter armed with an old Sevressugar-basin which Grandet had brought home from the chateau ofFroidfond. "And where will you get the sugar? Are you crazy?""Mamma, Nanon can buy some sugar as well as the candle."

°°°°"But your father?"

°°°°"Surely his nephew ought not to go without a glass of /eau sucree/?Besides, he will not notice it."

°°°°"Your father sees everything," said Madame Grandet, shaking her head.Nanon hesitated; she knew her master.

°°°°"Come, Nanon, go,--because it is my birthday."

°°°°Nanon gave a loud laugh as she heard the first little jest her youngmistress had ever made, and then obeyed her.

°°°°While Eugenie and her mother were trying to embellish the bedroomassigned by Monsieur Grandet for his nephew, Charles himself was theobject of Madame des Grassins' attentions; to all appearances she wassetting her cap at him.

°°°°"You are very courageous, monsieur," she said to the young dandy, "toleave the pleasures of the capital at this season and take up yourabode in Saumur. But if we do not frighten you away, you will findthere are some amusements even here."

°°°°She threw him the ogling glance of the provinces, where women put somuch prudence and reserve into their eyes that they impart to them theprudish concupiscence peculiar to certain ecclesiastics to whom allpleasure is either a theft or an error. Charles was so completely outof his element in this abode, and so far from the vast chateau and thesumptuous life with which his fancy had endowed his uncle, that as helooked at Madame des Grassins he perceived a dim likeness to Parisianfaces. He gracefully responded to the species of invitation addressedto him, and began very naturally a conversation, in which Madame desGrassins gradually lowered her voice so as to bring it into harmonywith the nature of the confidences she was making. With her, as withCharles, there was the need of conference; so after a few momentsspent in coquettish phrases and a little serious jesting, the cleverprovincial said, thinking herself unheard by the others, who werediscussing the sale of wines which at that season filled the heads ofevery one in Saumur,--

°°°°"Monsieur if you will do us the honor to come and see us, you willgive as much pleasure to my husband as to myself. Our salon is theonly one in Saumur where you will find the higher business circlesmingling with the nobility. We belong to both societies, who meet atour house simply because they find it amusing. My husband--I say itwith pride--is as much valued by the one class as by the other. Wewill try to relieve the monotony of your visit here. If you stay allthe time with Monsieur Grandet, good heavens! what will become of you?Your uncle is a sordid miser who thinks of nothing but his vines; youraunt is a pious soul who can't put two ideas together; and your cousinis a little fool, without education, perfectly common, no fortune, whowill spend her life in darning towels."

°°°°"She is really very nice, this woman," thought Charles Grandet as heduly responded to Madame des Grassins' coquetries.

°°°°"It seems to me, wife, that you are taking possession of monsieur,"said the stout banker, laughing.

°°°°On this remark the notary and the president said a few words that weremore or less significant; but the abbe, looking at them slyly, broughttheir thoughts to a focus by taking a pinch of snuff and saying as hehanded round his snuff-box: "Who can do the honors of Saumur formonsieur so well as madame?"

°°°°"Ah! what do you mean by that, monsieur l'abbe?" demanded Monsieur desGrassins.

°°°°"I mean it in the best possible sense for you, for madame, for thetown of Saumur, and for monsieur," said the wily old man, turning toCharles.

°°°°The Abbe Cruchot had guessed the conversation between Charles andMadame des Grassins without seeming to pay attention to it."Monsieur," said Adolphe to Charles with an air which he tried to makefree and easy, "I don't know whether you remember me, but I had thehonor of dancing as your /vis-a-vis/ at a ball given by the Baron deNucingen, and--"

°°°°"Perfectly; I remember perfectly, monsieur," answered Charles, pleasedto find himself the object of general attention.

°°°°"Monsieur is your son?" he said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°The abbe looked at her maliciously.

°°°°"Yes, monsieur," she answered.

°°°°"Then you were very young when you were in Paris?" said Charles,addressing Adolphe.

°°°°"You must know, monsieur," said the abbe, "that we send them toBabylon as soon as they are weaned."

°°°°Madame des Grassins examined the abbe with a glance of extremepenetration.

°°°°"It is only in the provinces," he continued, "that you will find womenof thirty and more years as fresh as madame, here, with a son about totake his degree. I almost fancy myself back in the days when the youngmen stood on chairs in the ball-room to see you dance, madame," saidthe abbe, turning to his female adversary. "To me, your triumphs arebut of yesterday--"

°°°°"The old rogue!" thought Madame Grassins; "can he have guessed myintentions?"

°°°°"It seems that I shall have a good deal of success in Saumur," thoughtCharles as he unbuttoned his great-coat, put a hand into hiswaistcoat, and cast a glance into the far distance, to imitate theattitude which Chantrey has given to Lord Byron.

°°°°The inattention of Pere Grandet, or, to speak more truly, thepreoccupation of mind into which the reading of the letter had plungedhim, did not escape the vigilance of the notary and the president, whotried to guess the contents of the letter by the almost imperceptiblemotions of the miser's face, which was then under the full light ofthe candle. He maintained the habitual calm of his features withevident difficulty; we may, in fact, picture to ourselves thecountenance such a man endeavored to preserve as he read the fatalletter which here follows:--

°°°°My Brother,--It is almost twenty-three years since we have seen

°°°°each other. My marriage was the occasion of our last interview,

°°°°after which we parted, and both of us were happy. Assuredly I

°°°°could not then foresee that you would one day be the prop of the

°°°°family whose prosperity you then predicted.

°°°°When you hold this letter within your hands I shall be no longer

°°°°living. In the position I now hold I cannot survive the disgrace

°°°°of bankruptcy. I have waited on the edge of the gulf until the

°°°°last moment, hoping to save myself. The end has come, I must sink

°°°°into it. The double bankruptcies of my broker and of Roguin, my

°°°°notary, have carried off my last resources and left me nothing. I

°°°°have the bitterness of owing nearly four millions, with assets not

°°°°more than twenty-five per cent in value to pay them. The wines in

°°°°my warehouses suffer from the fall in prices caused by the

°°°°abundance and quality of your vintage. In three days Paris will

°°°°cry out: "Monsieur Grandet was a knave!" and I, an honest man,

°°°°shall be lying in my winding-sheet of infamy. I deprive my son of

°°°°a good name, which I have stained, and the fortune of his mother,

°°°°which I have lost. He knows nothing of all this,--my unfortunate

°°°°child whom I idolize! We parted tenderly. He was ignorant,

°°°°happily, that the last beatings of my heart were spent in that

°°°°farewell. Will he not some day curse me? My brother, my brother!

°°°°the curses of our children are horrible; they can appeal against

°°°°ours, but theirs are irrevocable. Grandet, you are my elder

°°°°brother, you owe me your protection; act for me so that Charles

°°°°may cast no bitter words upon my grave! My brother, if I were

°°°°writing with my blood, with my tears, no greater anguish could I

°°°°put into this letter,--nor as great, for then I should weep, I

°°°°should bleed, I should die, I should suffer no more, but now I

°°°°suffer and look at death with dry eyes.

°°°°From henceforth you are my son's father; he has no relations, as

°°°°you well know, on his mother's side. Why did I not consider social

°°°°prejudices? Why did I yield to love? Why did I marry the natural

°°°°daughter of a great lord? Charles has no family. Oh, my unhappy

°°°°son! my son! Listen, Grandet! I implore nothing for myself,--

°°°°besides, your property may not be large enough to carry a mortgage

°°°°of three millions,--but for my son! Brother, my suppliant hands

°°°°are clasped as I think of you; behold them! Grandet, I confide my

°°°°son to you in dying, and I look at the means of death with less

°°°°pain as I think that you will be to him a father. He loved me

°°°°well, my Charles; I was good to him, I never thwarted him; he will

°°°°not curse me. Ah, you see! he is gentle, he is like his mother, he

°°°°will cause you no grief. Poor boy! accustomed to all the

°°°°enjoyments of luxury, he knows nothing of the privations to which

°°°°you and I were condemned by the poverty of our youth. And I leave

°°°°him ruined! alone! Yes, all my friends will avoid him, and it is I

°°°°who have brought this humiliation upon him! Would that I had the

°°°°force to send him with one thrust into the heavens to his mother's

°°°°side! Madness! I come back to my disaster--to his. I send him to

°°°°you that you may tell him in some fitting way of my death, of his

°°°°future fate. Be a father to him, but a good father. Do not tear

°°°°him all at once from his idle life, it would kill him. I beg him

°°°°on my knees to renounce all rights that, as his mother's heir, he

°°°°may have on my estate. But the prayer is superfluous; he is

°°°°honorable, and he will feel that he must not appear among my

°°°°creditors. Bring him to see this at the right time; reveal to him

°°°°the hard conditions of the life I have made for him: and if he

°°°°still has tender thoughts of me, tell him in my name that all is

°°°°not lost for him. Yes, work, labor, which saved us both, may give

°°°°him back the fortune of which I have deprived him; and if he

°°°°listens to his father's voice as it reaches him from the grave, he

°°°°will go the Indies. My brother, Charles is an upright and

°°°°courageous young man; give him the wherewithal to make his

°°°°venture; he will die sooner than not repay you the funds which you

°°°°may lend him. Grandet! if you will not do this, you will lay up

°°°°for yourself remorse. Ah, should my child find neither tenderness

°°°°nor succor in you, I would call down the vengeance of God upon

°°°°your cruelty!

°°°°If I had been able to save something from the wreck, I might have

°°°°had the right to leave him at least a portion of his mother's

°°°°property; but my last monthly payments have absorbed everything. I

°°°°did not wish to die uncertain of my child's fate; I hoped to feel

°°°°a sacred promise in a clasp of your hand which might have warmed

°°°°my heart: but time fails me. While Charles is journeying to you I

°°°°shall be preparing my assignment. I shall endeavor to show by the

°°°°order and good faith of my accounts that my disaster comes neither

°°°°from a faulty life nor from dishonesty. It is for my son's sake

°°°°that I strive to do this.

°°°°Farewell, my brother! May the blessing of God be yours for the

°°°°generous guardianship I lay upon you, and which, I doubt not, you

°°°°will accept. A voice will henceforth and forever pray for you in

°°°°that world where we must all go, and where I am now as you read

°°°°these lines.

°°°°Victor-Ange-Guillaume Grandet.

°°°°"So you are talking?" said Pere Grandet as he carefully folded theletter in its original creases and put it into his waistcoat-pocket.He looked at his nephew with a humble, timid air, beneath which he hidhis feelings and his calculations. "Have you warmed yourself?" he saidto him.

°°°°"Thoroughly, my dear uncle."

°°°°"Well, where are the women?" said his uncle, already forgetting thathis nephew was to sleep at the house. At this moment Eugenie andMadame Grandet returned.

°°°°"Is the room all ready?" said Grandet, recovering his composure."Yes, father."

°°°°"Well then, my nephew, if you are tired, Nanon shall show you yourroom. It isn't a dandy's room; but you will excuse a poor wine-growerwho never has a penny to spare. Taxes swallow up everything.""We do not wish to intrude, Grandet," said the banker; "you may wantto talk to your nephew, and therefore we will bid you good-night."At these words the assembly rose, and each made a parting bow inkeeping with his or her own character. The old notary went to the doorto fetch his lantern and came back to light it, offering to accompanythe des Grassins on their way. Madame des Grassins had not foreseenthe incident which brought the evening prematurely to an end, herservant therefore had not arrived.

°°°°"Will you do me the honor to take my arm, madame?" said the abbe."Thank you, monsieur l'abbe, but I have my son," she answered dryly."Ladies cannot compromise themselves with me," said the abbe."Take Monsieur Cruchot's arm," said her husband.

°°°°The abbe walked off with the pretty lady so quickly that they weresoon some distance in advance of the caravan.

°°°°"That is a good-looking young man, madame," he said, pressing her arm."Good-by to the grapes, the vintage is done. It is all over with us.We may as well say adieu to Mademoiselle Grandet. Eugenie will belongto the dandy. Unless this cousin is enamoured of some Parisian woman,your son Adolphe will find another rival in--"

°°°°"Not at all, monsieur l'abbe. This young man cannot fail to see thatEugenie is a little fool,--a girl without the least freshness. Did younotice her to-night? She was as yellow as a quince."

°°°°"Perhaps you made the cousin notice it?"

°°°°"I did not take the trouble--"

°°°°"Place yourself always beside Eugenie, madame, and you need never takethe trouble to say anything to the young man against his cousin; hewill make his own comparisons, which--"

°°°°"Well, he has promised to dine with me the day after to-morrow.""Ah! if you only /would/, madame--" said the abbe.

°°°°"What is it that you wish me to do, monsieur l'abbe? Do you mean tooffer me bad advice? I have not reached the age of thirty-nine,without a stain upon my reputation, thank God! to compromise myselfnow, even for the empire of the Great Mogul. You and I are of an agewhen we both know the meaning of words. For an ecclesiastic, youcertainly have ideas that are very incongruous. Fie! it is worthy ofFaublas!"

°°°°"You have read Faublas?"

°°°°"No, monsieur l'abbe; I meant to say the /Liaisons dangereuses/.""Ah! that book is infinitely more moral," said the abbe, laughing."But you make me out as wicked as a young man of the present day; Ionly meant--"

°°°°"Do you dare to tell me you were not thinking of putting wicked thingsinto my head? Isn't it perfectly clear? If this young man--who I admitis very good-looking--were to make love to me, he would not think ofhis cousin. In Paris, I know, good mothers do devote themselves inthis way to the happiness and welfare of their children; but we livein the provinces, monsieur l'abbe."

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"And," she continued, "I do not want, and Adolphe himself would notwant, a hundred millions brought at such a price."

°°°°"Madame, I said nothing about a hundred millions; that temptationmight be too great for either of us to withstand. Only, I do thinkthat an honest woman may permit herself, in all honor, certainharmless little coquetries, which are, in fact, part of her socialduty and which--"

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"Are we not bound, madame, to make ourselves agreeable to each other?--Permit me to blow my nose.--I assure you, madame," he resumed, "thatthe young gentleman ogled you through his glass in a more flatteringmanner than he put on when he looked at me; but I forgive him fordoing homage to beauty in preference to old age--"

°°°°"It is quite apparent," said the president in his loud voice, "thatMonsieur Grandet of Paris has sent his son to Saumur with extremelymatrimonial intentions."

°°°°"But in that case the cousin wouldn't have fallen among us like acannon-ball," answered the notary.

°°°°"That doesn't prove anything," said Monsieur des Grassins; "the oldmiser is always making mysteries."

°°°°"Des Grassins, my friend, I have invited the young man to dinner. Youmust go and ask Monsieur and Madame de Larsonniere and the du Hautoys,with the beautiful demoiselle du Hautoy, of course. I hope she will beproperly dressed; that jealous mother of hers does make such a frightof her! Gentlemen, I trust that you will all do us the honor to come,"she added, stopping the procession to address the two Cruchots."Here you are at home, madame," said the notary.

°°°°After bowing to the three des Grassins, the three Cruchots returnedhome, applying their provincial genius for analysis to studying, underall its aspects, the great event of the evening, which undoubtedlychanged the respective positions of Grassinists and Cruchotines. Theadmirable common-sense which guided all the actions of these greatmachinators made each side feel the necessity of a momentary allianceagainst a common enemy. Must they not mutually hinder Eugenie fromloving her cousin, and the cousin from thinking of Eugenie? Could theParisian resist the influence of treacherous insinuations, soft-spokencalumnies, slanders full of faint praise and artless denials, whichshould be made to circle incessantly about him and deceive him?IV

°°°°When the four relations were left alone, Monsieur Grandet said to hisnephew,--

°°°°"We must go to bed. It is too late to talk about the matters whichhave brought you here; to-morrow we will take a suitable moment. Webreakfast at eight o'clock; at midday we eat a little fruit or a bitof bread, and drink a glass of white wine; and we dine, like theParisians, at five o'clock. That's the order of the day. If you liketo go and see the town and the environs you are free to do so. Youwill excuse me if my occupations do not permit me to accompany you.You may perhaps hear people say that I am rich,--Monsieur Grandetthis, Monsieur Grandet that. I let them talk; their gossip does nothurt my credit. But I have not a penny; I work in my old age like anapprentice whose worldly goods are a bad plane and two good arms.Perhaps you'll soon know yourself what a franc costs when you have gotto sweat for it. Nanon, where are the candles?"

°°°°"I trust, my nephew, that you will find all you want," said MadameGrandet; "but if you should need anything else, you can call Nanon.""My dear aunt, I shall need nothing; I have, I believe, broughteverything with me. Permit me to bid you good-night, and my youngcousin also."

°°°°Charles took a lighted wax candle from Nanon's hand,--an Anjou candle,very yellow in color, and so shopworn that it looked like tallow anddeceived Monsieur Grandet, who, incapable of suspecting its presenceunder his roof, did not perceive this magnificence.

°°°°"I will show you the way," he said.

°°°°Instead of leaving the hall by the door which opened under thearchway, Grandet ceremoniously went through the passage which dividedthe hall from the kitchen. A swing-door, furnished with a large ovalpane of glass, shut this passage from the staircase, so as to fend offthe cold air which rushed through it. But the north wind whistled nonethe less keenly in winter, and, in spite of the sand-bags at thebottom of the doors of the living-room, the temperature within couldscarcely be kept at a proper height. Nanon went to bolt the outerdoor; then she closed the hall and let loose a wolf-dog, whose barkwas so strangled that he seemed to have laryngitis. This animal, notedfor his ferocity, recognized no one but Nanon; the two untutoredchildren of the fields understood each other.

°°°°When Charles saw the yellow, smoke-stained walls of the well of thestaircase, where each worm-eaten step shook under the heavy foot-fallof his uncle, his expectations began to sober more and more. Hefancied himself in a hen-roost. His aunt and cousin, to whom he turnedan inquiring look, were so used to the staircase that they did notguess the cause of his amazement, and took the glance for anexpression of friendliness, which they answered by a smile that madehim desperate.

°°°°"Why the devil did my father send me to such a place?" he said tohimself.

°°°°When they reached the first landing he saw three doors painted inEtruscan red and without casings,--doors sunk in the dusty walls andprovided with iron bars, which in fact were bolts, each ending withthe pattern of a flame, as did both ends of the long sheath of thelock. The first door at the top of the staircase, which opened into aroom directly above the kitchen, was evidently walled up. In fact, theonly entrance to that room was through Grandet's bedchamber; the roomitself was his office. The single window which lighted it, on the sideof the court, was protected by a lattice of strong iron bars. No one,not even Madame Grandet, had permission to enter it. The old man choseto be alone, like an alchemist in his laboratory. There, no doubt,some hiding-place had been ingeniously constructed; there the title-deeds of property were stored; there hung the scales on which to weighthe louis; there were devised, by night and secretly, the estimates,the profits, the receipts, so that business men, finding Grandetprepared at all points, imagined that he got his cue from fairies ordemons; there, no doubt, while Nanon's loud snoring shook the rafters,while the wolf-dog watched and yawned in the courtyard, while Madameand Mademoiselle Grandet were quietly sleeping, came the old cooper tocuddle, to con over, to caress and clutch and clasp his gold. Thewalls were thick, the screens sure. He alone had the key of thislaboratory, where--so people declared--he studied the maps on whichhis fruit-trees were marked, and calculated his profits to a vine, andalmost to a twig.

°°°°The door of Eugenie's chamber was opposite to the walled-up entranceto this room. At the other end of the landing were the appartements ofthe married pair, which occupied the whole front of the house. MadameGrandet had a room next to that of Eugenie, which was entered througha glass door. The master's chamber was separated from that of his wifeby a partition, and from the mysterious strong-room by a thick wall.Pere Grandet lodged his nephew on the second floor, in the highmansarde attic which was above his own bedroom, so that he might hearhim if the young man took it into his head to go and come. WhenEugenie and her mother reached the middle of the landing they kissedeach other for good-night; then with a few words of adieu to Charles,cold upon the lips, but certainly very warm in the heart of the younggirl, they withdrew into their own chambers.

°°°°"Here you are in your room, my nephew," said Pere Grandet as he openedthe door. "If you need to go out, call Nanon; without her, beware! thedog would eat you up without a word. Sleep well. Good-night. Ha! why,they have made you a fire!" he cried.

°°°°At this moment Nanon appeared with the warming pan.

°°°°"Here's something more!" said Monsieur Grandet. "Do you take my nephewfor a lying-in woman? Carry off your brazier, Nanon!"

°°°°"But, monsieur, the sheets are damp, and this gentleman is as delicateas a woman."

°°°°"Well, go on, as you've taken it into your head," said Grandet,pushing her by the shoulders; "but don't set things on fire." Sosaying, the miser went down-stairs, grumbling indistinct sentences.Charles stood aghast in the midst of his trunks. After casting hiseyes on the attic-walls covered with that yellow paper sprinkled withbouquets so well known in dance-houses, on the fireplace of ribbedstone whose very look was chilling, on the chairs of yellow wood withvarnished cane seats that seemed to have more than the usual fourangles, on the open night-table capacious enough to hold a smallsergeant-at-arms, on the meagre bit of rag-carpet beside the bed, onthe tester whose cloth valance shook as if, devoured by moths, it wasabout to fall, he turned gravely to la Grande Nanon and said,--"Look here! my dear woman, just tell me, am I in the house of MonsieurGrandet, formerly mayor of Saumur, and brother to Monsieur Grandet ofParis?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur; and a very good, a very kind, a very perfectgentleman. Shall I help you to unpack your trunks?"

°°°°"Faith! yes, if you will, my old trooper. Didn't you serve in themarines of the Imperial Guard?"

°°°°"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Nanon. "What's that,--the marines of the guard?Is it salt? Does it go in the water?"

°°°°"Here, get me my dressing-gown out of that valise; there's the key."Nanon was wonder-struck by the sight of a dressing-gown made of greensilk, brocaded with gold flowers of an antique design.

°°°°"Are you going to put that on to go to bed with?" she asked."Yes."

°°°°"Holy Virgin! what a beautiful altar-cloth it would make for theparish church! My dear darling monsieur, give it to the church, andyou'll save your soul; if you don't, you'll lose it. Oh, how nice youlook in it! I must call mademoiselle to see you."

°°°°"Come, Nanon, if Nanon you are, hold your tongue; let me go to bed.I'll arrange my things to-morrow. If my dressing-gown pleases you somuch, you shall save your soul. I'm too good a Christian not to giveit to you when I go away, and you can do what you like with it."Nanon stood rooted to the ground, gazing at Charles and unable to putfaith into his words.

°°°°"Good night, Nanon."

°°°°"What in the world have I come here for?" thought Charles as he wentto sleep. "My father is not a fool; my journey must have some object.Pshaw! put off serious thought till the morrow, as some Greek idiotsaid."

°°°°"Blessed Virgin! how charming he is, my cousin!" Eugenie was saying,interrupting her prayers, which that night at least were neverfinished.

°°°°Madame Grandet had no thoughts at all as she went to bed. She heardthe miser walking up and down his room through the door ofcommunication which was in the middle of the partition. Like all timidwomen, she had studied the character of her lord. Just as the petrelforesees the storm, she knew by imperceptible signs when an inwardtempest shook her husband; and at such times, to use an expression ofher own, she "feigned dead."

°°°°Grandet gazed at the door lined with sheet-iron which he lately put tohis sanctum, and said to himself,--

°°°°"What a crazy idea of my brother to bequeath his son to me! A finelegacy! I have not fifty francs to give him. What are fifty francs toa dandy who looked at my barometer as if he meant to make firewood ofit!"

°°°°In thinking over the consequences of that legacy of anguish Grandetwas perhaps more agitated than his brother had been at the moment ofwriting it.

°°°°"I shall have that golden robe," thought Nanon, who went to sleeptricked out in her altar-cloth, dreaming for the first time in herlife of flowers, embroidery, and damask, just as Eugenie was dreamingof love.

°°°°*****

°°°°In the pure and monotonous life of young girls there comes a delicioushour when the sun sheds its rays into their soul, when the flowersexpress their thoughts, when the throbbings of the heart send upwardto the brain their fertilizing warmth and melt all thoughts into avague desire,--day of innocent melancholy and of dulcet joys! Whenbabes begin to see, they smile; when a young girl first perceives thesentiment of nature, she smiles as she smiled when an infant. If lightis the first love of life, is not love a light to the heart? Themoment to see within the veil of earthly things had come for Eugenie.An early riser, like all provincial girls, she was up betimes and saidher prayers, and then began the business of dressing,--a businesswhich henceforth was to have a meaning. First she brushed and smoothedher chestnut hair and twisted its heavy masses to the top of her headwith the utmost care, preventing the loose tresses from straying, andgiving to her head a symmetry which heightened the timid candor of herface; for the simplicity of these accessories accorded well with theinnocent sincerity of its lines. As she washed her hands again andagain in the cold water which hardened and reddened the skin, shelooked at her handsome round arms and asked herself what her cousindid to make his hands so softly white, his nails so delicately curved.She put on new stockings and her prettiest shoes. She laced her corsetstraight, without skipping a single eyelet. And then, wishing for thefirst time in her life to appear to advantage, she felt the joy ofhaving a new gown, well made, which rendered her attractive.As she finished her toilet the clock of the parish church struck thehour; to her astonishment, it was only seven. The desire of havingplenty of time for dressing carefully had led her to get up too early.Ignorant of the art of retouching every curl and studying everyeffect, Eugenie simply crossed her arms, sat down by the window, andlooked at the court-yard, the narrow garden, and the high terracedwalls that over-topped it: a dismal, hedged-in prospect, yet notwholly devoid of those mysterious beauties which belong to solitary oruncultivated nature. Near the kitchen was a well surrounded by a curb,with a pulley fastened to a bent iron rod clasped by a vine whoseleaves were withered, reddened, and shrivelled by the season. Fromthence the tortuous shoots straggled to the wall, clutched it, and ranthe whole length of the house, ending near the wood-pile, where thelogs were ranged with as much precision as the books in a library. Thepavement of the court-yard showed the black stains produced in time bylichens, herbage, and the absence of all movement or friction. Thethick walls wore a coating of green moss streaked with waving brownlines, and the eight stone steps at the bottom of the court-yard whichled up to the gate of the garden were disjointed and hidden beneathtall plants, like the tomb of a knight buried by his widow in the daysof the Crusades. Above a foundation of moss-grown, crumbling stoneswas a trellis of rotten wood, half fallen from decay; over themclambered and intertwined at will a mass of clustering creepers. Oneach side of the latticed gate stretched the crooked arms of twostunted apple-trees. Three parallel walks, gravelled and separatedfrom each other by square beds, where the earth was held in by box-borders, made the garden, which terminated, beneath a terrace of theold walls, in a group of lindens. At the farther end were raspberry-bushes; at the other, near the house, an immense walnut-tree droopedits branches almost into the window of the miser's sanctum.A clear day and the beautiful autumnal sun common to the banks of theLoire was beginning to melt the hoar-frost which the night had laid onthese picturesque objects, on the walls, and on the plants whichswathed the court-yard. Eugenie found a novel charm in the aspect ofthings lately so insignificant to her. A thousand confused thoughtscame to birth in her mind and grew there, as the sunbeams grew withoutalong the wall. She felt that impulse of delight, vague, inexplicable,which wraps the moral being as a cloud wraps the physical body. Herthoughts were all in keeping with the details of this strangelandscape, and the harmonies of her heart blended with the harmoniesof nature. When the sun reached an angle of the wall where the "Venus-hair" of southern climes drooped its thick leaves, lit with thechanging colors of a pigeon's breast, celestial rays of hope illuminedthe future to her eyes, and thenceforth she loved to gaze upon thatpiece of wall, on its pale flowers, its blue harebells, its wiltingherbage, with which she mingled memories as tender as those ofchildhood. The noise made by each leaf as it fell from its twig in thevoid of that echoing court gave answer to the secret questionings ofthe young girl, who could have stayed there the livelong day withoutperceiving the flight of time. Then came tumultuous heavings of thesoul. She rose often, went to her glass, and looked at herself, as anauthor in good faith looks at his work to criticise it and blame it inhis own mind.

°°°°"I am not beautiful enough for him!" Such was Eugenie's thought,--ahumble thought, fertile in suffering. The poor girl did not do herselfjustice; but modesty, or rather fear, is among the first of love'svirtues. Eugenie belonged to the type of children with sturdyconstitutions, such as we see among the lesser bourgeoisie, whosebeauties always seem a little vulgar; and yet, though she resembledthe Venus of Milo, the lines of her figure were ennobled by the softerChristian sentiment which purifies womanhood and gives it adistinction unknown to the sculptors of antiquity. She had an enormoushead, with the masculine yet delicate forehead of the Jupiter ofPhidias, and gray eyes, to which her chaste life, penetrating fullyinto them, carried a flood of light. The features of her round face,formerly fresh and rosy, were at one time swollen by the small-pox,which destroyed the velvet texture of the skin, though it kindly leftno other traces, and her cheek was still so soft and delicate that hermother's kiss made a momentary red mark upon it. Her nose was somewhattoo thick, but it harmonized well with the vermilion mouth, whoselips, creased in many lines, were full of love and kindness. Thethroat was exquisitely round. The bust, well curved and carefullycovered, attracted the eye and inspired reverie. It lacked, no doubt,the grace which a fitting dress can bestow; but to a connoisseur thenon-flexibility of her figure had its own charm. Eugenie, tall andstrongly made, had none of the prettiness which pleases the masses;but she was beautiful with a beauty which the spirit recognizes, andnone but artists truly love. A painter seeking here below for a typeof Mary's celestial purity, searching womankind for those proud modesteyes which Raphael divined, for those virgin lines, often due tochances of conception, which the modesty of Christian life alone canbestow or keep unchanged,--such a painter, in love with his ideal,would have found in the face of Eugenie the innate nobleness that isignorant of itself; he would have seen beneath the calmness of thatbrow a world of love; he would have felt, in the shape of the eyes, inthe fall of the eyelids, the presence of the nameless something thatwe call divine. Her features, the contour of her head, which noexpression of pleasure had ever altered or wearied, were like thelines of the horizon softly traced in the far distance across thetranquil lakes. That calm and rosy countenance, margined with lightlike a lovely full-blown flower, rested the mind, held the eye, andimparted the charm of the conscience that was there reflected. Eugeniewas standing on the shore of life where young illusions flower, wheredaisies are gathered with delights ere long to be unknown; and thusshe said, looking at her image in the glass, unconscious as yet oflove: "I am too ugly; he will not notice me."

°°°°Then she opened the door of her chamber which led to the staircase,and stretched out her neck to listen for the household noises. "He isnot up," she thought, hearing Nanon's morning cough as the good soulwent and came, sweeping out the halls, lighting her fire, chaining thedog, and speaking to the beasts in the stable. Eugenie at once wentdown and ran to Nanon, who was milking the cow.

°°°°"Nanon, my good Nanon, make a little cream for my cousin's breakfast.""Why, mademoiselle, you should have thought of that yesterday," saidNanon, bursting into a loud peal of laughter. "I can't make cream.Your cousin is a darling, a darling! oh, that he is! You should haveseen him in his dressing-gown, all silk and gold! I saw him, I did! Hewears linen as fine as the surplice of monsieur le cure.""Nanon, please make us a /galette/."

°°°°"And who'll give me wood for the oven, and flour and butter for thecakes?" said Nanon, who in her function of prime-minister to Grandetassumed at times enormous importance in the eyes of Eugenie and hermother. "Mustn't rob the master to feast the cousin. You ask him forbutter and flour and wood: he's your father, perhaps he'll give yousome. See! there he is now, coming to give out the provisions."Eugenie escaped into the garden, quite frightened as she heard thestaircase shaking under her father's step. Already she felt theeffects of that virgin modesty and that special consciousness ofhappiness which lead us to fancy, not perhaps without reason, that ourthoughts are graven on our foreheads and are open to the eyes of all.Perceiving for the first time the cold nakedness of her father'shouse, the poor girl felt a sort of rage that she could not put it inharmony with her cousin's elegance. She felt the need of doingsomething for him,--what, she did not know. Ingenuous and truthful,she followed her angelic nature without mistrusting her impressions orher feelings. The mere sight of her cousin had wakened within her thenatural yearnings of a woman,--yearnings that were the more likely todevelop ardently because, having reached her twenty-third year, shewas in the plenitude of her intelligence and her desires. For thefirst time in her life her heart was full of terror at the sight ofher father; in him she saw the master of the fate, and she fanciedherself guilty of wrong-doing in hiding from his knowledge certainthoughts. She walked with hasty steps, surprised to breathe a purerair, to feel the sun's rays quickening her pulses, to absorb fromtheir heat a moral warmth and a new life. As she turned over in hermind some stratagem by which to get the cake, a quarrel--an event asrare as the sight of swallows in winter--broke out between la GrandeNanon and Grandet. Armed with his keys, the master had come to doleout provisions for the day's consumption.

°°°°"Is there any bread left from yesterday?" he said to Nanon."Not a crumb, monsieur."

°°°°Grandet took a large round loaf, well floured and moulded in one ofthe flat baskets which they use for baking in Anjou, and was about tocut it, when Nanon said to him,--

°°°°"We are five, to-day, monsieur."

°°°°"That's true," said Grandet, "but your loaves weigh six pounds;there'll be some left. Besides, these young fellows from Paris don'teat bread, you'll see."

°°°°"Then they must eat /frippe/?" said Nanon.

°°°°/Frippe/ is a word of the local lexicon of Anjou, and means anyaccompaniment of bread, from butter which is spread upon it, thecommonest kind of /frippe/, to peach preserve, the most distinguishedof all the /frippes/; those who in their childhood have licked the/frippe/ and left the bread, will comprehend the meaning of Nanon'sspeech.

°°°°"No," answered Grandet, "they eat neither bread nor /frippe/; they aresomething like marriageable girls."

°°°°After ordering the meals for the day with his usual parsimony, thegoodman, having locked the closets containing the supplies, was aboutto go towards the fruit-garden, when Nanon stopped him to say,--"Monsieur, give me a little flour and some butter, and I'll make a/galette/ for the young ones."

°°°°"Are you going to pillage the house on account of my nephew?""I wasn't thinking any more of your nephew than I was of your dog,--not more than you think yourself; for, look here, you've only forkedout six bits of sugar. I want eight."

°°°°"What's all this, Nanon? I have never seen you like this before. Whathave you got in your head? Are you the mistress here? You sha'n't havemore than six pieces of sugar."

°°°°"Well, then, how is your nephew to sweeten his coffee?"

°°°°"With two pieces; I'll go without myself."

°°°°"Go without sugar at your age! I'd rather buy you some out of my ownpocket."

°°°°"Mind your own business."

°°°°In spite of the recent fall in prices, sugar was still in Grandet'seyes the most valuable of all the colonial products; to him it wasalways six francs a pound. The necessity of economizing it, acquiredunder the Empire, had grown to be the most inveterate of his habits.All women, even the greatest ninnies, know how to dodge and dodge toget their ends; Nanon abandoned the sugar for the sake of getting the/galette/.

°°°°"Mademoiselle!" she called through the window, "do you want some/galette/?"

°°°°"No, no," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Come, Nanon," said Grandet, hearing his daughter's voice. "See here."He opened the cupboard where the flour was kept, gave her a cupful,and added a few ounces of butter to the piece he had already cut off."I shall want wood for the oven," said the implacable Nanon."Well, take what you want," he answered sadly; "but in that case youmust make us a fruit-tart, and you'll cook the whole dinner in theoven. In that way you won't need two fires."

°°°°"Goodness!" cried Nanon, "you needn't tell me that."

°°°°Grandet cast a look that was well-nigh paternal upon his faithfuldeputy.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she cried, when his back was turned, "we shall havethe /galette/."

°°°°Pere Grandet returned from the garden with the fruit and arranged aplateful on the kitchen-table.

°°°°"Just see, monsieur," said Nanon, "what pretty boots your nephew has.What leather! why it smells good! What does he clean it with, Iwonder? Am I to put your egg-polish on it?"

°°°°"Nanon, I think eggs would injure that kind of leather. Tell him youdon't know how to black morocco; yes, that's morocco. He will get yousomething himself in Saumur to polish those boots with. I have heardthat they put sugar into the blacking to make it shine."

°°°°"They look good to eat," said the cook, putting the boots to her nose."Bless me! if they don't smell like madame's eau-de-cologne. Ah! howfunny!"

°°°°"Funny!" said her master. "Do you call it funny to put more money intoboots than the man who stands in them is worth?"

°°°°"Monsieur," she said, when Grandet returned the second time, afterlocking the fruit-garden, "won't you have the /pot-au-feu/ put on onceor twice a week on account of your nephew?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Am I to go to the butcher's?"

°°°°"Certainly not. We will make the broth of fowls; the farmers willbring them. I shall tell Cornoiller to shoot some crows; they make thebest soup in the world."

°°°°"Isn't it true, monsieur, that crows eat the dead?"

°°°°"You are a fool, Nanon. They eat what they can get, like the rest ofthe world. Don't we all live on the dead? What are legacies?"Monsieur Grandet, having no further orders to give, drew out hiswatch, and seeing that he had half an hour to dispose of beforebreakfast, he took his hat, went and kissed his daughter, and said toher:

°°°°"Do you want to come for a walk in the fields, down by the Loire? Ihave something to do there."

°°°°Eugenie fetched her straw bonnet, lined with pink taffeta; then thefather and daughter went down the winding street to the shore."Where are you going at this early hour?" said Cruchot, the notary,meeting them.

°°°°"To see something," answered Grandet, not duped by the matutinalappearance of his friend.

°°°°When Pere Grandet went to "see something," the notary knew byexperience there was something to be got by going with him; so hewent.

°°°°"Come, Cruchot," said Grandet, "you are one of my friends. I'll showyou what folly it is to plant poplar-trees on good ground.""Do you call the sixty thousand francs that you pocketed for thosethat were in your fields down by the Loire, folly?" said MaitreCruchot, opening his eyes with amazement. "What luck you have had! Tocut down your trees at the very time they ran short of white-wood atNantes, and to sell them at thirty francs!"

°°°°Eugenie listened, without knowing that she approached the most solemnmoment of her whole life, and that the notary was about to bring downupon her head a paternal and supreme sentence. Grandet had now reachedthe magnificent fields which he owned on the banks of the Loire, wherethirty workmen were employed in clearing away, filling up, andlevelling the spots formerly occupied by the poplars.

°°°°"Maitre Cruchot, see how much ground this tree once took up! Jean," hecried to a laborer, "m-m-measure with your r-r-rule, b-both ways.""Four times eight feet," said the man.

°°°°"Thirty-two feet lost," said Grandet to Cruchot. "I had three hundredpoplars in this one line, isn't that so? Well, then, three h-h-hundredtimes thir-thirty-two lost m-m-me five hundred in h-h-hay; add twiceas much for the side rows,--fifteen hundred; the middle rows as muchmore. So we may c-c-call it a th-thousand b-b-bales of h-h-hay--""Very good," said Cruchot, to help out his friend; "a thousand balesare worth about six hundred francs."

°°°°"Say t-t-twelve hundred, be-c-cause there's three or four hundredfrancs on the second crop. Well, then, c-c-calculate that t-twelvethousand francs a year for f-f-forty years with interest c-c-comesto--"

°°°°"Say sixty thousand francs," said the notary.

°°°°"I am willing; c-c-comes t-t-to sixty th-th-thousand. Very good,"continued Grandet, without stuttering: "two thousand poplars fortyyears old will only yield me fifty thousand francs. There's a loss. Ihave found that myself," said Grandet, getting on his high horse."Jean, fill up all the holes except those at the bank of the river;there you are to plant the poplars I have bought. Plant 'em there, andthey'll get nourishment from the government," he said, turning toCruchot, and giving a slight motion to the wen on his nose, whichexpressed more than the most ironical of smiles.

°°°°"True enough; poplars should only be planted on poor soil," saidCruchot, amazed at Grandet's calculations.

°°°°"Y-y-yes, monsieur," answered the old man satirically.

°°°°Eugenie, who was gazing at the sublime scenery of the Loire, andpaying no attention to her father's reckonings, presently turned anear to the remarks of Cruchot when she heard him say,--

°°°°"So you have brought a son-in-law from Paris. All Saumur is talkingabout your nephew. I shall soon have the marriage-contract to draw up,hey! Pere Grandet?"

°°°°"You g-g-got up very early to t-t-tell me that," said Grandet,accompanying the remark with a motion of his wen. "Well, oldc-c-comrade, I'll be frank, and t-t-tell you what you want t-t-toknow. I would rather, do you see, f-f-fling my daughter into the Loirethan g-g-give her to her c-c-cousin. You may t-t-tell that everywhere,--no, never mind; let the world t-t-talk."

°°°°This answer dazzled and blinded the young girl with sudden light. Thedistant hopes upspringing in her heart bloomed suddenly, became real,tangible, like a cluster of flowers, and she saw them cut down andwilting on the earth. Since the previous evening she had attachedherself to Charles by those links of happiness which bind soul tosoul; from henceforth suffering was to rivet them. Is it not the nobledestiny of women to be more moved by the dark solemnities of griefthan by the splendors of fortune? How was it that fatherly feeling haddied out of her father's heart? Of what crime had Charles been guilty?Mysterious questions! Already her dawning love, a mystery so profound,was wrapping itself in mystery. She walked back trembling in all herlimbs; and when she reached the gloomy street, lately so joyous toher, she felt its sadness, she breathed the melancholy which time andevents had printed there. None of love's lessons lacked. A few stepsfrom their own door she went on before her father and waited at thethreshold. But Grandet, who saw a newspaper in the notary's hand,stopped short and asked,--

°°°°"How are the Funds?"

°°°°"You never listen to my advice, Grandet," answered Cruchot. "Buy soon;you will still make twenty per cent in two years, besides getting anexcellent rate of interest,--five thousand a year for eighty thousandfrancs fifty centimes."

°°°°"We'll see about that," answered Grandet, rubbing his chin."Good God!" exclaimed the notary.

°°°°"Well, what?" cried Grandet; and at the same moment Cruchot put thenewspaper under his eyes and said:

°°°°"Read that!"

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, one of the most respected merchants in Paris,

°°°°blew his brains out yesterday, after making his usual appearance

°°°°at the Bourse. He had sent his resignation to the president of the

°°°°Chamber of Deputies, and had also resigned his functions as a

°°°°judge of the commercial courts. The failures of Monsieur Roguin

°°°°and Monsieur Souchet, his broker and his notary, had ruined him.

°°°°The esteem felt for Monsieur Grandet and the credit he enjoyed

°°°°were nevertheless such that he might have obtained the necessary

°°°°assistance from other business houses. It is much to be regretted

°°°°that so honorable a man should have yielded to momentary despair,"

°°°°etc.

°°°°"I knew it," said the old wine-grower to the notary.

°°°°The words sent a chill of horror through Maitre Cruchot, who,notwithstanding his impassibility as a notary, felt the cold runningdown his spine as he thought that Grandet of Paris had possiblyimplored in vain the millions of Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"And his son, so joyous yesterday--"

°°°°"He knows nothing as yet," answered Grandet, with the same composure."Adieu! Monsieur Grandet," said Cruchot, who now understood the stateof the case, and went off to reassure Monsieur de Bonfons.On entering, Grandet found breakfast ready. Madame Grandet, roundwhose neck Eugenie had flung her arms, kissing her with the quickeffusion of feeling often caused by secret grief, was already seatedin her chair on castors, knitting sleeves for the coming winter."You can begin to eat," said Nanon, coming downstairs four steps at atime; "the young one is sleeping like a cherub. Isn't he a darlingwith his eyes shut? I went in and I called him: no answer.""Let him sleep," said Grandet; "he'll wake soon enough to hear ill-tidings."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Eugenie, putting into her coffee the two littlebits of sugar weighing less than half an ounce which the old miseramused himself by cutting up in his leisure hours. Madame Grandet, whodid not dare to put the question, gazed at her husband.

°°°°"His father has blown his brains out."

°°°°"My uncle?" said Eugenie.

°°°°"Poor young man!" exclaimed Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Poor indeed!" said Grandet; "he isn't worth a sou!"

°°°°"Eh! poor boy, and he's sleeping like the king of the world!" saidNanon in a gentle voice.

°°°°Eugenie stopped eating. Her heart was wrung, as the young heart iswrung when pity for the suffering of one she loves overflows, for thefirst time, the whole being of a woman. The poor girl wept."What are you crying about? You didn't know your uncle," said herfather, giving her one of those hungry tigerish looks he doubtlessthrew upon his piles of gold.

°°°°"But, monsieur," said Nanon, "who wouldn't feel pity for the pooryoung man, sleeping there like a wooden shoe, without knowing what'scoming?"

°°°°"I didn't speak to you, Nanon. Hold your tongue!"

°°°°Eugenie learned at that moment that the woman who loves must be ableto hide her feelings. She did not answer.

°°°°"You will say nothing to him about it, Ma'ame Grandet, till I return,"said the old man. "I have to go and straighten the line of my hedgealong the high-road. I shall be back at noon, in time for the secondbreakfast, and then I will talk with my nephew about his affairs. Asfor you, Mademoiselle Eugenie, if it is for that dandy you are crying,that's enough, child. He's going off like a shot to the Indies. Youwill never see him again."

°°°°The father took his gloves from the brim of his hat, put them on withhis usual composure, pushed them in place by shoving the fingers ofboth hands together, and went out.

°°°°"Mamma, I am suffocating!" cried Eugenie when she was alone with hermother; "I have never suffered like this."

°°°°Madame Grandet, seeing that she turned pale, opened the window and lether breathe fresh air.

°°°°"I feel better!" said Eugenie after a moment.

°°°°This nervous excitement in a nature hitherto, to all appearance, calmand cold, reacted on Madame Grandet; she looked at her daughter withthe sympathetic intuition with which mothers are gifted for theobjects of their tenderness, and guessed all. In truth the life of theHungarian sisters, bound together by a freak of nature, could scarcelyhave been more intimate than that of Eugenie and her mother,--alwaystogether in the embrasure of that window, and sleeping together in thesame atmosphere.

°°°°"My poor child!" said Madame Grandet, taking Eugenie's head and layingit upon her bosom.

°°°°At these words the young girl raised her head, questioned her motherby a look, and seemed to search out her inmost thought.

°°°°"Why send him to the Indies?" she said. "If he is unhappy, ought henot to stay with us? Is he not our nearest relation?"

°°°°"Yes, my child, it seems natural; but your father has his reasons: wemust respect them."

°°°°The mother and daughter sat down in silence, the former upon herraised seat, the latter in her little armchair, and both took up theirwork. Swelling with gratitude for the full heart-understanding hermother had given her, Eugenie kissed the dear hand, saying,--"How good you are, my kind mamma!"

°°°°The words sent a glow of light into the motherly face, worn andblighted as it was by many sorrows.

°°°°"You like him?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°Madame Grandet only smiled in reply. Then, after a moment's silence,she said in a low voice: "Do you love him already? That is wrong.""Wrong?" said Eugenie. "Why is it wrong? You are pleased with him,Nanon is pleased with him; why should he not please me? Come, mamma,let us set the table for his breakfast."

°°°°She threw down her work, and her mother did the same, saying, "Foolishchild!" But she sanctioned the child's folly by sharing it. Eugeniecalled Nanon.

°°°°"What do you want now, mademoiselle?"

°°°°"Nanon, can we have cream by midday?"

°°°°"Ah! midday, to be sure you can," answered the old servant."Well, let him have his coffee very strong; I heard Monsieur desGrassins say that they make the coffee very strong in Paris. Put in agreat deal."

°°°°"Where am I to get it?"

°°°°"Buy some."

°°°°"Suppose monsieur meets me?"

°°°°"He has gone to his fields."

°°°°"I'll run, then. But Monsieur Fessard asked me yesterday if the Magihad come to stay with us when I bought the wax candle. All the townwill know our goings-on."

°°°°"If your father finds it out," said Madame Grandet, "he is capable ofbeating us."

°°°°"Well, let him beat us; we will take his blows on our knees."Madame Grandet for all answer raised her eyes to heaven. Nanon put onher hood and went off. Eugenie got out some clean table-linen, andwent to fetch a few bunches of grapes which she had amused herself byhanging on a string across the attic; she walked softly along thecorridor, so as not to waken her cousin, and she could not helplistening at the door to his quiet breathing.

°°°°"Sorrow is watching while he sleeps," she thought.

°°°°She took the freshest vine-leaves and arranged her dish of grapes ascoquettishly as a practised house-keeper might have done, and placedit triumphantly on the table. She laid hands on the pears counted outby her father, and piled them in a pyramid mixed with leaves. She wentand came, and skipped and ran. She would have liked to lay undercontribution everything in her father's house; but the keys were inhis pocket. Nanon came back with two fresh eggs. At sight of themEugenie almost hugged her round the neck.

°°°°"The farmer from Lande had them in his basket. I asked him for them,and he gave them to me, the darling, for nothing, as an attention!"VAfter two hours' thought and care, during which Eugenie jumped uptwenty times from her work to see if the coffee were boiling, or to goand listen to the noise her cousin made in dressing, she succeeded inpreparing a simple little breakfast, very inexpensive, but which,nevertheless, departed alarmingly from the inveterate customs of thehouse. The midday breakfast was always taken standing. Each took aslice of bread, a little fruit or some butter, and a glass of wine. AsEugenie looked at the table drawn up near the fire with an arm-chairplaced before her cousin's plate, at the two dishes of fruit, the egg-cup, the bottle of white wine, the bread, and the sugar heaped up in asaucer, she trembled in all her limbs at the mere thought of the lookher father would give her if he should come in at that moment. Sheglanced often at the clock to see if her cousin could breakfast beforethe master's return.

°°°°"Don't be troubled, Eugenie; if your father comes in, I will take itall upon myself," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Eugenie could not repress a tear.

°°°°"Oh, my good mother!" she cried, "I have never loved you enough."Charles, who had been tramping about his room for some time, singingto himself, now came down. Happily, it was only eleven o'clock. Thetrue Parisian! he had put as much dandyism into his dress as if hewere in the chateau of the noble lady then travelling in Scotland. Hecame into the room with the smiling, courteous manner so becoming toyouth, which made Eugenie's heart beat with mournful joy. He had takenthe destruction of his castles in Anjou as a joke, and came up to hisaunt gaily.

°°°°"Have you slept well, dear aunt? and you, too, my cousin?""Very well, monsieur; did you?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"I? perfectly."

°°°°"You must be hungry, cousin," said Eugenie; "will you take your seat?""I never breakfast before midday; I never get up till then. However, Ifared so badly on the journey that I am glad to eat something at once.Besides--" here he pulled out the prettiest watch Breguet ever made."Dear me! I am early, it is only eleven o'clock!"

°°°°"Early?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Yes; but I wanted to put my things in order. Well, I shall be glad tohave anything to eat,--anything, it doesn't matter what, a chicken, apartridge."

°°°°"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Nanon, overhearing the words.

°°°°"A partridge!" whispered Eugenie to herself; she would gladly havegiven the whole of her little hoard for a partridge.

°°°°"Come and sit down," said his aunt.

°°°°The young dandy let himself drop into an easy-chair, just as a prettywoman falls gracefully upon a sofa. Eugenie and her mother tookordinary chairs and sat beside him, near the fire.

°°°°"Do you always live here?" said Charles, thinking the room uglier bydaylight than it had seemed the night before.

°°°°"Always," answered Eugenie, looking at him, "except during thevintage. Then we go and help Nanon, and live at the Abbaye desNoyers."

°°°°"Don't you ever take walks?"

°°°°"Sometimes on Sunday after vespers, when the weather is fine," saidMadame Grandet, "we walk on the bridge, or we go and watch thehaymakers."

°°°°"Have you a theatre?"

°°°°"Go to the theatre!" exclaimed Madame Grandet, "see a play! Why,monsieur, don't you know it is a mortal sin?"

°°°°"See here, monsieur," said Nanon, bringing in the eggs, "here are yourchickens,--in the shell."

°°°°"Oh! fresh eggs," said Charles, who, like all people accustomed toluxury, had already forgotten about his partridge, "that is delicious:now, if you will give me the butter, my good girl."

°°°°"Butter! then you can't have the /galette/."

°°°°"Nanon, bring the butter," cried Eugenie.

°°°°The young girl watched her cousin as he cut his sippets, with as muchpleasure as a grisette takes in a melodrama where innocence and virtuetriumph. Charles, brought up by a charming mother, improved, andtrained by a woman of fashion, had the elegant, dainty, foppishmovements of a coxcomb. The compassionate sympathy and tenderness of ayoung girl possess a power that is actually magnetic; so that Charles,finding himself the object of the attentions of his aunt and cousin,could not escape the influence of feelings which flowed towards him,as it were, and inundated him. He gave Eugenie a bright, caressinglook full of kindness,--a look which seemed itself a smile. Heperceived, as his eyes lingered upon her, the exquisite harmony offeatures in the pure face, the grace of her innocent attitude, themagic clearness of the eyes, where young love sparkled and desireshone unconsciously.

°°°°"Ah! my dear cousin, if you were in full dress at the Opera, I assureyou my aunt's words would come true,--you would make the men committhe mortal sin of envy, and the women the sin of jealousy."The compliment went to Eugenie's heart and set it beating, though shedid not understand its meaning.

°°°°"Oh! cousin," she said, "you are laughing at a poor little countrygirl."

°°°°"If you knew me, my cousin, you would know that I abhor ridicule; itwithers the heart and jars upon all my feelings." Here he swallowedhis buttered sippet very gracefully. "No, I really have not enoughmind to make fun of others; and doubtless it is a great defect. InParis, when they want to disparage a man, they say: 'He has a goodheart.' The phrase means: 'The poor fellow is as stupid as arhinoceros.' But as I am rich, and known to hit the bull's-eye atthirty paces with any kind of pistol, and even in the open fields,ridicule respects me."

°°°°"My dear nephew, that bespeaks a good heart."

°°°°"You have a very pretty ring," said Eugenie; "is there any harm inasking to see it?"

°°°°Charles held out his hand after loosening the ring, and Eugenieblushed as she touched the pink nails of her cousin with the tips ofher fingers.

°°°°"See, mamma, what beautiful workmanship."

°°°°"My! there's a lot of gold!" said Nanon, bringing in the coffee."What is that?" exclaimed Charles, laughing, as he pointed to anoblong pot of brown earthenware, glazed on the inside, and edged witha fringe of ashes, from the bottom of which the coffee-grounds werebubbling up and falling in the boiling liquid.

°°°°"It is boiled coffee," said Nanon.

°°°°"Ah! my dear aunt, I shall at least leave one beneficent trace of myvisit here. You are indeed behind the age! I must teach you to makegood coffee in a Chaptal coffee-pot."

°°°°He tried to explain the process of a Chaptal coffee-pot.

°°°°"Gracious! if there are so many things as all that to do," said Nanon,"we may as well give up our lives to it. I shall never make coffeethat way; I know that! Pray, who is to get the fodder for the cowwhile I make the coffee?"

°°°°"I will make it," said Eugenie.

°°°°"Child!" said Madame Grandet, looking at her daughter.

°°°°The word recalled to their minds the sorrow that was about to fallupon the unfortunate young man; the three women were silent, andlooked at him with an air of commiseration that caught his attention."Is anything the matter, my cousin?" he said.

°°°°"Hush!" said Madame Grandet to Eugenie, who was about to answer; "youknow, my daughter, that your father charged us not to speak tomonsieur--"

°°°°"Say Charles," said young Grandet.

°°°°"Ah! you are called Charles? What a beautiful name!" cried Eugenie.Presentiments of evil are almost always justified. At this momentNanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie, who had all three been thinkingwith a shudder of the old man's return, heard the knock whose echoesthey knew but too well.

°°°°"There's papa!" said Eugenie.

°°°°She removed the saucer filled with sugar, leaving a few pieces on thetable-cloth; Nanon carried off the egg-cup; Madame Grandet sat up likea frightened hare. It was evidently a panic, which amazed Charles, whowas wholly unable to understand it.

°°°°"Why! what is the matter?" he asked.

°°°°"My father has come," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, what of that?"

°°°°Monsieur Grandet entered the room, threw his keen eye upon the table,upon Charles, and saw the whole thing.

°°°°"Ha! ha! so you have been making a feast for your nephew; very good,very good, very good indeed!" he said, without stuttering. "When thecat's away, the mice will play."

°°°°"Feast!" thought Charles, incapable of suspecting or imagining therules and customs of the household.

°°°°"Give me my glass, Nanon," said the master

°°°°Eugenie brought the glass. Grandet drew a horn-handled knife with abig blade from his breeches' pocket, cut a slice of bread, took asmall bit of butter, spread it carefully on the bread, and ate itstanding. At this moment Charlie was sweetening his coffee. PereGrandet saw the bits of sugar, looked at his wife, who turned pale,and made three steps forward; he leaned down to the poor woman's earand said,--

°°°°"Where did you get all that sugar?"

°°°°"Nanon fetched it from Fessard's; there was none."

°°°°It is impossible to picture the profound interest the three women tookin this mute scene. Nanon had left her kitchen and stood looking intothe room to see what would happen. Charles, having tasted his coffee,found it bitter and glanced about for the sugar, which Grandet hadalready put away.

°°°°"What do you want?" said his uncle.

°°°°"The sugar."

°°°°"Put in more milk," answered the master of the house; "your coffeewill taste sweeter."

°°°°Eugenie took the saucer which Grandet had put away and placed it onthe table, looking calmly at her father as she did so. Most assuredly,the Parisian woman who held a silken ladder with her feeble arms tofacilitate the flight of her lover, showed no greater courage thanEugenie displayed when she replaced the sugar upon the table. Thelover rewarded his mistress when she proudly showed him her beautifulbruised arm, and bathed every swollen vein with tears and kisses tillit was cured with happiness. Charles, on the other hand, never so muchas knew the secret of the cruel agitation that shook and bruised theheart of his cousin, crushed as it was by the look of the old miser."You are not eating your breakfast, wife."

°°°°The poor helot came forward with a piteous look, cut herself a pieceof bread, and took a pear. Eugenie boldly offered her father somegrapes, saying,--

°°°°"Taste my preserves, papa. My cousin, you will eat some, will you not?I went to get these pretty grapes expressly for you."

°°°°"If no one stops them, they will pillage Saumur for you, nephew. Whenyou have finished, we will go into the garden; I have something totell you which can't be sweetened."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother cast a look on Charles whose meaning the youngman could not mistake.

°°°°"What is it you mean, uncle? Since the death of my poor mother"--atthese words his voice softened--"no other sorrow can touch me.""My nephew, who knows by what afflictions God is pleased to try us?"said his aunt.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta," said Grandet, "there's your nonsense beginning. I amsorry to see those white hands of yours, nephew"; and he showed theshoulder-of-mutton fists which Nature had put at the end of his ownarms. "There's a pair of hands made to pick up silver pieces. You'vebeen brought up to put your feet in the kid out of which we make thepurses we keep our money in. A bad look-out! Very bad!"

°°°°"What do you mean, uncle? I'll be hanged if I understand a single wordof what you are saying."

°°°°"Come!" said Grandet.

°°°°The miser closed the blade of his knife with a snap, drank the last ofhis wine, and opened the door.

°°°°"My cousin, take courage!"

°°°°The tone of the young girl struck terror to Charles's heart, and hefollowed his terrible uncle, a prey to disquieting thoughts. Eugenie,her mother, and Nanon went into the kitchen, moved by irresistiblecuriosity to watch the two actors in the scene which was about to takeplace in the garden, where at first the uncle walked silently ahead ofthe nephew. Grandet was not at all troubled at having to tell Charlesof the death of his father; but he did feel a sort of compassion inknowing him to be without a penny, and he sought for some phrase orformula by which to soften the communication of that cruel truth. "Youhave lost your father," seemed to him a mere nothing to say; fathersdie before their children. But "you are absolutely without means,"--all the misfortunes of life were summed up in those words! Grandetwalked round the garden three times, the gravel crunching under hisheavy step.

°°°°In the crucial moments of life our minds fasten upon the localitywhere joys or sorrows overwhelm us. Charles noticed with minuteattention the box-borders of the little garden, the yellow leaves asthey fluttered down, the dilapidated walls, the gnarled fruit-trees,--picturesque details which were destined to remain forever in hismemory, blending eternally, by the mnemonics that belong exclusivelyto the passions, with the recollections of this solemn hour."It is very fine weather, very warm," said Grandet, drawing a longbreath.

°°°°"Yes, uncle; but why--"

°°°°"Well, my lad," answered his uncle, "I have some bad news to give you.Your father is ill--"

°°°°"Then why am I here?" said Charles. "Nanon," he cried, "order post-horses! I can get a carriage somewhere?" he added, turning to hisuncle, who stood motionless.

°°°°"Horses and carriages are useless," answered Grandet, looking atCharles, who remained silent, his eyes growing fixed. "Yes, my poorboy, you guess the truth,--he is dead. But that's nothing; there issomething worse: he blew out his brains."

°°°°"My father!"

°°°°"Yes, but that's not the worst; the newspapers are all talking aboutit. Here, read that."

°°°°Grandet, who had borrowed the fatal article from Cruchot, thrust thepaper under his nephew's eyes. The poor young man, still a child,still at an age when feelings wear no mask, burst into tears."That's good!" thought Grandet; "his eyes frightened me. He'll be allright if he weeps,--That is not the worst, my poor nephew," he saidaloud, not noticing whether Charles heard him, "that is nothing; youwill get over it: but--"

°°°°"Never, never! My father! Oh, my father!"

°°°°"He has ruined you, you haven't a penny."

°°°°"What does that matter? My father! Where is my father?"

°°°°His sobs resounded horribly against those dreary walls andreverberated in the echoes. The three women, filled with pity, weptalso; for tears are often as contagious as laughter. Charles, withoutlistening further to his uncle, ran through the court and up thestaircase to his chamber, where he threw himself across the bed andhid his face in the sheets, to weep in peace for his lost parents."The first burst must have its way," said Grandet, entering theliving-room, where Eugenie and her mother had hastily resumed theirseats and were sewing with trembling hands, after wiping their eyes."But that young man is good for nothing; his head is more taken upwith the dead than with his money."

°°°°Eugenie shuddered as she heard her father's comment on the most sacredof all griefs. From that moment she began to judge him. Charles'ssobs, though muffled, still sounded through the sepulchral house; andhis deep groans, which seemed to come from the earth beneath, onlyceased towards evening, after growing gradually feebler.

°°°°"Poor young man!" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Fatal exclamation! Pere Grandet looked at his wife, at Eugenie, and atthe sugar-bowl. He recollected the extraordinary breakfast preparedfor the unfortunate youth, and he took a position in the middle of theroom.

°°°°"Listen to me," he said, with his usual composure. "I hope that youwill not continue this extravagance, Madame Grandet. I don't give youMY money to stuff that young fellow with sugar."

°°°°"My mother had nothing to do with it," said Eugenie; "it was I who--""Is it because you are of age," said Grandet, interrupting hisdaughter, "that you choose to contradict me? Remember, Eugenie--""Father, the son of your brother ought to receive from us--""Ta, ta, ta, ta!" exclaimed the cooper on four chromatic tones; "theson of my brother this, my nephew that! Charles is nothing at all tous; he hasn't a farthing, his father has failed; and when this dandyhas cried his fill, off he goes from here. I won't have himrevolutionize my household."

°°°°"What is 'failing,' father?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°"To fail," answered her father, "is to commit the most dishonorableaction that can disgrace a man."

°°°°"It must be a great sin," said Madame Grandet, "and our brother may bedamned."

°°°°"There, there, don't begin with your litanies!" said Grandet,shrugging his shoulders. "To fail, Eugenie," he resumed, "is to commita theft which the law, unfortunately, takes under its protection.People have given their property to Guillaume Grandet trusting to hisreputation for honor and integrity; he has made away with it all, andleft them nothing but their eyes to weep with. A highway robber isbetter than a bankrupt: the one attacks you and you can defendyourself, he risks his own life; but the other--in short, Charles isdishonored."

°°°°The words rang in the poor girl's heart and weighed it down with theirheavy meaning. Upright and delicate as a flower born in the depths ofa forest, she knew nothing of the world's maxims, of its deceitfularguments and specious sophisms; she therefore believed the atrociousexplanation which her father gave her designedly, concealing thedistinction which exists between an involuntary failure and anintentional one.

°°°°"Father, could you not have prevented such a misfortune?""My brother did not consult me. Besides, he owes four millions.""What is a 'million,' father?" she asked, with the simplicity of achild which thinks it can find out at once all that it wants to know."A million?" said Grandet, "why, it is a million pieces of twenty souseach, and it takes five twenty sous pieces to make five francs.""Dear me!" cried Eugenie, "how could my uncle possibly have had fourmillions? Is there any one else in France who ever had so manymillions?" Pere Grandet stroked his chin, smiled, and his wen seemedto dilate. "But what will become of my cousin Charles?"

°°°°"He is going off to the West Indies by his father's request, and hewill try to make his fortune there."

°°°°"Has he got the money to go with?"

°°°°"I shall pay for his journey as far as--yes, as far as Nantes."Eugenie sprang into his arms.

°°°°"Oh, father, how good you are!"

°°°°She kissed him with a warmth that almost made Grandet ashamed ofhimself, for his conscience galled him a little.

°°°°"Will it take much time to amass a million?" she asked.

°°°°"Look here!" said the old miser, "you know what a napoleon is? Well,it takes fifty thousand napoleons to make a million."

°°°°"Mamma, we must say a great many /neuvaines/ for him."

°°°°"I was thinking so," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"That's the way, always spending my money!" cried the father. "Do youthink there are francs on every bush?"

°°°°At this moment a muffled cry, more distressing than all the others,echoed through the garrets and struck a chill to the hearts of Eugenieand her mother.

°°°°"Nanon, go upstairs and see that he does not kill himself," saidGrandet. "Now, then," he added, looking at his wife and daughter, whohad turned pale at his words, "no nonsense, you two! I must leave you;I have got to see about the Dutchmen who are going away to-day. Andthen I must find Cruchot, and talk with him about all this."He departed. As soon as he had shut the door Eugenie and her motherbreathed more freely. Until this morning the young girl had never feltconstrained in the presence of her father; but for the last few hoursevery moment wrought a change in her feelings and ideas.

°°°°"Mamma, how many louis are there in a cask of wine?"

°°°°"Your father sells his from a hundred to a hundred and fifty francs,sometimes two hundred,--at least, so I've heard say."

°°°°"Then papa must be rich?"

°°°°"Perhaps he is. But Monsieur Cruchot told me he bought Froidfond twoyears ago; that may have pinched him."

°°°°Eugenie, not being able to understand the question of her father'sfortune, stopped short in her calculations.

°°°°"He didn't even see me, the darling!" said Nanon, coming back from hererrand. "He's stretched out like a calf on his bed and crying like theMadeleine, and that's a blessing! What's the matter with the poor dearyoung man!"

°°°°"Let us go and console him, mamma; if any one knocks, we can comedown."

°°°°Madame Grandet was helpless against the sweet persuasive tones of herdaughter's voice. Eugenie was sublime: she had become a woman. Thetwo, with beating hearts, went up to Charles's room. The door wasopen. The young man heard and saw nothing; plunged in grief, he onlyuttered inarticulate cries.

°°°°"How he loves his father!" said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°In the utterance of those words it was impossible to mistake the hopesof a heart that, unknown to itself, had suddenly become passionate.Madame Grandet cast a mother's look upon her daughter, and thenwhispered in her ear,--

°°°°"Take care, you will love him!"

°°°°"Love him!" answered Eugenie. "Ah! if you did but know what my fathersaid to Monsieur Cruchot."

°°°°Charles turned over, and saw his aunt and cousin.

°°°°"I have lost my father, my poor father! If he had told me his secrettroubles we might have worked together to repair them. My God! my poorfather! I was so sure I should see him again that I think I kissed himquite coldly--"

°°°°Sobs cut short the words.

°°°°"We will pray for him," said Madame Grandet. "Resign yourself to thewill of God."

°°°°"Cousin," said Eugenie, "take courage! Your loss is irreparable;therefore think only of saving your honor."

°°°°With the delicate instinct of a woman who intuitively puts her mindinto all things, even at the moment when she offers consolation,Eugenie sought to cheat her cousin's grief by turning his thoughtsinward upon himself.

°°°°"My honor?" exclaimed the young man, tossing aside his hair with animpatient gesture as he sat up on his bed and crossed his arms. "Ah!that is true. My uncle said my father had failed." He uttered a heart-rending cry, and hid his face in his hands. "Leave me, leave me,cousin! My God! my God! forgive my father, for he must have sufferedsorely!"

°°°°There was something terribly attractive in the sight of this youngsorrow, sincere without reasoning or afterthought. It was a virgingrief which the simple hearts of Eugenie and her mother were fitted tocomprehend, and they obeyed the sign Charles made them to leave him tohimself. They went downstairs in silence and took their accustomedplaces by the window and sewed for nearly an hour without exchanging aword. Eugenie had seen in the furtive glance that she cast about theyoung man's room--that girlish glance which sees all in the twinklingof an eye--the pretty trifles of his dressing-case, his scissors, hisrazors embossed with gold. This gleam of luxury across her cousin'sgrief only made him the more interesting to her, possibly by way ofcontrast. Never before had so serious an event, so dramatic a sight,touched the imaginations of these two passive beings, hitherto sunk inthe stillness and calm of solitude.

°°°°"Mamma," said Eugenie, "we must wear mourning for my uncle.""Your father will decide that," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°They relapsed into silence. Eugenie drew her stitches with a uniformmotion which revealed to an observer the teeming thoughts of hermeditation. The first desire of the girl's heart was to share hercousin's mourning.

°°°°VI

°°°°About four o'clock an abrupt knock at the door struck sharply on theheart of Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What can have happened to your father?" she said to her daughter.Grandet entered joyously. After taking off his gloves, he rubbed hishands hard enough to take off their skin as well, if his epidermis hadnot been tanned and cured like Russia leather,--saving, of course, theperfume of larch-trees and incense. Presently his secret escaped him."Wife," he said, without stuttering, "I've trapped them all! Our wineis sold! The Dutch and the Belgians have gone. I walked about themarket-place in front of their inn, pretending to be doing nothing.That Belgian fellow--you know who I mean--came up to me. The owners ofall the good vineyards have kept back their vintages, intending towait; well, I didn't hinder them. The Belgian was in despair; I sawthat. In a minute the bargain was made. He takes my vintage at twohundred francs the puncheon, half down. He paid me in gold; the notesare drawn. Here are six louis for you. In three months wines will havefallen."

°°°°These words, uttered in a quiet tone of voice, were nevertheless sobitterly sarcastic that the inhabitants of Saumur, grouped at thismoment in the market-place and overwhelmed by the news of the saleGrandet had just effected, would have shuddered had they heard them.Their panic would have brought the price of wines down fifty per centat once.

°°°°"Did you have a thousand puncheons this year, father?"

°°°°"Yes, little one."

°°°°That term applied to his daughter was the superlative expression ofthe old miser's joy.

°°°°"Then that makes two hundred thousand pieces of twenty sous each?""Yes, Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"Then, father, you can easily help Charles."

°°°°The amazement, the anger, the stupefaction of Belshazzar when he sawthe /Mene-Tekel-Upharsin/ before his eyes is not to be compared withthe cold rage of Grandet, who, having forgotten his nephew, now foundhim enshrined in the heart and calculations of his daughter."What's this? Ever since that dandy put foot in MY house everythinggoes wrong! You behave as if you had the right to buy sugar-plums andmake feasts and weddings. I won't have that sort of thing. I hope Iknow my duty at my time of life! I certainly sha'n't take lessons frommy daughter, or from anybody else. I shall do for my nephew what it isproper to do, and you have no need to poke your nose into it. As foryou, Eugenie," he added, facing her, "don't speak of this again, orI'll send you to the Abbaye des Noyers with Nanon, see if I don't; andno later than to-morrow either, if you disobey me! Where is thatfellow, has he come down yet?"

°°°°"No, my friend," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What is he doing then?"

°°°°"He is weeping for his father," said Eugenie.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter without finding a word to say; afterall, he was a father. He made a couple of turns up and down the room,and then went hurriedly to his secret den to think over an investmenthe was meditating in the public Funds. The thinning out of his twothousand acres of forest land had yielded him six hundred thousandfrancs: putting this sum to that derived from the sale of his poplarsand to his other gains for the last year and for the current year, hehad amassed a total of nine hundred thousand francs, without countingthe two hundred thousand he had got by the sale just concluded. Thetwenty per cent which Cruchot assured him would gain in a short timefrom the Funds, then quoted at seventy, tempted him. He figured outhis calculation on the margin of the newspaper which gave the accountof his brother's death, all the while hearing the moans of his nephew,but without listening to them. Nanon came and knocked on the wall tosummon him to dinner. On the last step of the staircase he was sayingto himself as he came down,--

°°°°"I'll do it; I shall get eight per cent interest. In two years I shallhave fifteen hundred thousand francs, which I will then draw out ingood gold,--Well, where's my nephew?"

°°°°"He says he doesn't want anything to eat," answered Nanon; "that's notgood for him."

°°°°"So much saved," retorted her master.

°°°°"That's so," she said.

°°°°"Bah! he won't cry long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the woods."The dinner was eaten in silence.

°°°°"My good friend," said Madame Grandet, when the cloth was removed, "wemust put on mourning."

°°°°"Upon my word, Madame Grandet! what will you invent next to spendmoney on? Mourning is in the heart, and not in the clothes.""But mourning for a brother is indispensable; and the Church commandsus to--"

°°°°"Buy your mourning out of your six louis. Give me a hat-band; that'senough for me."

°°°°Eugenie raised her eyes to heaven without uttering a word. Hergenerous instincts, slumbering and long repressed but now suddenly andfor the first time awakened, were galled at every turn. The eveningpassed to all appearance like a thousand other evenings of theirmonotonous life, yet it was certainly the most horrible. Eugenie sewedwithout raising her head, and did not use the workbox which Charleshad despised the night before. Madame Grandet knitted her sleeves.Grandet twirled his thumbs for four hours, absorbed in calculationswhose results were on the morrow to astonish Saumur. No one came tovisit the family that day. The whole town was ringing with the news ofthe business trick just played by Grandet, the failure of his brother,and the arrival of his nephew. Obeying the desire to gossip over theirmutual interests, all the upper and middle-class wine-growers inSaumur met at Monsieur des Grassins, where terrible imprecations werebeing fulminated against the ex-mayor. Nanon was spinning, and thewhirr of her wheel was the only sound heard beneath the gray raftersof that silent hall.

°°°°"We don't waste our tongues," she said, showing her teeth, as largeand white as peeled almonds.

°°°°"Nothing should be wasted," answered Grandet, rousing himself from hisreverie. He saw a perspective of eight millions in three years, and hewas sailing along that sheet of gold. "Let us go to bed. I will bid mynephew good-night for the rest of you, and see if he will takeanything."

°°°°Madame Grandet remained on the landing of the first storey to hear theconversation that was about to take place between the goodman and hisnephew. Eugenie, bolder than her mother, went up two stairs."Well, nephew, you are in trouble. Yes, weep, that's natural. A fatheris a father; but we must bear our troubles patiently. I am a gooduncle to you, remember that. Come, take courage! Will you have alittle glass of wine?" (Wine costs nothing in Saumur, and they offerit as tea is offered in China.) "Why!" added Grandet, "you have got nolight! That's bad, very bad; you ought to see what you are about," andhe walked to the chimney-piece. "What's this?" he cried. "A waxcandle! How the devil did they filch a wax candle? The spendthriftswould tear down the ceilings of my house to boil the fellow's eggs."Hearing these words, mother and daughter slipped back into their roomsand burrowed in their beds, with the celerity of frightened micegetting back to their holes.

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you found a mine?" said the man, coming into thechamber of his wife.

°°°°"My friend, wait; I am saying my prayers," said the poor mother in atrembling voice.

°°°°"The devil take your good God!" growled Grandet in reply.Misers have no belief in a future life; the present is their all inall. This thought casts a terrible light upon our present epoch, inwhich, far more than at any former period, money sways the laws andpolitics and morals.  Institutions, books, men, and dogmas, allconspire to undermine belief in a future life,--a belief upon whichthe social edifice has rested for eighteen hundred years. The grave,as a means of transition, is little feared in our day. The future,which once opened to us beyond the requiems, has now been importedinto the present. To obtain /per fas et nefas/ a terrestrial paradiseof luxury and earthly enjoyment, to harden the heart and macerate thebody for the sake of fleeting possessions, as the martyrs oncesuffered all things to reach eternal joys, this is now the universalthought--a thought written everywhere, even in the very laws which askof the legislator, "What do you pay?" instead of asking him, "What doyou think?" When this doctrine has passed down from the bourgeoisie tothe populace, where will this country be?

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you done?" asked the old man.

°°°°"My friend, I am praying for you."

°°°°"Very good! Good-night; to-morrow morning we will have a talk."The poor woman went to sleep like a schoolboy who, not having learnedhis lessons, knows he will see his master's angry face on the morrow.At the moment when, filled with fear, she was drawing the sheet aboveher head that she might stifle hearing, Eugenie, in her night-gown andwith naked feet, ran to her side and kissed her brow.

°°°°"Oh! my good mother," she said, "to-morrow I will tell him it was I.""No; he would send you to Noyers. Leave me to manage it; he cannot eatme."

°°°°"Do you hear, mamma?"

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"/He/ is weeping still."

°°°°"Go to bed, my daughter; you will take cold in your feet: the floor isdamp."

°°°°*****

°°°°Thus passed the solemn day which was destined to weight upon the wholelife of the rich and poor heiress, whose sleep was never again to beso calm, nor yet so pure, as it had been up to this moment. It oftenhappens that certain actions of human life seem, literally speaking,improbable, though actual. Is not this because we constantly omit toturn the stream of psychological light upon our impulsivedeterminations, and fail to explain the subtile reasons, mysteriouslyconceived in our minds, which impelled them? Perhaps Eugenie's deeppassion should be analyzed in its most delicate fibres; for it became,scoffers might say, a malady which influenced her whole existence.Many people prefer to deny results rather than estimate the force ofties and links and bonds, which secretly join one fact to another inthe moral order. Here, therefore, Eugenie's past life will offer toobservers of human nature an explanation of her naive want ofreflection and the suddenness of the emotions which overflowed hersoul. The more tranquil her life had been, the more vivid was herwomanly pity, the more simple-minded were the sentiments now developedin her soul.

°°°°Made restless by the events of the day, she woke at intervals tolisten to her cousin, thinking she heard the sighs which still echoedin her heart. Sometimes she saw him dying of his trouble, sometimesshe dreamed that he fainted from hunger. Towards morning she wascertain that she heard a startling cry. She dressed at once and ran,in the dawning light, with a swift foot to her cousin's chamber, thedoor of which he had left open. The candle had burned down to thesocket. Charles, overcome by nature, was sleeping, dressed and sittingin an armchair beside the bed, on which his head rested; he dreamed asmen dream on an empty stomach. Eugenie might weep at her ease; shemight admire the young and handsome face blotted with grief, the eyesswollen with weeping, that seemed, sleeping as they were, to wellforth tears. Charles felt sympathetically the young girl's presence;he opened his eyes and saw her pitying him.

°°°°"Pardon me, my cousin," he said, evidently not knowing the hour northe place in which he found himself.

°°°°"There are hearts who hear you, cousin, and /we/ thought you mightneed something. You should go to bed; you tire yourself by sittingthus."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, then, adieu!"

°°°°She escaped, ashamed and happy at having gone there. Innocence alonecan dare to be so bold. Once enlightened, virtue makes hercalculations as well as vice. Eugenie, who had not trembled beside hercousin, could scarcely stand upon her legs when she regained herchamber. Her ignorant life had suddenly come to an end; she reasoned,she rebuked herself with many reproaches.

°°°°"What will he think of me? He will think that I love him!"That was what she most wished him to think. An honest love has its ownprescience, and knows that love begets love. What an event for thispoor solitary girl thus to have entered the chamber of a young man!Are there not thoughts and actions in the life of love which tocertain souls bear the full meaning of the holiest espousals? An hourlater she went to her mother and dressed her as usual. Then they bothcame down and sat in their places before the window waiting forGrandet, with that cruel anxiety which, according to the individualcharacter, freezes the heart or warms it, shrivels or dilates it, whena scene is feared, a punishment expected,--a feeling so natural thateven domestic animals possess it, and whine at the slightest pain ofpunishment, though they make no outcry when they inadvertently hurtthemselves. The goodman came down; but he spoke to his wife with anabsent manner, kissed Eugenie, and sat down to table without appearingto remember his threats of the night before.

°°°°"What has become of my nephew? The lad gives no trouble.""Monsieur, he is asleep," answered Nanon.

°°°°"So much the better; he won't want a wax candle," said Grandet in ajeering tone.

°°°°This unusual clemency, this bitter gaiety, struck Madame Grandet withamazement, and she looked at her husband attentively. The goodman--here it may be well to explain that in Touraine, Anjou, Pitou, andBretagne the word "goodman," already used to designate Grandet, isbestowed as often upon harsh and cruel men as upon those of kindlytemperament, when either have reached a certain age; the title meansnothing on the score of individual gentleness--the goodman took hishat and gloves, saying as he went out,--

°°°°"I am going to loiter about the market-place and find Cruchot.""Eugenie, your father certainly has something on his mind."Grandet, who was a poor sleeper, employed half his nights in thepreliminary calculations which gave such astonishing accuracy to hisviews and observations and schemes, and secured to them the unfailingsuccess at sight of which his townsmen stood amazed. All human poweris a compound of time and patience. Powerful beings will and wait. Thelife of a miser is the constant exercise of human power put to theservice of self. It rests on two sentiments only,--self-love and self-interest; but self-interest being to a certain extent compact andintelligent self-love, the visible sign of real superiority, itfollows that self-love and self-interest are two parts of the samewhole,--egotism. From this arises, perhaps, the excessive curiosityshown in the habits of a miser's life whenever they are put before theworld. Every nature holds by a thread to those beings who challengeall human sentiments by concentrating all in one passion. Where is theman without desire? and what social desire can be satisfied withoutmoney?

°°°°Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

°°°°In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

°°°°"My cousin!"

°°°°"Yes, cousin."

°°°°"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

°°°°"Where you like."

°°°°"How do you feel?"

°°°°"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

°°°°This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

°°°°She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

°°°°That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

°°°°"What troubles you?" she said.

°°°°"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

°°°°Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

°°°°When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

°°°°"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

°°°°"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

°°°°Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

°°°°"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

°°°°"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

°°°°The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

°°°°"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

°°°°Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

°°°°"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

°°°°"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

°°°°*****

°°°°About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

°°°°VII

°°°°At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

°°°°The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

°°°°"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

°°°°"Certainly, nephew."

°°°°As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

°°°°He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

°°°°"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

°°°°"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

°°°°"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

°°°°"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

°°°°"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

°°°°"--is threatened with insolvency--"

°°°°"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

°°°°"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

°°°°"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

°°°°"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

°°°°"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

°°°°"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

°°°°"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

°°°°"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

°°°°"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

°°°°"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

°°°°Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

°°°°"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

°°°°"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

°°°°"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

°°°°"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Exactly so," said the president.

°°°°"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

°°°°"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

°°°°"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

°°°°"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

°°°°"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

°°°°"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

°°°°"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

°°°°"Bentham, an Englishman.'

°°°°"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

°°°°"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

°°°°"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

°°°°"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

°°°°"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

°°°°"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

°°°°"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

°°°°"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

°°°°"That's very true."

°°°°"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

°°°°"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

°°°°"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

°°°°"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

°°°°A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

°°°°"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

°°°°He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

°°°°"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

°°°°"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

°°°°These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

°°°°"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

°°°°"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

°°°°The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

°°°°"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

°°°°She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

°°°°"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

°°°°"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

°°°°"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

°°°°"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

°°°°"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

°°°°"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

°°°°"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

°°°°"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

°°°°"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

°°°°The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

°°°°"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

°°°°"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

°°°°"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

°°°°When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

°°°°"Are not they fuming, hein?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

°°°°"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

°°°°In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

°°°°When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

°°°°"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

°°°°So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

°°°°"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

°°°°Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

°°°°"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

°°°°"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

°°°°The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

°°°°"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

°°°°"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

°°°°"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

°°°°"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

°°°°"I didn't know where."

°°°°"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

°°°°"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

°°°°"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

°°°°"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

°°°°The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

°°°°VIII

°°°°"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

°°°°"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

°°°°"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

°°°°"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

°°°°These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

°°°°She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

°°°°"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

°°°°My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

°°°°great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

°°°°foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

°°°°fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

°°°°when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

°°°°yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

°°°°plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

°°°°If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

°°°°that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

°°°°fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

°°°°my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

°°°°me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

°°°°so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

°°°°the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

°°°°bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

°°°°killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

°°°°there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

°°°°ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

°°°°I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

°°°°last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

°°°°enterprise.

°°°°"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

°°°°She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

°°°°I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

°°°°hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

°°°°not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

°°°°even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

°°°°have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

°°°°to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

°°°°world like other men who have started young without a sou and

°°°°brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

°°°°faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

°°°°another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

°°°°so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

°°°°my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

°°°°life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

°°°°Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

°°°°young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

°°°°caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

°°°°family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

°°°°were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

°°°°Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

°°°°grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

°°°°with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

°°°°your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

°°°°expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

°°°°accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

°°°°Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

°°°°When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

°°°°ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

°°°°hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

°°°°your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

°°°°spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

°°°°cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

°°°°ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

°°°°depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

°°°°of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

°°°°poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

°°°°see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

°°°°life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

°°°°can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

°°°°necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

°°°°have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

°°°°face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

°°°°seems to me--

°°°°"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

°°°°Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

°°°°Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

°°°°"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

°°°°Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

°°°°Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

°°°°My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

°°°°friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

°°°°of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

°°°°settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

°°°°can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

°°°°have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

°°°°have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

°°°°and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

°°°°can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

°°°°horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

°°°°keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

°°°°the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

°°°°will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

°°°°these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

°°°°nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

°°°°give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

°°°°his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

°°°°travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

°°°°them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

°°°°do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

°°°°seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

°°°°British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

°°°°pay him--

°°°°"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

°°°°Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

°°°°"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

°°°°"I have read those letters."

°°°°Charles colored.

°°°°"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

°°°°"And what?" asked Charles.

°°°°"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

°°°°"My dear cousin--"

°°°°"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

°°°°Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

°°°°"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

°°°°Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

°°°°As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

°°°°"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

°°°°Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

°°°°"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

°°°°"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

°°°°"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

°°°°"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

°°°°Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

°°°°"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

°°°°"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

°°°°"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

°°°°"But he owns Froidfond."

°°°°"What is Froidfond worth?"

°°°°"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

°°°°"Nothing but a poor farm!"

°°°°"He has vineyards and fields."

°°°°"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

°°°°"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

°°°°Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

°°°°Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

°°°°It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

°°°°"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

°°°°"Nothing," answered the old man.

°°°°Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

°°°°"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

°°°°"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

°°°°"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

°°°°"Say /was/ worth--"

°°°°"Where the devil have they got any?"

°°°°"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

°°°°"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

°°°°"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

°°°°"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

°°°°"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

°°°°Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

°°°°"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

°°°°The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

°°°°"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

°°°°Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

°°°°"Dans les gardes francaises

°°°°J'avais un bon papa."

°°°°Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

°°°°"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

°°°°He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

°°°°"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

°°°°"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

°°°°"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

°°°°"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

°°°°IX

°°°°The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

°°°°For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

°°°°After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

°°°°Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

°°°°"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

°°°°"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

°°°°"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

°°°°"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

°°°°"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

°°°°"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

°°°°"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

°°°°"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

°°°°"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

°°°°"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

°°°°The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

°°°°"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

°°°°Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

°°°°"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

°°°°He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

°°°°"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

°°°°"I must," he said, bowing his head.

°°°°For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

°°°°"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

°°°°"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

°°°°When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

°°°°"Do you love me?" she said.

°°°°"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

°°°°"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

°°°°She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

°°°°"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

°°°°"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

°°°°The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

°°°°"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

°°°°"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

°°°°"Then my heart will be always there."

°°°°"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

°°°°No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

°°°°"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

°°°°At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

°°°°"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

°°°°"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

°°°°"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

°°°°Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

°°°°Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

°°°°"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

°°°°Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

°°°°In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

°°°°Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

°°°°In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

°°°°"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

°°°°Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

°°°°"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

°°°°"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

°°°°The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

°°°°But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

°°°°As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

°°°°"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

°°°°"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

°°°°"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

°°°°In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

°°°°*****

°°°°In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

°°°°"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

°°°°Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

°°°°"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

°°°°X

°°°°Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

°°°°"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

°°°°The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

°°°°"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

°°°°"Where could we have got the money?"

°°°°"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

°°°°"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

°°°°Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

°°°°"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

°°°°There was a moment's silence.

°°°°"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

°°°°"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

°°°°"I'm always gay,--

°°°°"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

°°°°Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

°°°°he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

°°°°Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

°°°°"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

°°°°The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

°°°°When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

°°°°"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

°°°°"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

°°°°"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

°°°°"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

°°°°"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

°°°°"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur."

°°°°"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

°°°°"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

°°°°Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

°°°°"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

°°°°"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

°°°°"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

°°°°"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

°°°°The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

°°°°"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

°°°°At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

°°°°"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

°°°°"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

°°°°The two women were dumb.

°°°°"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

°°°°Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

°°°°"I have not got /my/ gold."

°°°°"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

°°°°"No, I have not got it."

°°°°"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

°°°°"No."

°°°°"By the shears of my father!"

°°°°Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

°°°°"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

°°°°Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

°°°°"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

°°°°Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

°°°°"Yes, father."

°°°°She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

°°°°"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

°°°°"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

°°°°Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

°°°°"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

°°°°"What use?"

°°°°"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

°°°°"And this is mine."

°°°°"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

°°°°"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

°°°°"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

°°°°She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

°°°°"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

°°°°Eugenie was silent and impassive.

°°°°"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

°°°°"You are a child."

°°°°"Of age."

°°°°Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

°°°°He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

°°°°Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

°°°°"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

°°°°Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

°°°°"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

°°°°"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

°°°°"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

°°°°"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

°°°°Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

°°°°"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

°°°°"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

°°°°"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

°°°°"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

°°°°"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

°°°°"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

°°°°He looked fixedly at his wife.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

°°°°"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

°°°°"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

°°°°"I will ask God to punish only me."

°°°°"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

°°°°"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

°°°°"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

°°°°"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

°°°°*****

°°°°Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

°°°°"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

°°°°"It is grease I'm trying out."

°°°°"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

°°°°The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

°°°°"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

°°°°At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

°°°°"How is Madame Grandet?"

°°°°"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

°°°°"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

°°°°They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

°°°°"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

°°°°When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

°°°°"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

°°°°"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

°°°°XI

°°°°For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

°°°°"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

°°°°"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

°°°°Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

°°°°One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

°°°°"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

°°°°"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

°°°°"All" meant "him."

°°°°"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

°°°°"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

°°°°Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

°°°°"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

°°°°Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

°°°°When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

°°°°"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

°°°°At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

°°°°"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

°°°°"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

°°°°"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

°°°°On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

°°°°"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

°°°°"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

°°°°"What do you mean?"

°°°°"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

°°°°"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

°°°°These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

°°°°"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

°°°°"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

°°°°"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

°°°°"She has given away her gold!"

°°°°"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

°°°°"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

°°°°"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

°°°°"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

°°°°"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

°°°°"How much?"

°°°°"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

°°°°"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

°°°°After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

°°°°"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

°°°°"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

°°°°"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

°°°°"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

°°°°"She has not a month to live."

°°°°Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

°°°°"What can be done?"

°°°°"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

°°°°"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

°°°°"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

°°°°"The scoundrels!"

°°°°"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

°°°°"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

°°°°He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

°°°°"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

°°°°"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

°°°°But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

°°°°"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

°°°°He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

°°°°"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

°°°°"O God, have pity upon us!"

°°°°The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

°°°°"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

°°°°Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

°°°°"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

°°°°"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

°°°°"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

°°°°"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

°°°°"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

°°°°Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

°°°°"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

°°°°"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

°°°°The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

°°°°"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

°°°°"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

°°°°"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

°°°°Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

°°°°"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

°°°°Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

°°°°"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

°°°°"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

°°°°"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

°°°°"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

°°°°XII

°°°°On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

°°°°"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

°°°°"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

°°°°"Oh! father--"

°°°°"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

°°°°"What is it you wish me to do?"

°°°°"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

°°°°"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

°°°°"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

°°°°"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

°°°°"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

°°°°Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

°°°°"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

°°°°"I will do all you wish, father."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

°°°°"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

°°°°He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

°°°°"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

°°°°The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

°°°°"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

°°°°"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

°°°°"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

°°°°Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

°°°°*****

°°°°Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

°°°°At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

°°°°"Yes, my father," she would answer.

°°°°"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

°°°°Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

°°°°"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

°°°°When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

°°°°"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

°°°°"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

°°°°*****

°°°°Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

°°°°"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

°°°°The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

°°°°"Nanon, we are alone--"

°°°°"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

°°°°"The ocean is between us," she said.

°°°°While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

°°°°"Fast colors!" said the draper.

°°°°"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

°°°°"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

°°°°When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

°°°°At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

°°°°It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

°°°°"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

°°°°"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

°°°°"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

°°°°"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

°°°°Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

°°°°Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

°°°°"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

°°°°"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

°°°°XIII

°°°°While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

°°°°With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

°°°°Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

°°°°Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

°°°°"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

°°°°Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

°°°°Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

°°°°"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

°°°°*****

°°°°At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

°°°°"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

°°°°The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

°°°°"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

°°°°Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

°°°°"Read it, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

°°°°Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

°°°°My dear Cousin,--

°°°°"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

°°°°You--

°°°°"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

°°°°"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

°°°°"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

°°°°She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

°°°°My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

°°°°success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

°°°°rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

°°°°together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

°°°°des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

°°°°we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

°°°°Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

°°°°the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

°°°°be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

°°°°life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

°°°°To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

°°°°dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

°°°°realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

°°°°from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

°°°°forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

°°°°long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

°°°°Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

°°°°--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

°°°°forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

°°°°night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

°°°°to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

°°°°heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

°°°°Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

°°°°sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

°°°°deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

°°°°all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

°°°°present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

°°°°all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

°°°°Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

°°°°your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

°°°°will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

°°°°education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

°°°°with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

°°°°myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

°°°°to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

°°°°think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

°°°°be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

°°°°right to understand it and to judge it.

°°°°I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

°°°°francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

°°°°Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

°°°°me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

°°°°Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

°°°°dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

°°°°marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

°°°°advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

°°°°are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

°°°°my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

°°°°have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

°°°°year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

°°°°proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

°°°°You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

°°°°heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

°°°°years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

°°°°but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

°°°°remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

°°°°which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

°°°°and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

°°°°you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

°°°°convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

°°°°putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

°°°°of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

°°°°ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

°°°°simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

°°°°Your devoted cousin,

°°°°Charles.

°°°°"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

°°°°P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

°°°°thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

°°°°capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

°°°°am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

°°°°which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

°°°°gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

°°°°hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

°°°°"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

°°°°Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

°°°°"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

°°°°Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

°°°°This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

°°°°"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

°°°°"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

°°°°"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

°°°°"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

°°°°"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

°°°°At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

°°°°"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

°°°°"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

°°°°"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

°°°°"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

°°°°Eugenie read the following letter:--

°°°°My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

°°°°has been in Paris about a month--

°°°°"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

°°°°I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

°°°°Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

°°°°the banns are published--

°°°°"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

°°°°The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

°°°°will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

°°°°tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

°°°°business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

°°°°keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

°°°°fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

°°°°devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

°°°°/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

°°°°the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

°°°°francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

°°°°there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

°°°°creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

°°°°I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

°°°°Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

°°°°Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

°°°°for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

°°°°have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

°°°°happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

°°°°matter before you have spoken to her about it--

°°°°There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

°°°°"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

°°°°"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

°°°°"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

°°°°"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

°°°°"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

°°°°The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

°°°°"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

°°°°There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

°°°°"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

°°°°"A love game," said the notary.

°°°°Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

°°°°"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

°°°°"I am ready for all things," said the president.

°°°°"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

°°°°The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

°°°°"I will be your slave!" he said.

°°°°"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

°°°°The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

°°°°When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

°°°°The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

°°°°The president gave Charles the following letter:--

°°°°My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

°°°°place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

°°°°also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

°°°°sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

°°°°I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

°°°°Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

°°°°mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

°°°°I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

°°°°not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

°°°°according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

°°°°our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

°°°°your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

°°°°in your cousin

°°°°Eugenie.

°°°°The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

°°°°"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

°°°°"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

°°°°Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

°°°°"Seventeen mil--"

°°°°"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

°°°°"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

°°°°"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

°°°°"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

°°°°"In money?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

°°°°"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

°°°°"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

°°°°The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

°°°°"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

°°°°The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

°°°°"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

°°°°"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

°°°°Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

°°°°God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

°°°°The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

°°°°Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

°°°°End





°°°°Colonel Chabert

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage and Clara Bell

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Madame la Comtesse Ida de Bocarme nee du Chasteler.

°°°°COLONEL CHABERT

°°°°"HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!"

°°°°This exclamation was made by a lawyer's clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper--a messenger in fact--who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread with a hearty appetite. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

°°°°"Come, Simonnin, don't play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!" said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

°°°°The lawyer's messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and /billets-doux/ keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

°°°°"If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?" asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

°°°°And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

°°°°"What trick can we play that cove?" said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

°°°°Then he went on improvising:

°°°°"/But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth/--(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned-- you, as you engross it!)--/when he resumed the reins of Government, understood/--(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)--/the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!/--(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)--/and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents/--('numerous' is flattering, and ought to please the Bench)--/all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in/--Stop," said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, "that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.--Well," he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, "well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!"

°°°°And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating--"/given in/--Are you ready?"

°°°°"Yes," cried the three writers.

°°°°It all went all together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

°°°°"/Given in/--Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our /i/'s and cross our /t/'s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages."

°°°°"By Jingo!" repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

°°°°"What! have you written /by Jingo/?" cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

°°°°"Why, yes," said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor's copy, "he has written, '/We must dot our i's/' and spelt it /by Gingo/!"

°°°°All the clerks shouted with laughter.

°°°°"Why! Monsieur Hure, you take 'By Jingo' for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!" exclaimed Simonnin.

°°°°"Scratch it cleanly out," said the head clerk. "If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the 'Shoulder arms!' of the law."

°°°°"/Given in--in/?" asked Godeschal.--"Tell me when, Boucard."

°°°°"June 1814," replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

°°°°A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, "Come in!"

°°°°Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers--/broutilles/ (odds and ends) in French law jargon--and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

°°°°The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk's cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk's table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

°°°°The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,--all the glory of a lawyer's office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine --neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of /remainders/, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to /Chlet/)--a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

°°°°So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients--something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities--an attorney's office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

°°°°But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man's soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

°°°°"Where is my penknife?"

°°°°"I am eating my breakfast."

°°°°"You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen!"

°°°°These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

°°°°"Monsieur, is your master at home?"

°°°°The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, "I am deaf."

°°°°"What do you want, sir?" asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

°°°°"This is the fifth time I have called," replied the victim. "I wish to speak to M. Derville."

°°°°"On business?"

°°°°"Yes, but I can explain it to no one but--"

°°°°"M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to----"

°°°°The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers' clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the old man, "as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up."

°°°°Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

°°°°"It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning." The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in "parties," went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

°°°°"I will come again to-night," said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

°°°°The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

°°°°"What do you think of that for a cracked pot?" said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

°°°°"He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again," said a clerk.

°°°°"He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay," said the head clerk.

°°°°"No, he is a retired concierge," said Godeschal.

°°°°"I bet you he is a nobleman," cried Boucard.

°°°°"I bet you he has been a porter," retorted Godeschal. "Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body's. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch."

°°°°"He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch," cried Desroches. "It has been known!"

°°°°"No," Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, "I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic."

°°°°"I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Done with you," answered Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur! Monsieur!" shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

°°°°"What are you at now, Simonnin?" asked Boucard.

°°°°"I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know."

°°°°All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

°°°°"What can we say to him?" cried Godeschal.

°°°°"Leave it to me," replied Boucard.

°°°°The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Boucard, "will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know----"

°°°°"Chabert."

°°°°"The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?" asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

°°°°"The same, monsieur," replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

°°°°"Whew!"

°°°°"Done brown!"

°°°°"Poof!"

°°°°"Oh!"

°°°°"Ah!"

°°°°"Boum!"

°°°°"The old rogue!"

°°°°"Ting-a-ring-ting!"

°°°°"Sold again!"

°°°°"Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying," said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

°°°°There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopeia of the language would fail to represent.

°°°°"Which theatre shall we go to?"

°°°°"To the opera," cried the head clerk.

°°°°"In the first place," said Godeschal, "I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui."

°°°°"Madame Saqui is not the play."

°°°°"What is a play?" replied Godeschal. "First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen--"

°°°°"But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!" cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

°°°°"To be seen for money," Godeschal added.

°°°°"But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective," said Desroches.

°°°°"But do listen to me!"

°°°°"You are talking nonsense, my dear boy," said Boucard.

°°°°"Is Curtius' a play?" said Godeschal.

°°°°"No," said the head clerk, "it is a collection of figures--but it is a spectacle."

°°°°"I bet you a hundred francs to a sou," Godeschal resumed, "that Curtius' Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy."

°°°°"And so on, and so forth!" said Simonnin.

°°°°"You mind I don't box your ears!" said Godeschal.

°°°°The clerk shrugged their shoulders.

°°°°"Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us," he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. "On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients."

°°°°"Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow," said Boucard. "To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!"

°°°°"If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?" said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal's.

°°°°"Since nothing is settled," said Boucard, "let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in 'Nero.' Simonnin may go to the pit."

°°°°And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

°°°°"/Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen/ (in words)," said Godeschal. "Ready?"

°°°°"Yes," replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

°°°°"/And we hope that my lords on the Bench/," the extemporizing clerk went on. "Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself."

°°°°"Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines," said Boucard.

°°°°"/We hope/," Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, "/that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth/----"

°°°°"Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn't you like a glass of water?" said the little messenger.

°°°°"That imp of a boy!" said Boucard. "Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides."

°°°°"/Here set forth/," Godeschal went on. "Add /in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse/ (at full length) /de Grandlieu/."

°°°°"What!" cried the chief, "are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor--a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of 'inasmuch,' and go to the Courts myself."

°°°°This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, "Those were good times."

°°°°At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maitre Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

°°°°Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at finding the head clerk busily arranging in a convenient order on his master's dining-room table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take a seat, which the client did.

°°°°"On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you named such an hour for an interview," said the old man, with the forced mirth of a ruined man, who does his best to smile.

°°°°"The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too," replied the man, going on with his work. "M. Derville chooses this hour for studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect is freer at this hour--the only time when he can have the silence and quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case, read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business, then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money."

°°°°As he listened to this explanation, the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an expression so bereft of intelligence, that the clerk, after looking at him, thought no more about him.

°°°°A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers. The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius' collection to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This quiescence would not have been a subject for astonishment if it had not completed the supernatural aspect of the man's whole person. The old soldier was dry and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, if I may use such a vulgar expression, was as the face of the dead. Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

°°°°Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head was due to some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by Rembrandt, without a frame. The brim of the hat which covered the old man's brow cast a black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This grotesque effect, though natural, threw into relief by contrast the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a certain look of melancholy madness, and the deteriorating symptoms characteristic of senility, giving the face an indescribably ill- starred look which no human words could render.

°°°°But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had worn into this face, as drops of water from the sky falling on fine marble at last destroy its beauty. A physician, an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama at the sight of its sublime horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques which artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of the lithographic stone while chatting with a friend.

°°°°On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful reverie in silence and at night. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow to the young man; the leather lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was, "His intelligence must have escaped through that cut."

°°°°"If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!" thought Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Derville, "to whom have I the honor of speaking?"

°°°°"To Colonel Chabert."

°°°°"Which?"

°°°°"He who was killed at Eylau," replied the old man.

°°°°On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each other, as much as to say, "He is mad."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Colonel went on, "I wish to confide to you the secret of my position."

°°°°A thing worthy of note is the natural intrepidity of lawyers. Whether from the habit of receiving a great many persons, or from the deep sense of the protection conferred on them by the law, or from confidence in their missions, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing, like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

°°°°"During the day, sir," said the attorney, "I am not so miserly of my time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise. Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I may consider necessary. Speak."

°°°°Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he turned over the bundles of papers.

°°°°"You know, perhaps," said the dead man, "that I commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat's famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is a historical fact, recorded in /Victoires et Conquetes/, where it is related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor, after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the enemy's cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers, perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse. Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men, fifteen hundred of them--there might have been more! My death was announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution --for he was fond of me, was the master--wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and bring me into Hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, for he was very busy, 'Go and see whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.' These rascally saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse, and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was probably made out in accordance with the rules of military jurisprudence."

°°°°As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and relate a story so probable though so strange, the young lawyer ceased fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

°°°°"Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud," he said, interrupting the speaker, "Colonel Chabert's widow?"

°°°°"My wife--yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the custom in time of the war, and thrown into the common grave by the men ordered to bury the dead?

°°°°"Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded. Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a ball.

°°°°"When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. the little air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room. I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die. This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard--or I thought I heard, I will assert nothing--groans from the world of dead among whom I was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very indistinct, in spite of my impressions of far more acute suffering I was fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

°°°°"But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such as I have never known elsewhere--literally, the silence of the grave. At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would seem that, thanks to the carelessness and the haste with which we had been pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules! A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unhoped-for help, I must have perished. But with a fury you may imagine, I began to work my way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which had no doubt been thrown over us--I say us, as if there had been others living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms. This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw daylight, but through snow!

°°°°"At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse, who knows, had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow. However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole, where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the moment for saying, 'Respect courage in misfortune!' In short, monsieur, after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy, of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them they got me to their poor hovel.

°°°°"It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy--allow me to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which, from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

°°°°"You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave as naked as I came from my mother's; so that six months afterwards, when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert, and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man, named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

°°°°"Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence, nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond, begging my bread, treated as a madman when I have told my story, without ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert. For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample reason for shutting a man up.

°°°°"At the end of two years' detention, which I was compelled to submit to, after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, 'Here is a poor man who thinks he is Colonel Chabert' to people who would reply, 'Poor fellow!' I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh, monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I----"

°°°°Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study, which Derville respected.

°°°°"One fine day," his visitor resumed, "one spring day, they gave me the key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me. If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name, no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field- Marshal in Austria or Russia. Who knows?"

°°°°"Monsieur," said the attorney, "you have upset all my ideas. I feel as if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you."

°°°°"You are the only person," said the Colonel, with a melancholy look, "who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary documents to begin my lawsuit--"

°°°°"What lawsuit?" said the attorney, who had forgotten his client's painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

°°°°"Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a son. When I tell lawyers these things--men of sense; when I propose-- I, a beggar--to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I--a dead man--bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold politeness, which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler or a madman--it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts, under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!"

°°°°"Pray resume your narrative," said Derville.

°°°°" 'Pray resume it!' " cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer's hand. "That is the first polite word I have heard since----"

°°°°The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing and unutterable eloquence that lies in the eyes, in a gesture, even in silence, entirely convinced Derville, and touched him deeply.

°°°°"Listen, monsieur," said he; "I have this evening won three hundred francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his fortune to make. Proceed."

°°°°The Colonel, as he called himself, sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps it was in obedience to the inexplicable feeling, the latent germ in every man's heart, to which we owe the experiments of alchemists, the passion for glory, the discoveries of astronomy and of physics, everything which prompts man to expand his being by multiplying himself through deeds or ideas. In his mind the /Ego/ was now but a secondary object, just as the vanity of success or the pleasures of winning become dearer to the gambler than the object he has at stake. The young lawyer's words were as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer's office the ten gold pieces which had so long been refused him by so many people, and in so many ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured. There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us, it is like a thunderbolt; they burn us. The poor man's gratitude was too great to find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found his voice.

°°°°"Where was I?" said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier, and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in France.

°°°°"At Stuttgart. You were out of prison," said Derville.

°°°°"You know my wife?" asked the Colonel.

°°°°"Yes," said Derville, with a bow.

°°°°"What is she like?"

°°°°"Still quite charming."

°°°°The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation that is characteristic of men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, with a sort of cheerfulness--for he breathed again, the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave; he had just melted a covering of snow less easily thawed than that which had once before frozen his head; and he drew a deep breath, as if he had just escaped from a dungeon--"Monsieur, if I had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a /sans-culotte/. I was more like an Esquimaux than a Frenchman--I, who had formerly been considered one of the smartest of fops in 1799!--I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

°°°°"Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier's name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; but though I recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin's mouth opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known. It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was, then, unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former friends!

°°°°"I had once saved Boutin's life, but it was only the repayment of a debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but, like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I recalled them to his mind his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me, were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered triumphantly.

°°°°"He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon's first abdication. That news was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

°°°°"We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland, Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies. Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert. That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage, whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose only protector is the Almighty.--Nay, I am wrong! I had a father--the Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see /his Chabert/, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my wife's silence!

°°°°"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar. Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me. I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

°°°°"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu. There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me! Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

°°°°"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur, knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury, "when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

°°°°"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness; well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not know what will become of me!"

°°°°With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

°°°°"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg, it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

°°°°"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I fail, I can die--but not alone."

°°°°The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy, lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

°°°°"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

°°°°"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

°°°°"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to recover; you are rich."

°°°°This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

°°°°"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

°°°°The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville, and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

°°°°"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

°°°°The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs, and held a light for him.

°°°°"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the day."

°°°°When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

°°°°"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.

°°°°About three months after this interview, at night, in Derville's room, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville's account to his eccentric client, came to consult the attorney on a serious matter, and began by begging him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

°°°°"Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?" said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought up the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

°°°°"I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair," replied Derville. "My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty- five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism."

°°°°As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers his head clerk had laid out for him. His eye was struck by the appearance of the stamps--long, square, and triangular, in red and blue ink, which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

°°°°"Ah ha!" said he with a laugh, "here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!"

°°°°He took up the letter and opened it; but he could not read it; it was written in German.

°°°°"Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately," said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

°°°°The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, all perfectly regular and duly witnessed, and legally stamped to serve as evidence in law. He also informed him that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

°°°°"This looks like business," cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. "But look here, my boy," he went on, addressing the notary, "I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?"

°°°°"We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin," interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

°°°°"Well, was it not that ill-used man who has just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients' money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert's estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud."

°°°°"Yes," said Crottat. "It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollections, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at the time of his decease, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury."

°°°°"So that Comte Chabert's personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?"

°°°°"Consequently so it was, old fellow!" said Crottat. "You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other."

°°°°Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint- Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were rather too deep for cab wheels. Looking about him on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, "Vergniaud, dairyman." To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, all painted in white. The gate was open, and no doubt remained open all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels built in the neighborhood of Paris, which are like nothing else, not even the most wretched dwellings in the country, of which they have all the poverty without their poetry.

°°°°Indeed, in the midst of the fields, even a hovel may have a certain grace derived from the pure air, the verdure, the open country--a hill, a serpentine road, vineyards, quickset hedges, moss-grown thatch and rural implements; but poverty in Paris gains dignity only by horror. Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found a legitimate use; they had been collected from the various demolitions which are going on every day in Paris. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, "Fancy Goods." The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed to be the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil, and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall of this frail construction, which seemed rather more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred their numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes, the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough deal boards nailed so as to overlap, and shabbily thatched with rushes.

°°°°Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of the necessity for being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags that were used to clean them, fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat was munching the shoots of a starved and dusty vine that clung to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, was licking them over. The fowls, scared by Derville's approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

°°°°"And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!" said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the general effect of the squalid scene.

°°°°The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, in the hope that they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole thing tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither of them replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity, if I may combine those two words. Derville repeated his questions, but without success. Provoked by the saucy cunning of these three imps, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry which young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

°°°°The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold of his doorway with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely- colored pipe--a technical phrase to a smoker--a humble, short clay pipe of the kind called "/brule-queule/." He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join his benefactor the sooner, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

°°°°"Silence in the ranks!"

°°°°The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

°°°°"Why did you not write to me?" he said to Derville. "Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there," he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer's hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

°°°°Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; and, in fact, Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel's bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread two or three of those old fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating salt-petre, green with mould, and full of cracks, were so excessively damp that on the side where the Colonel's bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the /Bulletins de la Grande Armee/, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel's reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit to Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived in them traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

°°°°"Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?" he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

°°°°"But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!"

°°°°The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the deplorable experience which they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

°°°°"Here," said he to himself, "is a man who has of course spent my money in satisfying a trooper's three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!"

°°°°"To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----" And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--"I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace."

°°°°Derville reflected that there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums of money he had advanced, so he merely said:

°°°°"But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, but where you would have been better lodged?"

°°°°"Why," replied the Colonel, "the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me /gratis/ for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old /Egyptian/--"

°°°°"An Egyptian!"

°°°°"We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read."

°°°°"He might have lodged you better for your money," said Derville.

°°°°"Bah!" said the Colonel, "his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune . . . However, it does very well."

°°°°"Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!"

°°°°"Curse the money! To think I haven't got any!" he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

°°°°Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

°°°°"Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business," said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

°°°°"To me," said the soldier, "it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau."

°°°°"Things are not done so in the legal world," said Derville. "Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing that justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

°°°°"In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets."

°°°°"And my fortune?"

°°°°"Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?"

°°°°"Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?"

°°°°"My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs."

°°°°"And you call that justice!" said the Colonel, in dismay.

°°°°"Why, certainly--"

°°°°"A pretty kind of justice!"

°°°°"So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, that what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor."

°°°°"But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----"

°°°°"I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to."

°°°°"That would be to sell my wife!"

°°°°"With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in the position in which you are, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice."

°°°°"Let us go together."

°°°°"What, just as you are?" said the lawyer. "No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot."

°°°°"Can I possibly gain it?"

°°°°"On every count," replied Derville. "But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor."

°°°°"To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that," said he simply.

°°°°"Well, until then," Derville went on, "will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it."

°°°°Large tears gathered in the poor veteran's faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

°°°°"I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!" he cried. "I will call out: 'I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!'--The statue--he--he will know me."

°°°°"And you will find yourself in Charenton."

°°°°At this terrible name the soldier's transports collapsed.

°°°°"And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?"

°°°°"The war office!" said Derville. "Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire."

°°°°The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

°°°°His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements, which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

°°°°Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

°°°°"Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests."

°°°°"Do what you will," said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death."

°°°°"Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?"

°°°°"That is not my view of it," said the lawyer. "We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud's intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension."

°°°°"Well, proceed then," said Chabert. "I put myself entirely in your hands."

°°°°"I will send you a power of attorney to sign," said Derville. "Good- bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me."

°°°°Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer's hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him excepting with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

°°°°During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer's; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir," said he, taking Derville by the arm, "if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General's."

°°°°"And what then?" replied Derville. "What concern have you with him?-- But who are you?" said the cautious lawyer.

°°°°"I am Louis Vergniaud," he replied at once. "I have a few words to say to you."

°°°°"So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?"

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think? --Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it's neighbors' fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings."

°°°°"He?"

°°°°"Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, 'Really, General----' 'Bah!' says he, 'I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.'--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados-- Do you know him, sir?"

°°°°"But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you."

°°°°"He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it's just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----"

°°°°Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

°°°°"On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!" thought he.

°°°°"All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure."

°°°°"And will that be soon?"

°°°°"Why, yes."

°°°°"Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!" and the cowkeeper's tanned face seemed to expand.

°°°°"Now," said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, "let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but . . ."

°°°°And he set to work to study the Countess' position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves up when concocting their own plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

°°°°But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer's cleverness.

°°°°Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old /Parlement/ of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon's blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor's advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised the restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

°°°°The Emperor fell.

°°°°At the time of Comte Chabert's death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband's fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving of this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband's will; but Napoleon's hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count's marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

°°°°Then came the Restoration. The Count's political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the "Gulf of Revolution should be closed"--for this phrase of the King's, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer's preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

°°°°Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master's influence, and he made the Count's fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness of which most women have a share more or less, understood the man's motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well, that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

°°°°The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess' abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress' capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on the housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess' greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

°°°°At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert's widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

°°°°A speech he made, /a propos/ of Talleyrand's marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess' heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband's return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

°°°°"There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud's position," said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. "How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the /pairie/ by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the /Parlement/ is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King's great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess," thought he as he went up the steps.

°°°°Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

°°°°She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, while playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert's wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

°°°°"The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them."

°°°°A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

°°°°"Good-morning, Monsieur Derville," said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

°°°°"Madame," said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. "I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter."

°°°°"I am so /grieved/, M. le Comte is away--"

°°°°"I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count."

°°°°"Then I will send for Delbecq," said she.

°°°°"He would be of no use to you, clever as he is," replied Derville. "Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!"

°°°°"Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?" said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

°°°°"Madame," he said with cold and piercing solemnity, "you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point."

°°°°"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

°°°°"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

°°°°"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come."

°°°°"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

°°°°"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--"

°°°°"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

°°°°"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----"

°°°°The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's attorney, be so good as to--"

°°°°"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening."

°°°°"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

°°°°"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

°°°°"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

°°°°"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you."

°°°°"And who is he?"

°°°°"Comte Ferraud."

°°°°"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--"

°°°°"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--"

°°°°"He would defend me, monsieur."

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

°°°°"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

°°°°The Countess turned pale.

°°°°"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

°°°°"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?"

°°°°"Compromise!" said Derville.

°°°°"Does he still love me?" she said.

°°°°"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

°°°°The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

°°°°"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.

°°°°A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and seemed to have acquired youth and /impasto/, to borrow a picturesque word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture and a book.

°°°°When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville's office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off, when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a dress which, though simple, was cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was. She wore a pretty drawn bonnet lined with pink, which framed her face to perfection, softening its outlines and making it look younger.

°°°°If the clients were rejuvenescent, the office was unaltered, and presented the same picture as that described at the beginning of this story. Simonnin was eating his breakfast, his shoulder leaning against the window, which was then open, and he was staring up at the blue sky in the opening of the courtyard enclosed by four gloomy houses.

°°°°"Ah, ha!" cried the little clerk, "who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?"

°°°°"The chief is a great magician," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Then there is no trick to play on him this time?" asked Desroches.

°°°°"His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud," said Boucard.

°°°°"What next?" said Godeschal. "Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?"

°°°°"Here she is," answered Simonnin.

°°°°"So you are not deaf, you young rogue!" said Chabert, taking the gutter-jumper by the ear and twisting it, to the delight of the other clerks, who began to laugh, looking at the Colonel with the curious attention due to so singular a personage.

°°°°Comte Chabert was in Derville's private room at the moment when his wife came in by the door of the office.

°°°°"I say, Boucard, there is going to be a queer scene in the chief's room! There is a woman who can spend her days alternately, the odd with Comte Ferraud, and the even with Comte Chabert."

°°°°"And in leap year," said Godeschal, "they must settle the /count/ between them."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen, you can be heard!" said Boucard severely. "I never was in an office where there was so much jesting as there is here over the clients."

°°°°Derville had made the Colonel retire to the bedroom when the Countess was admitted.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert, I have placed you apart. If, however, you should wish it--"

°°°°"It is an attention for which I am obliged to you."

°°°°"I have drawn up the memorandum of an agreement of which you and M. Chabert can discuss the conditions, here, and now. I will go alternately to him and to you, and explain your views respectively."

°°°°"Let me see, monsieur," said the Countess impatiently.

°°°°Derville read aloud:

°°°°" 'Between the undersigned:

°°°°" 'M. Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, Marechal de Camp, and Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, living in Paris, Rue du Petit-Banquier, on the one part;

°°°°" 'And Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the aforesaid M. le Comte Chabert, /nee/--' "

°°°°"Pass over the preliminaries," said she. "Come to the conditions."

°°°°"Madame," said the lawyer, "the preamble briefly sets forth the position in which you stand to each other. Then, by the first clause, you acknowledge, in the presence of three witnesses, of whom two shall be notaries, and one the dairyman with whom your husband has been lodging, to all of whom your secret is known, and who will be absolutely silent--you acknowledge, I say, that the individual designated in the documents subjoined to the deed, and whose identity is to be further proved by an act of recognition prepared by your notary, Alexandre Crottat, is your first husband, Comte Chabert. By the second clause Comte Chabert, to secure your happiness, will undertake to assert his rights only under certain circumstances set forth in the deed.--And these," said Derville, in a parenthesis, "are none other than a failure to carry out the conditions of this secret agreement.--M. Chabert, on his part, agrees to accept judgment on a friendly suit, by which his certificate of death shall be annulled, and his marriage dissolved."

°°°°"That will not suit me in the least," said the Countess with surprise. "I will be a party to no suit; you know why."

°°°°"By the third clause," Derville went on, with imperturbable coolness, "you pledge yourself to secure to Hyacinthe Comte Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock held in his name, to revert to you at his death--"

°°°°"But it is much too dear!" exclaimed the Countess.

°°°°"Can you compromise the matter cheaper?"

°°°°"Possibly."

°°°°"But what do you want, madame?"

°°°°"I want--I will not have a lawsuit. I want--"

°°°°"You want him to remain dead?" said Derville, interrupting her hastily.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, "if twenty-four thousand francs a year are necessary, we will go to law--"

°°°°"Yes, we will go to law," said the Colonel in a deep voice, as he opened the door and stood before his wife, with one hand in his waistcoat and the other hanging by his side--an attitude to which the recollection of his adventure gave horrible significance.

°°°°"It is he," said the Countess to herself.

°°°°"Too dear!" the old soldier exclaimed. "I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you--you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved--"

°°°°"But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!" cried the Countess, in feigned amazement.

°°°°"Indeed!" said the old man, in a tone of intense irony. "Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais Royal----"

°°°°The Countess turned pale. Seeing her grow white under her rouge, the old soldier paused, touched by the acute suffering he was inflicting on the woman he had once so ardently loved; but she shot such a venomous glance at him that he abruptly went on:

°°°°"You were with La--"

°°°°"Allow me, Monsieur Derville," said the Countess to the lawyer. "You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things."

°°°°She rose and went out. Derville rushed after her; but the Countess had taken wings, and seemed to have flown from the place.

°°°°On returning to his private room, he found the Colonel in a towering rage, striding up and down.

°°°°"In those times a man took his wife where he chose," said he. "But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted to appearances. She has no heart."

°°°°"Well, Colonel, was I not right to beg you not to come?--I am now positive of your identity; when you came in, the Countess gave a little start, of which the meaning was unequivocal. But you have lost your chances. Your wife knows that you are unrecognizable."

°°°°"I will kill her!"

°°°°"Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch. Besides you might miss! That would be unpardonable. A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife.--Let me set things straight; you are only a big child. Go now. Take care of yourself; she is capable of setting some trap for you and shutting you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you against a surprise."

°°°°The unhappy Colonel obeyed his young benefactor, and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly went down the dark staircase, lost in gloomy thoughts, and crushed perhaps by the blow just dealt him--the most cruel he could feel, the thrust that could most deeply pierce his heart--when he heard the rustle of a woman's dress on the lowest landing, and his wife stood before him.

°°°°"Come, monsieur," said she, taking his arm with a gesture like those familiar to him of old. Her action and the accent of her voice, which had recovered its graciousness, were enough to allay the Colonel's wrath, and he allowed himself to be led to the carriage.

°°°°"Well, get in!" said she, when the footman had let down the step.

°°°°And as if by magic, he found himself sitting by his wife in the brougham.

°°°°"Where to?" asked the servant.

°°°°"To Groslay," said she.

°°°°The horses started at once, and carried them all across Paris.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, in a tone of voice which betrayed one of those emotions which are rare in our lives, and which agitate every part of our being. At such moments the heart, fibres, nerves, countenance, soul, and body, everything, every pore even, feels a thrill. Life no longer seems to be within us; it flows out, springs forth, is communicated as if by contagion, transmitted by a look, a tone of voice, a gesture, impressing our will on others. The old soldier started on hearing this single word, this first, terrible "monsieur!" But still it was at once a reproach and a pardon, a hope and a despair, a question and an answer. This word included them all; none but an actress could have thrown so much eloquence, so many feelings into a single word. Truth is less complete in its utterance; it does not put everything on the outside; it allows us to see what is within. The Colonel was filled with remorse for his suspicions, his demands, and his anger; he looked down not to betray his agitation.

°°°°"Monsieur," repeated she, after an imperceptible pause, "I knew you at once."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old soldier, "those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes."

°°°°Two large tears rolled hot on to his wife's hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

°°°°"Monsieur," she went on, "could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false as mine now is? If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in the privacy of my family. Ought not such a secret to remain buried in our hearts? You will forgive me, I hope, for my apparent indifference to the woes of a Chabert in whose existence I could not possibly believe. I received your letters," she hastily added, seeing in his face the objection it expressed, "but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing was unrecognizable; and after obtaining Napoleon's signature to my second marriage contract, I could not help believing that some clever swindler wanted to make a fool of me. Therefore, to avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud's peace of mind, and disturbing family ties, I was obliged to take precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right, I ask you?"

°°°°"Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot, the owl, the dolt, not to have calculated better what the consequences of such a position might be.--But where are we going?" he asked, seeing that they had reached the barrier of La Chapelle.

°°°°"To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There, monsieur, we will consider the steps to be taken. I know my duties. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? We need not inform the public of a situation, which for me has its ridiculous side, and let us preserve our dignity. You still love me," she said, with a sad, sweet gaze at the Colonel, "but have not I been authorized to form other ties? In so strange a position, a secret voice bids me trust to your kindness, which is so well known to me. Can I be wrong in taking you as the sole arbiter of my fate? Be at once judge and party to the suit. I trust in your noble character; you will be generous enough to forgive me for the consequences of faults committed in innocence. I may then confess to you: I love M. Ferraud. I believed that I had a right to love him. I do not blush to make this confession to you; even if it offends you, it does not disgrace us. I cannot conceal the facts. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother."

°°°°The Colonel with a wave of his hand bid his wife be silent, and for a mile and a half they sat without speaking a single word. Chabert could fancy he saw the two little ones before him.

°°°°"Rosine."

°°°°"Monsieur?"

°°°°"The dead are very wrong to come to life again."

°°°°"Oh, monsieur, no, no! Do not think me ungrateful. Only, you find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old man in a softened tone, "I no longer feel any resentment against you. We will forget anything," he added, with one of those smiles which always reflect a noble soul; "I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me."

°°°°The Countess gave him a flashing look full of such deep gratitude that poor Chabert would have been glad to sink again into his grave at Eylau. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion, of which the whole reward consists in the assurance that they have made the person they love happy.

°°°°"My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested," said the Countess.

°°°°The conversation turned to other subjects, for it was impossible to dwell very long on this one. Though the couple came back again and again to their singular position, either by some allusion or of serious purpose, they had a delightful drive, recalling the events of their former life together and the times of the Empire. The Countess knew how to lend peculiar charm to her reminiscences, and gave the conversation the tinge of melancholy that was needed to keep it serious. She revived his love without awakening his desires, and allowed her first husband to discern the mental wealth she had acquired while trying to accustom him to moderate his pleasure to that which a father may feel in the society of a favorite daughter.

°°°°The Colonel had known the Countess of the Empire; he found her a Countess of the Restoration.

°°°°At last, by a cross-road, they arrived at the entrance to a large park lying in the little valley which divides the heights of Margency from the pretty village of Groslay. The Countess had there a delightful house, where the Colonel on arriving found everything in readiness for his stay there, as well as for his wife's. Misfortune is a kind of talisman whose virtue consists in its power to confirm our original nature; in some men it increases their distrust and malignancy, just as it improves the goodness of those who have a kind heart.

°°°°Sorrow had made the Colonel even more helpful and good than he had always been, and he could understand some secrets of womanly distress which are unrevealed to most men. Nevertheless, in spite of his loyal trustfulness, he could not help saying to his wife:

°°°°"Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?"

°°°°"Yes," replied she, "if I found Colonel Chabert in Derville's client."

°°°°The appearance of truth she contrived to give to this answer dissipated the slight suspicions which the Colonel was ashamed to have felt. For three days the Countess was quite charming to her first husband. By tender attentions and unfailing sweetness she seemed anxious to wipe out the memory of the sufferings he had endured, and to earn forgiveness for the woes which, as she confessed, she had innocently caused him. She delighted in displaying for him the charms she knew he took pleasure in, while at the same time she assumed a kind of melancholy; for men are more especially accessible to certain ways, certain graces of the heart or of the mind which they cannot resist. She aimed at interesting him in her position, and appealing to his feelings so far as to take possession of his mind and control him despotically.

°°°°Ready for anything to attain her ends, she did not yet know what she was to do with this man; but at any rate she meant to annihilate him socially. On the evening of the third day she felt that in spite of her efforts she could not conceal her uneasiness as to the results of her manoeuvres. To give herself a minute's reprieve she went up to her room, sat down before her writing-table, and laid aside the mask of composure which she wore in Chabert's presence, like an actress who, returning to her dressing-room after a fatiguing fifth act, drops half dead, leaving with the audience an image of herself which she no longer resembles. She proceeded to finish a letter she had begun to Delbecq, whom she desired to go in her name and demand of Derville the deeds relating to Colonel Chabert, to copy them, and to come to her at once to Groslay. She had hardly finished when she heard the Colonel's step in the passage; uneasy at her absence, he had come to look for her.

°°°°"Alas!" she exclaimed, "I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable . . ."

°°°°"Why, what is the matter?" asked the good man.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing!" she replied.

°°°°She rose, left the Colonel, and went down to speak privately to her maid, whom she sent off to Paris, impressing on her that she was herself to deliver to Delbecq the letter just written, and to bring it back to the writer as soon as he had read it. Then the Countess went out to sit on a bench sufficiently in sight for the Colonel to join her as soon as he might choose. The Colonel, who was looking for her, hastened up and sat down by her.

°°°°"Rosine," said he, "what is the matter with you?"

°°°°She did not answer.

°°°°It was one of those glorious, calm evenings in the month of June, whose secret harmonies infuse such sweetness into the sunset. The air was clear, the stillness perfect, so that far away in the park they could hear the voices of some children, which added a kind of melody to the sublimity of the scene.

°°°°"You do not answer me?" the Colonel said to his wife.

°°°°"My husband----" said the Countess, who broke off, started a little, and with a blush stopped to ask him, "What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?"

°°°°"Call him your husband, my poor child," replied the Colonel, in a kind voice. "Is he not the father of your children?"

°°°°"Well, then," she said, "if he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out that I came here, alone, with a stranger, what am I to say to him? Listen, monsieur," she went on, assuming a dignified attitude, "decide my fate, I am resigned to anything--"

°°°°"My dear," said the Colonel, taking possession of his wife's hands, "I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness--"

°°°°"That is impossible!" she exclaimed, with a sudden spasmodic movement. "Remember that you would have to renounce your identity, and in an authenticated form."

°°°°"What?" said the Colonel. "Is not my word enough for you?"

°°°°The word "authenticated" fell on the old man's heart, and roused involuntary distrust. He looked at his wife in a way that made her color, she cast down her eyes, and he feared that he might find himself compelled to despise her. The Countess was afraid lest she had scared the shy modesty, the stern honesty, of a man whose generous temper and primitive virtues were known to her. Though these feelings had brought the clouds to her brow, they immediately recovered their harmony. This was the way of it. A child's cry was heard in the distance.

°°°°"Jules, leave your sister in peace," the Countess called out.

°°°°"What, are your children here?" said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but I told them not to trouble you."

°°°°The old soldier understood the delicacy, the womanly tact of so gracious a precaution, and took the Countess' hand to kiss it.

°°°°"But let them come," said he.

°°°°The little girl ran up to complain of her brother.

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"It was Jules--"

°°°°"It was her--"

°°°°Their little hands were held out to their mother, and the two childish voices mingled; it was an unexpected and charming picture.

°°°°"Poor little things!" cried the Countess, no longer restraining her tears, "I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother's heart cannot be divided; I want them, I want them."

°°°°"Are you making mamma cry?" said Jules, looking fiercely at the Colonel.

°°°°"Silence, Jules!" said the mother in a decided tone.

°°°°The two children stood speechless, examining their mother and the stranger with a curiosity which it is impossible to express in words.

°°°°"Oh yes!" she cried. "If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything . . ."

°°°°This was the decisive speech which gained all that she had hoped from it.

°°°°"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, as if he were ending a sentence already begun in his mind, "I must return underground again. I had told myself so already."

°°°°"Can I accept such a sacrifice?" replied his wife. "If some men have died to save a mistress' honor, they gave their life but once. But in this case you would be giving your life every day. No, no. It is impossible. If it were only your life, it would be nothing; but to sign a declaration that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to sacrifice your honor, and live a lie every hour of the day! Human devotion cannot go so far. Only think!--No. But for my poor children I would have fled with you by this time to the other end of the world."

°°°°"But," said Chabert, "cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn out as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but a little tobacco and the /Constitutionnel/."

°°°°The Countess melted into tears. There was a contest of generosity between the Comtesse Ferraud and Colonel Chabert, and the soldier came out victorious. One evening, seeing this mother with her children, the soldier was bewitched by the touching grace of a family picture in the country, in the shade and the silence; he made a resolution to remain dead, and, frightened no longer at the authentication of a deed, he asked what he could do to secure beyond all risk the happiness of this family.

°°°°"Do exactly as you like," said the Countess. "I declare to you that I will have nothing to do with this affair. I ought not."

°°°°Delbecq had arrived some days before, and in obedience to the Countess' verbal instructions, the intendant had succeeded in gaining the old soldier's confidence. So on the following morning Colonel Chabert went with the erewhile attorney to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had caused the notary to draw up an affidavit in such terms that, after hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

°°°°"Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!" he exclaimed.

°°°°"Indeed, monsieur," said Delbecq, "I should advise you not to sign in haste. In your place I would get at least thirty thousand francs a year out of the bargain. Madame would pay them."

°°°°After annihilating this scoundrel /emeritus/ by the lightning look of an honest man insulted, the Colonel rushed off, carried away by a thousand contrary emotions. He was suspicious, indignant, and calm again by turns.

°°°°Finally he made his way back into the park of Groslay by a gap in a fence, and slowly walked on to sit down and rest, and meditate at his ease, in a little room under a gazebo, from which the road to Saint- Leu could be seen. The path being strewn with the yellowish sand which is used instead of river-gravel, the Countess, who was sitting in the upper room of this little summer-house, did not hear the Colonel's approach, for she was too much preoccupied with the success of her business to pay the smallest attention to the slight noise made by her husband. Nor did the old man notice that his wife was in the room over him.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur Delbecq, has he signed?" the Countess asked her secretary, whom she saw alone on the road beyond the hedge of a haha.

°°°°"No, madame. I do not even know what has become of our man. The old horse reared."

°°°°"Then we shall be obliged to put him into Charenton," said she, "since we have got him."

°°°°The Colonel, who recovered the elasticity of youth to leap the haha, in the twinkling of an eye was standing in front of Delbecq, on whom he bestowed the two finest slaps that ever a scoundrel's cheeks received.

°°°°"And you may add that old horses can kick!" said he.

°°°°His rage spent, the Colonel no longer felt vigorous enough to leap the ditch. He had seen the truth in all its nakedness. The Countess' speech and Delbecq's reply had revealed the conspiracy of which he was to be the victim. The care taken of him was but a bait to entrap him in a snare. That speech was like a drop of subtle poison, bringing on in the old soldier a return of all his sufferings, physical and moral. He came back to the summer-house through the park gate, walking slowly like a broken man.

°°°°Then for him there was to be neither peace nor truce. From this moment he must begin the odious warfare with this woman of which Derville had spoken, enter on a life of litigation, feed on gall, drink every morning of the cup of bitterness. And then--fearful thought!--where was he to find the money needful to pay the cost of the first proceedings? He felt such disgust of life, that if there had been any water at hand he would have thrown himself into it; that if he had had a pistol, he would have blown out his brains. Then he relapsed into the indecision of mind which, since his conversation with Derville at the dairyman's had changed his character.

°°°°At last, having reached the kiosque, he went up to the gazebo, where little rose-windows afforded a view over each lovely landscape of the valley, and where he found his wife seated on a chair. The Countess was gazing at the distance, and preserved a calm countenance, showing that impenetrable face which women can assume when resolved to do their worst. She wiped her eyes as if she had been weeping, and played absently with the pink ribbons of her sash. Nevertheless, in spite of her apparent assurance, she could not help shuddering slightly when she saw before her her venerable benefactor, standing with folded arms, his face pale, his brow stern.

°°°°"Madame," he said, after gazing at her fixedly for a moment and compelling her to blush, "Madame, I do not curse you--I scorn you. I can now thank the chance that has divided us. I do not feel even a desire for revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on the strength of my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps have made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of the sunshine.--Farewell!"

°°°°The Countess threw herself at his feet; she would have detained him by taking his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust, saying:

°°°°"Do not touch me!"

°°°°The Countess' expression when she heard her husband's retreating steps is quite indescribable. Then, with the deep perspicacity given only by utter villainy, or by fierce worldly selfishness, she knew that she might live in peace on the word and the contempt of this loyal veteran.

°°°°Chabert, in fact, disappeared. The dairyman failed in business, and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel, perhaps, took up some similar industry for a time. Perhaps, like a stone flung into a chasm, he went falling from ledge to ledge, to be lost in the mire of rags that seethes through the streets of Paris.

°°°°Six months after this event, Derville, hearing no more of Colonel Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed that they had no doubt come to a compromise, which the Countess, out of revenge, had had arranged by some other lawyer. So one morning he added up the sums he had advanced to the said Chabert with the costs, and begged the Comtesse Ferraud to claim from M. le Comte Chabert the amount of the bill, assuming that she would know where to find her first husband.

°°°°The very next day Comte Ferraud's man of business, lately appointed President of the County Court in a town of some importance, wrote this distressing note to Derville:

°°°°"MONSIEUR,--

°°°°"Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your   client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the   individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he   came forward under false pretences. "Yours, etc.,                DELBECQ."

°°°°"One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half," cried Derville. "They don't deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand- franc notes!"

°°°°Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader to whom he wished to speak, and who was employed in the Police Court. As chance would have it, Derville went into Court Number 6 at the moment when the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months' imprisonment as a vagabond, and subsequently to be taken to the Mendicity House of Detention, a sentence which, by magistrates' law, is equivalent to perpetual imprisonment. On hearing the name of Hyacinthe, Derville looked at the deliquent, sitting between two /gendarmes/ on the bench for the accused, and recognized in the condemned man his false Colonel Chabert.

°°°°The old soldier was placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In spite of his rags, in spite of the misery stamped on his countenance, it gave evidence of noble pride. His eye had a stoical expression which no magistrate ought to have misunderstood; but as soon as a man has fallen into the hands of justice, he is no more than a moral entity, a matter of law or of fact, just as to statists he has become a zero.

°°°°When the veteran was taken back to the lock-up, to be removed later with the batch of vagabonds at that moment at the bar, Derville availed himself of the privilege accorded to lawyers of going wherever they please in the Courts, and followed him to the lock-up, where he stood scrutinizing him for some minutes, as well as the curious crew of beggars among whom he found himself. The passage to the lock-up at that moment afforded one of those spectacles which, unfortunately, neither legislators, nor philanthropists, nor painters, nor writers come to study. Like all the laboratories of the law, this ante-room is a dark and malodorous place; along the walls runs a wooden seat, blackened by the constant presence there of the wretches who come to this meeting-place of every form of social squalor, where not one of them is missing.

°°°°A poet might say that the day was ashamed to light up this dreadful sewer through which so much misery flows! There is not a spot on that plank where some crime has not sat, in embryo or matured; not a corner where a man has never stood who, driven to despair by the blight which justice has set upon him after his first fault, has not there begun a career, at the end of which looms the guillotine or the pistol-snap of the suicide. All who fall on the pavement of Paris rebound against these yellow-gray walls, on which a philanthropist who was not a speculator might read a justification of the numerous suicides complained of by hypocritical writers who are incapable of taking a step to prevent them--for that justification is written in that ante- room, like a preface to the dramas of the Morgue, or to those enacted on the Place de la Greve.

°°°°At this moment Colonel Chabert was sitting among these men--men with coarse faces, clothed in the horrible livery of misery, and silent at intervals, or talking in a low tone, for three gendarmes on duty paced to and fro, their sabres clattering on the floor.

°°°°"Do you recognize me?" said Derville to the old man, standing in front of him.

°°°°"Yes, sir," said Chabert, rising.

°°°°"If you are an honest man," Derville went on in an undertone, "how could you remain in my debt?"

°°°°The old soldier blushed as a young girl might when accused by her mother of a clandestine love affair.

°°°°"What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?" cried he in a loud voice.

°°°°"Paid me?" said Derville. "She wrote to me that you were a swindler."

°°°°The Colonel cast up his eyes in a sublime impulse of horror and imprecation, as if to call heaven to witness to this fresh subterfuge.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, in a voice that was calm by sheer huskiness, "get the gendarmes to allow me to go into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored."

°°°°At a word from Derville to the sergeant he was allowed to take his client into the room, where Hyacinthe wrote a few lines, and addressed them to the Comtesse Ferraud.

°°°°"Send her that," said the soldier, "and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is not the less there," and he laid his hand on his heart. "Yes, it is there, deep and sincere. But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all."

°°°°"What!" said Derville. "Did you not stipulate for an allowance?"

°°°°"Do not speak of it!" cried the old man. "You cannot conceive how deep my contempt is for the outside life to which most men cling. I was suddenly attacked by a sickness--disgust of humanity. When I think that Napoleon is at Saint-Helena, everything on earth is a matter of indifference to me. I can no longer be a soldier; that is my only real grief. After all," he added with a gesture of childish simplicity, "it is better to enjoy luxury of feeling than of dress. For my part, I fear nobody's contempt."

°°°°And the Colonel sat down on his bench again.

°°°°Derville went away. On returning to his office, he sent Godeschal, at that time his second clerk, to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert's lawyer.

°°°°In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now himself an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, to whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal's staff among beggars by living on at Bicetre as poor women live on at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures who are lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners, which consists in drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords to its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

°°°°"I say, Derville," said Godeschal to his traveling companion, "look at that old fellow. Isn't he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy."

°°°°Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

°°°°"That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?"

°°°°"Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious," said Godeschal.

°°°°"That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger's glare she shot at him at that moment."

°°°°This opening having excited Godeschal's curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

°°°°Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

°°°°"Good-morning, Colonel Chabert," said Derville.

°°°°"Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe," replied the veteran. "I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7," he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--"Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?" he asked after a moment's silence. "He is not married! He is very lucky!"

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Godeschal. "Would you like something to buy snuff?"

°°°°With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

°°°°"Brave troopers!"

°°°°He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

°°°°"Fire! both arms! /Vive Napoleon/!" And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

°°°°"The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish," said Derville.

°°°°"Childish! he?" said another old pauper, who was looking on. "Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, 'Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.'--'I was too young to be there,' said Hyacinthe. 'But I was at Jena.' And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions."

°°°°"What a destiny!" exclaimed Derville. "Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow," Derville went on after a pause, "there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

°°°°"How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris."

°°°°"I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches' office," replied Godeschal.

°°°°PARIS, February-March 1832.

°°°°End



°°°°Father Goriot

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage

°°°°To the great and illustrious Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a token of admiration for his works and genius. DE BALZAC.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans) is an elderly person, who for the past forty years has kept a lodging-house in the Rue Nueve- Sainte-Genevieve, in the district that lies between the Latin Quarter and the Faubourg Saint-Marcel. Her house (known in the neighborhood as the Maison Vauquer) receives men and women, old and young, and no word has ever been breathed against her respectable establishment; but, at the same time, it must be said that as a matter of fact no young woman has been under her roof for thirty years, and that if a young man stays there for any length of time it is a sure sign that his allowance must be of the slenderest. In 1819, however, the time when this drama opens, there was an almost penniless young girl among Mme. Vauquer's boarders.

°°°°That word drama has been somewhat discredited of late; it has been overworked and twisted to strange uses in these days of dolorous literature; but it must do service again here, not because this story is dramatic in the restricted sense of the word, but because some tears may perhaps be shed intra et extra muros before it is over.

°°°°Will any one without the walls of Paris understand it? It is open to doubt. The only audience who could appreciate the results of close observation, the careful reproduction of minute detail and local color, are dwellers between the heights of Montrouge and Montmartre, in a vale of crumbling stucco watered by streams of black mud, a vale of sorrows which are real and joys too often hollow; but this audience is so accustomed to terrible sensations, that only some unimaginable and well-neigh impossible woe could produce any lasting impression there. Now and again there are tragedies so awful and so grand by reason of the complication of virtues and vices that bring them about, that egotism and selfishness are forced to pause and are moved to pity; but the impression that they receive is like a luscious fruit, soon consumed. Civilization, like the car of Juggernaut, is scarcely stayed perceptibly in its progress by a heart less easy to break than the others that lie in its course; this also is broken, and Civilization continues on her course triumphant. And you, too, will do the like; you who with this book in your white hand will sink back among the cushions of your armchair, and say to yourself, "Perhaps this may amuse me." You will read the story of Father Goriot's secret woes, and, dining thereafter with an unspoiled appetite, will lay the blame of your insensibility upon the writer, and accuse him of exaggeration, of writing romances. Ah! once for all, this drama is neither a fiction nor a romance! ALL IS TRUE,--so true, that every one can discern the elements of the tragedy in his own house, perhaps in his own heart.

°°°°The lodging-house is Mme. Vauquer's own property. It is still standing in the lower end of the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, just where the road slopes so sharply down to the Rue de l'Arbalete, that wheeled traffic seldom passes that way, because it is so stony and steep. This position is sufficient to account for the silence prevalent in the streets shut in between the dome of the Pantheon and the dome of the Val-de-Grace, two conspicuous public buildings which give a yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies beneath the shadow of their leaden- hued cupolas.

°°°°In that district the pavements are clean and dry, there is neither mud nor water in the gutters, grass grows in the chinks of the walls. The most heedless passer-by feels the depressing influences of a place where the sound of wheels creates a sensation; there is a grim look about the houses, a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls. A Parisian straying into a suburb apparently composed of lodging-houses and public institutions would see poverty and dullness, old age lying down to die, and joyous youth condemned to drudgery. It is the ugliest quarter of Paris, and, it may be added, the least known. But, before all things, the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve is like a bronze frame for a picture for which the mind cannot be too well prepared by the contemplation of sad hues and sober images. Even so, step by step the daylight decreases, and the cicerone's droning voice grows hollower as the traveler descends into the Catacombs. The comparison holds good! Who shall say which is more ghastly, the sight of the bleached skulls or of dried-up human hearts?

°°°°The front of the lodging-house is at right angles to the road, and looks out upon a little garden, so that you see the side of the house in section, as it were, from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. Beneath the wall of the house front there lies a channel, a fathom wide, paved with cobble-stones, and beside it runs a graveled walk bordered by geraniums and oleanders and pomegranates set in great blue and white glazed earthenware pots. Access into the graveled walk is afforded by a door, above which the words MAISON VAUQUER may be read, and beneath, in rather smaller letters, "Lodgings for both sexes, etc."

°°°°During the day a glimpse into the garden is easily obtained through a wicket to which a bell is attached. On the opposite wall, at the further end of the graveled walk, a green marble arch was painted once upon a time by a local artist, and in this semblance of a shrine a statue representing Cupid is installed; a Parisian Cupid, so blistered and disfigured that he looks like a candidate for one of the adjacent hospitals, and might suggest an allegory to lovers of symbolism. The half-obliterated inscription on the pedestal beneath determines the date of this work of art, for it bears witness to the widespread enthusiasm felt for Voltaire on his return to Paris in 1777:

°°°°"Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;   He is, or was, or ought to be."

°°°°At night the wicket gate is replaced by a solid door. The little garden is no wider than the front of the house; it is shut in between the wall of the street and the partition wall of the neighboring house. A mantle of ivy conceals the bricks and attracts the eyes of passers-by to an effect which is picturesque in Paris, for each of the walls is covered with trellised vines that yield a scanty dusty crop of fruit, and furnish besides a subject of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her lodgers; every year the widow trembles for her vintage.

°°°°A straight path beneath the walls on either side of the garden leads to a clump of lime-trees at the further end of it; LINE- trees, as Mme. Vauquer persists in calling them, in spite of the fact that she was a de Conflans, and regardless of repeated corrections from her lodgers.

°°°°The central space between the walls is filled with artichokes and rows of pyramid fruit-trees, and surrounded by a border of lettuce, pot-herbs, and parsley. Under the lime-trees there are a few green-painted garden seats and a wooden table, and hither, during the dog-days, such of the lodgers as are rich enough to indulge in a cup of coffee come to take their pleasure, though it is hot enough to roast eggs even in the shade.

°°°°The house itself is three stories high, without counting the attics under the roof. It is built of rough stone, and covered with the yellowish stucco that gives a mean appearance to almost every house in Paris. There are five windows in each story in the front of the house; all the blinds visible through the small square panes are drawn up awry, so that the lines are all at cross purposes. At the side of the house there are but two windows on each floor, and the lowest of all are adorned with a heavy iron grating.

°°°°Behind the house a yard extends for some twenty feet, a space inhabited by a happy family of pigs, poultry, and rabbits; the wood-shed is situated on the further side, and on the wall between the wood-shed and the kitchen window hangs the meat-safe, just above the place where the sink discharges its greasy streams. The cook sweeps all the refuse out through a little door into the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, and frequently cleanses the yard with copious supplies of water, under pain of pestilence.

°°°°The house might have been built on purpose for its present uses. Access is given by a French window to the first room on the ground floor, a sitting-room which looks out upon the street through the two barred windows already mentioned. Another door opens out of it into the dining-room, which is separated from the kitchen by the well of the staircase, the steps being constructed partly of wood, partly of tiles, which are colored and beeswaxed. Nothing can be more depressing than the sight of that sitting- room. The furniture is covered with horse hair woven in alternate dull and glossy stripes. There is a round table in the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from Telemaque are depicted, the various classical personages being colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

°°°°The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the language, and which should be called the odeur de pension. The damp atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy, musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet, in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining dining- room.

°°°°The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which the lodgers' table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine, are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long table is so greasy that a waggish externe will write his name on the surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky, worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one- eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire, parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet, its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

°°°°This apartment is in all its glory at seven o'clock in the morning, when Mme. Vauquer's cat appears, announcing the near approach of his mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated countenance, and a nose like a parrot's beak set in the middle of it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn; there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and interpretation of her lodging- house, as surely as her lodging-house implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital. The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room, and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its mistress.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who "have seen a deal of trouble." She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still, "she is a good woman at bottom," said the lodgers who believed that the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

°°°°What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head. How had she lost her money? "Through trouble," was her answer. He had treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody, because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every possible misfortune.

°°°°Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress' shuffling footsteps, hastened to serve the lodgers' breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these externes usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty francs a month.

°°°°At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme. Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary- general in the service of the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred francs a year.

°°°°The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on the third floor were also let-- one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle. Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli, Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as "Father Goriot." The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of passage, to impecunious students, who like "Father Goriot" and Mlle. Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of better.

°°°°At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him. Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that their parents' hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as by those who had brought it to pass.

°°°°Above the third story there was a garret where the linen was hung to dry, and a couple of attics. Christophe, the man-of-all-work, slept in one, and Sylvie, the stout cook, in the other. Beside the seven inmates thus enumerated, taking one year with another, some eight law or medical students dined in the house, as well as two or three regular comers who lived in the neighborhood. There were usually eighteen people at dinner, and there was room, if need be, for twenty at Mme. Vauquer's table; at breakfast, however, only the seven lodgers appeared. It was almost like a family party. Every one came down in dressing-gown and slippers, and the conversation usually turned on anything that had happened the evening before; comments on the dress or appearance of the dinner contingent were exchanged in friendly confidence.

°°°°These seven lodgers were Mme. Vauquer's spoiled children. Among them she distributed, with astronomical precision, the exact proportion of respect and attention due to the varying amounts they paid for their board. One single consideration influenced all these human beings thrown together by chance. The two second- floor lodgers only paid seventy-two francs a month. Such prices as these are confined to the Faubourg Saint-Marcel and the district between La Bourbe and the Salpetriere; and, as might be expected, poverty, more or less apparent, weighed upon them all, Mme. Couture being the sole exception to the rule.

°°°°The dreary surroundings were reflected in the costumes of the inmates of the house; all were alike threadbare. The color of the men's coats were problematical; such shoes, in more fashionable quarters, are only to be seen lying in the gutter; the cuffs and collars were worn and frayed at the edges; every limp article of clothing looked like the ghost of its former self. The women's dresses were faded, old-fashioned, dyed and re-dyed; they wore gloves that were glazed with hard wear, much-mended lace, dingy ruffles, crumpled muslin fichus. So much for their clothing; but, for the most part, their frames were solid enough; their constitutions had weathered the storms of life; their cold, hard faces were worn like coins that have been withdrawn from circulation, but there were greedy teeth behind the withered lips. Dramas brought to a close or still in progress are foreshadowed by the sight of such actors as these, not the dramas that are played before the footlights and against a background of painted canvas, but dumb dramas of life, frost-bound dramas that sere hearts like fire, dramas that do not end with the actors' lives.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau, that elderly young lady, screened her weak eyes from the daylight by a soiled green silk shade with a rim of brass, an object fit to scare away the Angel of Pity himself. Her shawl, with its scanty, draggled fringe, might have covered a skeleton, so meagre and angular was the form beneath it. Yet she must have been pretty and shapely once. What corrosive had destroyed the feminine outlines? Was it trouble, or vice, or greed? Had she loved too well? Had she been a second-hand clothes dealer, a frequenter of the backstairs of great houses, or had she been merely a courtesan? Was she expiating the flaunting triumphs of a youth overcrowded with pleasures by an old age in which she was shunned by every passer-by? Her vacant gaze sent a chill through you; her shriveled face seemed like a menace. Her voice was like the shrill, thin note of the grasshopper sounding from the thicket when winter is at hand. She said that she had nursed an old gentleman, ill of catarrh of the bladder, and left to die by his children, who thought that he had nothing left. His bequest to her, a life annuity of a thousand francs, was periodically disputed by his heirs, who mingled slander with their persecutions. In spite of the ravages of conflicting passions, her face retained some traces of its former fairness and fineness of tissue, some vestiges of the physical charms of her youth still survived.

°°°°M. Poiret was a sort of automaton. He might be seen any day sailing like a gray shadow along the walks of the Jardin des Plantes, on his head a shabby cap, a cane with an old yellow ivory handle in the tips of his thin fingers; the outspread skirts of his threadbare overcoat failed to conceal his meagre figure; his breeches hung loosely on his shrunken limbs; the thin, blue-stockinged legs trembled like those of a drunken man; there was a notable breach of continuity between the dingy white waistcoat and crumpled shirt frills and the cravat twisted about a throat like a turkey gobbler's; altogether, his appearance set people wondering whether this outlandish ghost belonged to the audacious race of the sons of Japhet who flutter about on the Boulevard Italien. What devouring kind of toil could have so shriveled him? What devouring passions had darkened that bulbous countenance, which would have seemed outrageous as a caricature? What had he been? Well, perhaps he had been part of the machinery of justice, a clerk in the office to which the executioner sends in his accounts,--so much for providing black veils for parricides, so much for sawdust, so much for pulleys and cord for the knife. Or he might have been a receiver at the door of a public slaughter-house, or a sub-inspector of nuisances. Indeed, the man appeared to have been one of the beasts of burden in our great social mill; one of those Parisian Ratons whom their Bertrands do not even know by sight; a pivot in the obscure machinery that disposes of misery and things unclean; one of those men, in short, at sight of whom we are prompted to remark that, "After all, we cannot do without them."

°°°°Stately Paris ignores the existence of these faces bleached by moral or physical suffering; but, then, Paris is in truth an ocean that no line can plumb. You may survey its surface and describe it; but no matter how numerous and painstaking the toilers in this sea, there will always be lonely and unexplored regions in its depths, caverns unknown, flowers and pearls and monsters of the deep overlooked or forgotten by the divers of literature. The Maison Vauquer is one of these curious monstrosities.

°°°°Two, however, of Mme. Vauquer's boarders formed a striking contrast to the rest. There was a sickly pallor, such as is often seen in anaemic girls, in Mlle. Victorine Taillefer's face; and her unvarying expression of sadness, like her embarrassed manner and pinched look, was in keeping with the general wretchedness of the establishment in the Rue Nueve-Saint-Genevieve, which forms a background to this picture; but her face was young, there was youthfulness in her voice and elasticity in her movements. This young misfortune was not unlike a shrub, newly planted in an uncongenial soil, where its leaves have already begun to wither. The outlines of her figure, revealed by her dress of the simplest and cheapest materials, were also youthful. There was the same kind of charm about her too slender form, her faintly colored face and light-brown hair, that modern poets find in mediaeval statuettes; and a sweet expression, a look of Christian resignation in the dark gray eyes. She was pretty by force of contrast; if she had been happy, she would have been charming. Happiness is the poetry of woman, as the toilette is her tinsel. If the delightful excitement of a ball had made the pale face glow with color; if the delights of a luxurious life had brought the color to the wan cheeks that were slightly hollowed already; if love had put light into the sad eyes, then Victorine might have ranked among the fairest; but she lacked the two things which create woman a second time--pretty dresses and love- letters.

°°°°A book might have been made of her story. Her father was persuaded that he had sufficient reason for declining to acknowledge her, and allowed her a bare six hundred francs a year; he had further taken measures to disinherit his daughter, and had converted all his real estate into personalty, that he might leave it undivided to his son. Victorine's mother had died broken-hearted in Mme. Couture's house; and the latter, who was a near relation, had taken charge of the little orphan. Unluckily, the widow of the commissary-general to the armies of the Republic had nothing in the world but her jointure and her widow's pension, and some day she might be obliged to leave the helpless, inexperienced girl to the mercy of the world. The good soul, therefore, took Victorine to mass every Sunday, and to confession once a fortnight, thinking that, in any case, she would bring up her ward to be devout. She was right; religion offered a solution of the problem of the young girl's future. The poor child loved the father who refused to acknowledge her. Once every year she tried to see him to deliver her mother's message of forgiveness, but every year hitherto she had knocked at that door in vain; her father was inexorable. Her brother, her only means of communication, had not come to see her for four years, and had sent her no assistance; yet she prayed to God to unseal her father's eyes and to soften her brother's heart, and no accusations mingled with her prayers. Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exhausted the vocabulary of abuse, and failed to find words that did justice to the banker's iniquitous conduct; but while they heaped execrations on the millionaire, Victorine's words were as gentle as the moan of the wounded dove, and affection found expression even in the cry drawn from her by pain.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac was a thoroughly southern type; he had a fair complexion, blue eyes, black hair. In his figure, manner, and his whole bearing it was easy to see that he had either come of a noble family, or that, from his earliest childhood, he had been gently bred. If he was careful of his wardrobe, only taking last year's clothes into daily wear, still upon occasion he could issue forth as a young man of fashion. Ordinarily he wore a shabby coat and waistcoat, the limp black cravat, untidily knotted, that students affect, trousers that matched the rest of his costume, and boots that had been resoled.

°°°°Vautrin (the man of forty with the dyed whiskers) marked a transition stage between these two young people and the others. He was the kind of man that calls forth the remark: "He looks a jovial sort!" He had broad shoulders, a well-developed chest, muscular arms, and strong square-fisted hands; the joints of his fingers were covered with tufts of fiery red hair. His face was furrowed by premature wrinkles; there was a certain hardness about it in spite of his bland and insinuating manner. His bass voice was by no means unpleasant, and was in keeping with his boisterous laughter. He was always obliging, always in good spirits; if anything went wrong with one of the locks, he would soon unscrew it, take it to pieces, file it, oil and clean and set it in order, and put it back in its place again; "I am an old hand at it," he used to say. Not only so, he knew all about ships, the sea, France, foreign countries, men, business, law, great houses and prisons,--there was nothing that he did not know. If any one complained rather more than usual, he would offer his services at once. He had several times lent money to Mme. Vauquer, or to the boarders; but, somehow, those whom he obliged felt that they would sooner face death than fail to repay him; a certain resolute look, sometimes seen on his face, inspired fear of him, for all his appearance of easy good-nature. In the way he spat there was an imperturbable coolness which seemed to indicate that this was a man who would not stick at a crime to extricate himself from a false position. His eyes, like those of a pitiless judge, seemed to go to the very bottom of all questions, to read all natures, all feelings and thoughts. His habit of life was very regular; he usually went out after breakfast, returning in time for dinner, and disappeared for the rest of the evening, letting himself in about midnight with a latch key, a privilege that Mme. Vauquer accorded to no other boarder. But then he was on very good terms with the widow; he used to call her "mamma," and put his arm round her waist, a piece of flattery perhaps not appreciated to the full! The worthy woman might imagine this to be an easy feat; but, as a matter of fact, no arm but Vautrin's was long enough to encircle her.

°°°°It was a characteristic trait of his generously to pay fifteen francs a month for the cup of coffee with a dash of brandy in it, which he took after dinner. Less superficial observers than young men engulfed by the whirlpool of Parisian life, or old men, who took no interest in anything that did not directly concern them, would not have stopped short at the vaguely unsatisfactory impression that Vautrin made upon them. He knew or guessed the concerns of every one about him; but none of them had been able to penetrate his thoughts, or to discover his occupation. He had deliberately made his apparent good-nature, his unfailing readiness to oblige, and his high spirits into a barrier between himself and the rest of them, but not seldom he gave glimpses of appalling depths of character. He seemed to delight in scourging the upper classes of society with the lash of his tongue, to take pleasure in convicting it of inconsistency, in mocking at law and order with some grim jest worthy of Juvenal, as if some grudge against the social system rankled in him, as if there were some mystery carefully hidden away in his life.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer felt attracted, perhaps unconsciously, by the strength of the one man, and the good looks of the other; her stolen glances and secret thoughts were divided between them; but neither of them seemed to take any notice of her, although some day a chance might alter her position, and she would be a wealthy heiress. For that matter, there was not a soul in the house who took any trouble to investigate the various chronicles of misfortunes, real or imaginary, related by the rest. Each one regarded the others with indifference, tempered by suspicion; it was a natural result of their relative positions. Practical assistance not one could give, this they all knew, and they had long since exhausted their stock of condolence over previous discussions of their grievances. They were in something the same position as an elderly couple who have nothing left to say to each other. The routine of existence kept them in contact, but they were parts of a mechanism which wanted oil. There was not one of them but would have passed a blind man begging in the street, not one that felt moved to pity by a tale of misfortune, not one who did not see in death the solution of the all- absorbing problem of misery which left them cold to the most terrible anguish in others.

°°°°The happiest of these hapless beings was certainly Mme. Vauquer, who reigned supreme over this hospital supported by voluntary contributions. For her, the little garden, which silence, and cold, and rain, and drought combined to make as dreary as an Asian steppe, was a pleasant shaded nook; the gaunt yellow house, the musty odors of a back shop had charms for her, and for her alone. Those cells belonged to her. She fed those convicts condemned to penal servitude for life, and her authority was recognized among them. Where else in Paris would they have found wholesome food in sufficient quantity at the prices she charged them, and rooms which they were at liberty to make, if not exactly elegant or comfortable, at any rate clean and healthy? If she had committed some flagrant act of injustice, the victim would have borne it in silence.

°°°°Such a gathering contained, as might have been expected, the elements out of which a complete society might be constructed. And, as in a school, as in the world itself, there was among the eighteen men and women who met round the dinner table a poor creature, despised by all the others, condemned to be the butt of all their jokes. At the beginning of Eugene de Rastignac's second twelvemonth, this figure suddenly started out into bold relief against the background of human forms and faces among which the law student was yet to live for another two years to come. This laughing-stock was the retired vermicelli-merchant, Father Goriot, upon whose face a painter, like the historian, would have concentrated all the light in his picture.

°°°°How had it come about that the boarders regarded him with a half- malignant contempt? Why did they subject the oldest among their number to a kind of persecution, in which there was mingled some pity, but no respect for his misfortunes? Had he brought it on himself by some eccentricity or absurdity, which is less easily forgiven or forgotten than more serious defects? The question strikes at the root of many a social injustice. Perhaps it is only human nature to inflict suffering on anything that will endure suffering, whether by reason of its genuine humility, or indifference, or sheer helplessness. Do we not, one and all, like to feel our strength even at the expense of some one or of something? The poorest sample of humanity, the street arab, will pull the bell handle at every street door in bitter weather, and scramble up to write his name on the unsullied marble of a monument.

°°°°In the year 1813, at the age of sixty-nine or thereabouts, "Father Goriot" had sold his business and retired--to Mme. Vauquer's boarding house. When he first came there he had taken the rooms now occupied by Mme. Couture; he had paid twelve hundred francs a year like a man to whom five louis more or less was a mere trifle. For him Mme. Vauquer had made various improvements in the three rooms destined for his use, in consideration of a certain sum paid in advance, so it was said, for the miserable furniture, that is to say, for some yellow cotton curtains, a few chairs of stained wood covered with Utrecht velvet, several wretched colored prints in frames, and wall papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained. Possibly it was the careless generosity with which Father Goriot allowed himself to be overreached at this period of his life (they called him Monsieur Goriot very respectfully then) that gave Mme. Vauquer the meanest opinion of his business abilities; she looked on him as an imbecile where money was concerned.

°°°°Goriot had brought with him a considerable wardrobe, the gorgeous outfit of a retired tradesman who denies himself nothing. Mme. Vauquer's astonished eyes beheld no less than eighteen cambric- fronted shirts, the splendor of their fineness being enhanced by a pair of pins each bearing a large diamond, and connected by a short chain, an ornament which adorned the vermicelli-maker's shirt front. He usually wore a coat of corn-flower blue; his rotund and portly person was still further set off by a clean white waistcoat, and a gold chain and seals which dangled over that broad expanse. When his hostess accused him of being "a bit of a beau," he smiled with the vanity of a citizen whose foible is gratified. His cupboards (ormoires, as he called them in the popular dialect) were filled with a quantity of plate that he brought with him. The widow's eyes gleamed as she obligingly helped him to unpack the soup ladles, table-spoons, forks, cruet- stands, tureens, dishes, and breakfast services--all of silver, which were duly arranged upon shelves, besides a few more or less handsome pieces of plate, all weighing no inconsiderable number of ounces; he could not bring himself to part with these gifts that reminded him of past domestic festivals.

°°°°"This was my wife's present to me on the first anniversary of our wedding day," he said to Mme. Vauquer, as he put away a little silver posset dish, with two turtle-doves billing on the cover. "Poor dear! she spent on it all the money she had saved before we were married. Do you know, I would sooner scratch the earth with my nails for a living, madame, than part with that. But I shall be able to take my coffee out of it every morning for the rest of my days, thank the Lord! I am not to be pitied. There's not much fear of my starving for some time to come."

°°°°Finally, Mme. Vauquer's magpie's eye had discovered and read certain entries in the list of shareholders in the funds, and, after a rough calculation, was disposed to credit Goriot (worthy man) with something like ten thousand francs a year. From that day forward Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans), who, as a matter of fact, had seen forty-eight summers, though she would only own to thirty-nine of them--Mme. Vauquer had her own ideas. Though Goriot's eyes seemed to have shrunk in their sockets, though they were weak and watery, owing to some glandular affection which compelled him to wipe them continually, she considered him to be a very gentlemanly and pleasant-looking man. Moreover, the widow saw favorable indications of character in the well-developed calves of his legs and in his square-shaped nose, indications still further borne out by the worthy man's full-moon countenance and look of stupid good-nature. This, in all probability, was a strongly-build animal, whose brains mostly consisted in a capacity for affection. His hair, worn in ailes de pigeon, and duly powdered every morning by the barber from the Ecole Polytechnique, described five points on his low forehead, and made an elegant setting to his face. Though his manners were somewhat boorish, he was always as neat as a new pin and he took his snuff in a lordly way, like a man who knows that his snuff- box is always likely to be filled with maccaboy, so that when Mme. Vauquer lay down to rest on the day of M. Goriot's installation, her heart, like a larded partridge, sweltered before the fire of a burning desire to shake off the shroud of Vauquer and rise again as Goriot. She would marry again, sell her boarding-house, give her hand to this fine flower of citizenship, become a lady of consequence in the quarter, and ask for subscriptions for charitable purposes; she would make little Sunday excursions to Choisy, Soissy, Gentilly; she would have a box at the theatre when she liked, instead of waiting for the author's tickets that one of her boarders sometimes gave her, in July; the whole Eldorado of a little Parisian household rose up before Mme. Vauquer in her dreams. Nobody knew that she herself possessed forty thousand francs, accumulated sou by sou, that was her secret; surely as far as money was concerned she was a very tolerable match. "And in other respects, I am quite his equal," she said to herself, turning as if to assure herself of the charms of a form that the portly Sylvie found moulded in down feathers every morning.

°°°°For three months from that day Mme. Veuve Vauquer availed herself of the services of M. Goriot's coiffeur, and went to some expense over her toilette, expense justifiable on the ground that she owed it to herself and her establishment to pay some attention to appearances when such highly-respectable persons honored her house with their presence. She expended no small amount of ingenuity in a sort of weeding process of her lodgers, announcing her intention of receiving henceforward none but people who were in every way select. If a stranger presented himself, she let him know that M. Goriot, one of the best known and most highly- respected merchants in Paris, had singled out her boarding-house for a residence. She drew up a prospectus headed MAISON VAUQUER, in which it was asserted that hers was "one of the oldest and most highly recommended boarding-houses in the Latin Quarter." "From the windows of the house," thus ran the prospectus, "there is a charming view of the Vallee des Gobelins (so there is--from the third floor), and a BEAUTIFUL garden, EXTENDING down to AN AVENUE OF LINDENS at the further end." Mention was made of the bracing air of the place and its quiet situation.

°°°°It was this prospectus that attracted Mme. la Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil, a widow of six and thirty, who was awaiting the final settlement of her husband's affairs, and of another matter regarding a pension due to her as the wife of a general who had died "on the field of battle." On this Mme. Vauquer saw to her table, lighted a fire daily in the sitting-room for nearly six months, and kept the promise of her prospectus, even going to some expense to do so. And the Countess, on her side, addressed Mme. Vauquer as "my dear," and promised her two more boarders, the Baronne de Vaumerland and the widow of a colonel, the late Comte de Picquoisie, who were about to leave a boarding-house in the Marais, where the terms were higher than at the Maison Vauquer. Both these ladies, moreover, would be very well to do when the people at the War Office had come to an end of their formalities. "But Government departments are always so dilatory," the lady added.

°°°°After dinner the two widows went together up to Mme. Vauquer's room, and had a snug little chat over some cordial and various delicacies reserved for the mistress of the house. Mme. Vauquer's ideas as to Goriot were cordially approved by Mme. de l'Ambermesnil; it was a capital notion, which for that matter she had guessed from the very first; in her opinion the vermicelli maker was an excellent man.

°°°°"Ah! my dear lady, such a well-preserved man of his age, as sound as my eyesight--a man who might make a woman happy!" said the widow.

°°°°The good-natured Countess turned to the subject of Mme. Vauquer's dress, which was not in harmony with her projects. "You must put yourself on a war footing," said she.

°°°°After much serious consideration the two widows went shopping together--they purchased a hat adorned with ostrich feathers and a cap at the Palais Royal, and the Countess took her friend to the Magasin de la Petite Jeannette, where they chose a dress and a scarf. Thus equipped for the campaign, the widow looked exactly like the prize animal hung out for a sign above an a la mode beef shop; but she herself was so much pleased with the improvement, as she considered it, in her appearance, that she felt that she lay under some obligation to the Countess; and, though by no means open-handed, she begged that lady to accept a hat that cost twenty francs. The fact was that she needed the Countess' services on the delicate mission of sounding Goriot; the countess must sing her praises in his ears. Mme. de l'Ambermesnil lent herself very good-naturedly to this manoeuvre, began her operations, and succeeded in obtaining a private interview; but the overtures that she made, with a view to securing him for herself, were received with embarrassment, not to say a repulse. She left him, revolted by his coarseness.

°°°°"My angel," said she to her dear friend, "you will make nothing of that man yonder. He is absurdly suspicious, and he is a mean curmudgeon, an idiot, a fool; you would never be happy with him."

°°°°After what had passed between M. Goriot and Mme. de l'Ambermesnil, the Countess would no longer live under the same roof. She left the next day, forgot to pay for six months' board, and left behind her wardrobe, cast-off clothing to the value of five francs. Eagerly and persistently as Mme. Vauquer sought her quondam lodger, the Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil was never heard of again in Paris. The widow often talked of this deplorable business, and regretted her own too confiding disposition. As a matter of fact, she was as suspicious as a cat; but she was like many other people, who cannot trust their own kin and put themselves at the mercy of the next chance comer--an odd but common phenomenon, whose causes may readily be traced to the depths of the human heart.

°°°°Perhaps there are people who know that they have nothing more to look for from those with whom they live; they have shown the emptiness of their hearts to their housemates, and in their secret selves they are conscious that they are severely judged, and that they deserve to be judged severely; but still they feel an unconquerable craving for praises that they do not hear, or they are consumed by a desire to appear to possess, in the eyes of a new audience, the qualities which they have not, hoping to win the admiration or affection of strangers at the risk of forfeiting it again some day. Or, once more, there are other mercenary natures who never do a kindness to a friend or a relation simply because these have a claim upon them, while a service done to a stranger brings its reward to self-love. Such natures feel but little affection for those who are nearest to them; they keep their kindness for remoter circles of acquaintance, and show most to those who dwell on its utmost limits. Mme. Vauquer belonged to both these essentially mean, false, and execrable classes.

°°°°"If I had been there at the time," Vautrin would say at the end of the story, I would have shown her up, and that misfortune would not have befallen you. I know that kind of phiz!"

°°°°Like all narrow natures, Mme. Vauquer was wont to confine her attention to events, and did not go very deeply into the causes that brought them about; she likewise preferred to throw the blame of her own mistakes on other people, so she chose to consider that the honest vermicelli maker was responsible for her misfortune. It had opened her eyes, so she said, with regard to him. As soon as she saw that her blandishments were in vain, and that her outlay on her toilette was money thrown away, she was not slow to discover the reason of his indifference. It became plain to her at once that there was SOME OTHER ATTRACTION, to use her own expression. In short, it was evident that the hope she had so fondly cherished was a baseless delusion, and that she would "never make anything out of that man yonder," in the Countess' forcible phrase. The Countess seemed to have been a judge of character. Mme. Vauquer's aversion was naturally more energetic than her friendship, for her hatred was not in proportion to her love, but to her disappointed expectations. The human heart may find here and there a resting-place short of the highest height of affection, but we seldom stop in the steep, downward slope of hatred. Still, M. Goriot was a lodger, and the widow's wounded self-love could not vent itself in an explosion of wrath; like a monk harassed by the prior of his convent, she was forced to stifle her sighs of disappointment, and to gulp down her craving for revenge. Little minds find gratification for their feelings, benevolent or otherwise, by a constant exercise of petty ingenuity. The widow employed her woman's malice to devise a system of covert persecution. She began by a course of retrenchment--various luxuries which had found their way to the table appeared there no more.

°°°°"No more gherkins, no more anchovies; they have made a fool of me!" she said to Sylvie one morning, and they returned to the old bill of fare.

°°°°The thrifty frugality necessary to those who mean to make their way in the world had become an inveterate habit of life with M. Goriot. Soup, boiled beef, and a dish of vegetables had been, and always would be, the dinner he liked best, so Mme. Vauquer found it very difficult to annoy a boarder whose tastes were so simple. He was proof against her malice, and in desperation she spoke to him and of him slightingly before the other lodgers, who began to amuse themselves at his expense, and so gratified her desire for revenge.

°°°°Towards the end of the first year the widow's suspicions had reached such a pitch that she began to wonder how it was that a retired merchant with a secure income of seven or eight thousand livres, the owner of such magnificent plate and jewelry handsome enough for a kept mistress, should be living in her house. Why should he devote so small a proportion of his money to his expenses? Until the first year was nearly at an end, Goriot had dined out once or twice every week, but these occasions came less frequently, and at last he was scarcely absent from the dinner- table twice a month. It was hardly expected that Mme. Vauquer should regard the increased regularity of her boarder's habits with complacency, when those little excursions of his had been so much to her interest. She attributed the change not so much to a gradual diminution of fortune as to a spiteful wish to annoy his hostess. It is one of the most detestable habits of a Liliputian mind to credit other people with its own malignant pettiness.

°°°°Unluckily, towards the end of the second year, M. Goriot's conduct gave some color to the idle talk about him. He asked Mme. Vauquer to give him a room on the second floor, and to make a corresponding reduction in her charges. Apparently, such strict economy was called for, that he did without a fire all through the winter. Mme. Vauquer asked to be paid in advance, an arrangement to which M. Goriot consented, and thenceforward she spoke of him as "Father Goriot."

°°°°What had brought about this decline and fall? Conjecture was keen, but investigation was difficult. Father Goriot was not communicative; in the sham countess' phrase he was "a curmudgeon." Empty-headed people who babble about their own affairs because they have nothing else to occupy them, naturally conclude that if people say nothing of their doings it is because their doings will not bear being talked about; so the highly respectable merchant became a scoundrel, and the late beau was an old rogue. Opinion fluctuated. Sometimes, according to Vautrin, who came about this time to live in the Maison Vauquer, Father Goriot was a man who went on 'Change and DABBLED (to use the sufficiently expressive language of the Stock Exchange) in stocks and shares after he had ruined himself by heavy speculation. Sometimes it was held that he was one of those petty gamblers who nightly play for small stakes until they win a few francs. A theory that he was a detective in the employ of the Home Office found favor at one time, but Vautrin urged that "Goriot was not sharp enough for one of that sort." There were yet other solutions; Father Goriot was a skinflint, a shark of a money- lender, a man who lived by selling lottery tickets. He was by turns all the most mysterious brood of vice and shame and misery; yet, however vile his life might be, the feeling of repulsion which he aroused in others was not so strong that he must be banished from their society--he paid his way. Besides, Goriot had his uses, every one vented his spleen or sharpened his wit on him; he was pelted with jokes and belabored with hard words. The general consensus of opinion was in favor of a theory which seemed the most likely; this was Mme. Vauquer's view. According to her, the man so well preserved at his time of life, as sound as her eyesight, with whom a woman might be very happy, was a libertine who had strange tastes. These are the facts upon which Mme. Vauquer's slanders were based.

°°°°Early one morning, some few months after the departure of the unlucky Countess who had managed to live for six months at the widow's expense, Mme. Vauquer (not yet dressed) heard the rustle of a silk dress and a young woman's light footstep on the stair; some one was going to Goriot's room. He seemed to expect the visit, for his door stood ajar. The portly Sylvie presently came up to tell her mistress that a girl too pretty to be honest, "dressed like a goddess," and not a speck of mud on her laced cashmere boots, had glided in from the street like a snake, had found the kitchen, and asked for M. Goriot's room. Mme. Vauquer and the cook, listening, overheard several words affectionately spoken during the visit, which lasted for some time. When M. Goriot went downstairs with the lady, the stout Sylvie forthwith took her basket and followed the lover-like couple, under pretext of going to do her marketing.

°°°°"M. Goriot must be awfully rich, all the same, madame," she reported on her return, "to keep her in such style. Just imagine it! There was a splendid carriage waiting at the corner of the Place de l'Estrapade, and SHE got into it."

°°°°While they were at dinner that evening, Mme. Vauquer went to the window and drew the curtain, as the sun was shining into Goriot's eyes.

°°°°"You are beloved of fair ladies, M. Goriot--the sun seeks you out," she said, alluding to his visitor. "Peste! you have good taste; she was very pretty."

°°°°"That was my daughter," he said, with a kind of pride in his voice, and the rest chose to consider this as the fatuity of an old man who wishes to save appearances.

°°°°A month after this visit M. Goriot received another. The same daughter who had come to see him that morning came again after dinner, this time in evening dress. The boarders, in deep discussion in the dining-room, caught a glimpse of a lovely, fair-haired woman, slender, graceful, and much too distinguished- looking to be a daughter of Father Goriot's.

°°°°"Two of them!" cried the portly Sylvie, who did not recognize the lady of the first visit.

°°°°A few days later, and another young lady--a tall, well-moulded brunette, with dark hair and bright eyes--came to ask for M. Goriot.

°°°°"Three of them!" said Sylvie.

°°°°Then the second daughter, who had first come in the morning to see her father, came shortly afterwards in the evening. She wore a ball dress, and came in a carriage.

°°°°"Four of them!" commented Mme. Vauquer and her plump handmaid. Sylvie saw not a trace of resemblance between this great lady and the girl in her simple morning dress who had entered her kitchen on the occasion of her first visit.

°°°°At that time Goriot was paying twelve hundred francs a year to his landlady, and Mme. Vauquer saw nothing out of the common in the fact that a rich man had four or five mistresses; nay, she thought it very knowing of him to pass them off as his daughters. She was not at all inclined to draw a hard-and-fast line, or to take umbrage at his sending for them to the Maison Vauquer; yet, inasmuch as these visits explained her boarder's indifference to her, she went so far (at the end of the second year) as to speak of him as an "ugly old wretch." When at length her boarder declined to nine hundred francs a year, she asked him very insolently what he took her house to be, after meeting one of these ladies on he stairs. Father Goriot answered that the lady was his eldest daughter.

°°°°"So you have two or three dozen daughters, have you?" said Mme. Vauquer sharply.

°°°°"I have only two," her boarder answered meekly, like a ruined man who is broken in to all the cruel usage of misfortune.

°°°°Towards the end of the third year Father Goriot reduced his expenses still further; he went up to the third story, and now paid forty-five francs a month. He did without snuff, told his hairdresser that he no longer required his services, and gave up wearing powder. When Goriot appeared for the first time in this condition, an exclamation of astonishment broke from his hostess at the color of his hair--a dingy olive gray. He had grown sadder day by day under the influence of some hidden trouble; among all the faces round the table, his was the most woe-begone. There was no longer any doubt. Goriot was an elderly libertine, whose eyes had only been preserved by the skill of the physician from the malign influence of the remedies necessitated by the state of his health. The disgusting color of his hair was a result of his excesses and of the drugs which he had taken that he might continue his career. The poor old man's mental and physical condition afforded some grounds for the absurd rubbish talked about him. When his outfit was worn out, he replaced the fine linen by calico at fourteen sous the ell. His diamonds, his gold snuff-box, watch-chain and trinkets, disappeared one by one. He had left off wearing the corn-flower blue coat, and was sumptuously arrayed, summer as well as winter, in a coarse chestnut-brown coat, a plush waistcoat, and doeskin breeches. He grew thinner and thinner; his legs were shrunken, his cheeks, once so puffed out by contented bourgeois prosperity, were covered with wrinkles, and the outlines of the jawbones were distinctly visible; there were deep furrows in his forehead. In the fourth year of his residence in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve he was no longer like his former self. The hale vermicelli manufacturer, sixty-two years of age, who had looked scarce forty, the stout, comfortable, prosperous tradesman, with an almost bucolic air, and such a brisk demeanor that it did you good to look at him; the man with something boyish in his smile, had suddenly sunk into his dotage, and had become a feeble, vacillating septuagenarian.

°°°°The keen, bright blue eyes had grown dull, and faded to a steel- gray color; the red inflamed rims looked as though they had shed tears of blood. He excited feelings of repulsion in some, and of pity in others. The young medical students who came to the house noticed the drooping of his lower lip and the conformation of the facial angle; and, after teasing him for some time to no purpose, they declared that cretinism was setting in.

°°°°One evening after dinner Mme. Vauquer said half banteringly to him, "So those daughters of yours don't come to see you any more, eh?" meaning to imply her doubts as to his paternity; but Father Goriot shrank as if his hostess had touched him with a sword- point.

°°°°"They come sometimes," he said in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Aha! you still see them sometimes?" cried the students. "Bravo, Father Goriot!"

°°°°The old man scarcely seemed to hear the witticisms at his expense that followed on the words; he had relapsed into the dreamy state of mind that these superficial observers took for senile torpor, due to his lack of intelligence. If they had only known, they might have been deeply interested by the problem of his condition; but few problems were more obscure. It was easy, of course, to find out whether Goriot had really been a vermicelli manufacturer; the amount of his fortune was readily discoverable; but the old people, who were most inquisitive as to his concerns, never went beyond the limits of the Quarter, and lived in the lodging-house much as oysters cling to a rock. As for the rest, the current of life in Paris daily awaited them, and swept them away with it; so soon as they left the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, they forgot the existence of the old man, their butt at dinner. For those narrow souls, or for careless youth, the misery in Father Goriot's withered face and its dull apathy were quite incompatible with wealth or any sort of intelligence. As for the creatures whom he called his daughters, all Mme. Vauquer's boarders were of her opinion. With the faculty for severe logic sedulously cultivated by elderly women during long evenings of gossip till they can always find an hypothesis to fit all circumstances, she was wont to reason thus:

°°°°"If Father Goriot had daughters of his own as rich as those ladies who came here seemed to be, he would not be lodging in my house, on the third floor, at forty-five francs a month; and he would not go about dressed like a poor man."

°°°°No objection could be raised to these inferences. So by the end of the month of November 1819, at the time when the curtain rises on this drama, every one in the house had come to have a very decided opinion as to the poor old man. He had never had either wife or daughter; excesses had reduced him to this sluggish condition; he was a sort of human mollusk who should be classed among the capulidoe, so one of the dinner contingent, an employe at the Museum, who had a pretty wit of his own. Poiret was an eagle, a gentleman, compared with Goriot. Poiret would join the talk, argue, answer when he was spoken to; as a matter of fact, his talk, arguments, and responses contributed nothing to the conversation, for Poiret had a habit of repeating what the others said in different words; still, he did join in the talk; he was alive, and seemed capable of feeling; while Father Goriot (to quote the Museum official again) was invariably at zero--Reaumur.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac had just returned to Paris in a state of mind not unknown to young men who are conscious of unusual powers, and to those whose faculties are so stimulated by a difficult position, that for the time being they rise above the ordinary level.

°°°°Rastignac's first year of study for the preliminary examinations in law had left him free to see the sights of Paris and to enjoy some of its amusements. A student has not much time on his hands if he sets himself to learn the repertory of every theatre, and to study the ins and outs of the labyrinth of Paris. To know its customs; to learn the language, and become familiar with the amusements of the capital, he must explore its recesses, good and bad, follow the studies that please him best, and form some idea of the treasures contained in galleries and museums.

°°°°At this stage of his career a student grows eager and excited about all sorts of follies that seem to him to be of immense importance. He has his hero, his great man, a professor at the College de France, paid to talk down to the level of his audience. He adjusts his cravat, and strikes various attitudes for the benefit of the women in the first galleries at the Opera- Comique. As he passes through all these successive initiations, and breaks out of his sheath, the horizons of life widen around him, and at length he grasps the plan of society with the different human strata of which it is composed.

°°°°If he begins by admiring the procession of carriages on sunny afternoons in the Champs-Elysees, he soon reaches the further stage of envying their owners. Unconsciously, Eugene had served his apprenticeship before he went back to Angouleme for the long vacation after taking his degrees as bachelor of arts and bachelor of law. The illusions of childhood had vanished, so also had the ideas he brought with him from the provinces; he had returned thither with an intelligence developed, with loftier ambitions, and saw things as they were at home in the old manor house. His father and mother, his two brothers and two sisters, with an aged aunt, whose whole fortune consisted in annuities, lived on the little estate of Rastignac. The whole property brought in about three thousand francs; and though the amount varied with the season (as must always be the case in a vine- growing district), they were obliged to spare an unvarying twelve hundred francs out of their income for him. He saw how constantly the poverty, which they had generously hidden from him, weighed upon them; he could not help comparing the sisters, who had seemed so beautiful to his boyish eyes, with women in Paris, who had realized the beauty of his dreams. The uncertain future of the whole family depended upon him. It did not escape his eyes that not a crumb was wasted in the house, nor that the wine they drank was made from the second pressing; a multitude of small things, which it is useless to speak of in detail here, made him burn to distinguish himself, and his ambition to succeed increased tenfold.

°°°°He meant, like all great souls, that his success should be owing entirely to his merits; but his was pre-eminently a southern temperament, the execution of his plans was sure to be marred by the vertigo that seizes on youth when youth sees itself alone in a wide sea, uncertain how to spend its energies, whither to steer its course, how to adapt its sails to the winds. At first he determined to fling himself heart and soul into his work, but he was diverted from this purpose by the need of society and connections; then he saw how great an influence women exert in social life, and suddenly made up his mind to go out into this world to seek a protectress there. Surely a clever and high- spirited young man, whose wit and courage were set off to advantage by a graceful figure and the vigorous kind of beauty that readily strikes a woman's imagination, need not despair of finding a protectress. These ideas occurred to him in his country walks with his sisters, whom he had once joined so gaily. The girls thought him very much changed.

°°°°His aunt, Mme. de Marcillac, had been presented at court, and had moved among the brightest heights of that lofty region. Suddenly the young man's ambition discerned in those recollections of hers, which had been like nursery fairy tales to her nephews and nieces, the elements of a social success at least as important as the success which he had achieved at the Ecole de Droit. He began to ask his aunt about those relations; some of the old ties might still hold good. After much shaking of the branches of the family tree, the old lady came to the conclusion that of all persons who could be useful to her nephew among the selfish genus of rich relations, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was the least likely to refuse. To this lady, therefore, she wrote in the old-fashioned style, recommending Eugene to her; pointing out to her nephew that if he succeeded in pleasing Mme. de Beauseant, the Vicomtesse would introduce him to other relations. A few days after his return to Paris, therefore, Rastignac sent his aunt's letter to Mme. de Beauseant. The Vicomtesse replied by an invitation to a ball for the following evening. This was the position of affairs at the Maison Vauquer at the end of November 1819.

°°°°A few days later, after Mme. de Beauseant's ball, Eugene came in at two o'clock in the morning. The persevering student meant to make up for the lost time by working until daylight. It was the first time that he had attempted to spend the night in this way in that silent quarter. The spell of a factitious energy was upon him; he had beheld the pomp and splendor of the world. He had not dined at the Maison Vauquer; the boarders probably would think that he would walk home at daybreak from the dance, as he had done sometimes on former occasions, after a fete at the Prado, or a ball at the Odeon, splashing his silk stockings thereby, and ruining his pumps.

°°°°It so happened that Christophe took a look into the street before drawing the bolts of the door; and Rastignac, coming in at that moment, could go up to his room without making any noise, followed by Christophe, who made a great deal. Eugene exchanged his dress suit for a shabby overcoat and slippers, kindled a fire with some blocks of patent fuel, and prepared for his night's work in such a sort that the faint sounds he made were drowned by Christophe's heavy tramp on the stairs.

°°°°Eugene sat absorbed in thought for a few moments before plunging into his law books. He had just become aware of the fact that the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was one of the queens of fashion, that her house was thought to be the pleasantest in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. And not only so, she was, by right of her fortune, and the name she bore, one of the most conspicuous figures in that aristocratic world. Thanks to the aunt, thanks to Mme. de Marcillac's letter of introduction, the poor student had been kindly received in that house before he knew the extent of the favor thus shown to him. It was almost like a patent of nobility to be admitted to those gilded salons; he had appeared in the most exclusive circle in Paris, and now all doors were open for him. Eugene had been dazzled at first by the brilliant assembly, and had scarcely exchanged a few words with the Vicomtesse; he had been content to single out a goddess among this throng of Parisian divinities, one of those women who are sure to attract a young man's fancy.

°°°°The Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud was tall and gracefully made; she had one of the prettiest figures in Paris. Imagine a pair of great dark eyes, a magnificently moulded hand, a shapely foot. There was a fiery energy in her movements; the Marquis de Ronquerolles had called her "a thoroughbred," "a pure pedigree," these figures of speech have replaced the "heavenly angel" and Ossianic nomenclature; the old mythology of love is extinct, doomed to perish by modern dandyism. But for Rastignac, Mme. Anastasie de Restaud was the woman for whom he had sighed. He had contrived to write his name twice upon the list of partners upon her fan, and had snatched a few words with her during the first quadrille.

°°°°"Where shall I meet you again, Madame?" he asked abruptly, and the tones of his voice were full of the vehement energy that women like so well.

°°°°"Oh, everywhere!" said she, "in the Bois, at the Bouffons, in my own house."

°°°°With the impetuosity of his adventurous southern temper, he did all he could to cultivate an acquaintance with this lovely countess, making the best of his opportunities in the quadrille and during a waltz that she gave him. When he told her that he was a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's, the Countess, whom he took for a great lady, asked him to call at her house, and after her parting smile, Rastignac felt convinced that he must make this visit. He was so lucky as to light upon some one who did not laugh at his ignorance, a fatal defect among the gilded and insolent youth of that period; the coterie of Maulincourts, Maximes de Trailles, de Marsays, Ronquerolles, Ajuda-Pintos, and Vandenesses who shone there in all the glory of coxcombry among the best-dressed women of fashion in Paris--Lady Brandon, the Duchesse de Langeais, the Comtesse de Kergarouet, Mme. de Serizy, the Duchesse de Carigliano, the Comtesse Ferraud, Mme. de Lanty, the Marquise d'Aiglemont, Mme. Firmiani, the Marquise de Listomere and the Marquise d'Espard, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and the Grandlieus. Luckily, therefore, for him, the novice happened upon the Marquis de Montriveau, the lover of the Duchesse de Langeais, a general as simple as a child; from him Rastignac learned that the Comtesse lived in the Rue du Helder.

°°°°Ah, what it is to be young, eager to see the world, greedily on the watch for any chance that brings you nearer the woman of your dreams, and behold two houses open their doors to you! To set foot in the Vicomtesse de Beauseant's house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; to fall on your knees before a Comtesse de Restaud in the Chaussee d'Antin; to look at one glance across a vista of Paris drawing-rooms, conscious that, possessing sufficient good looks, you may hope to find aid and protection there in a feminine heart! To feel ambitious enough to spurn the tight-rope on which you must walk with the steady head of an acrobat for whom a fall is impossible, and to find in a charming woman the best of all balancing poles.

°°°°He sat there with his thoughts for a while, Law on the one hand, and Poverty on the other, beholding a radiant vision of a woman rise above the dull, smouldering fire. Who would not have paused and questioned the future as Eugene was doing? who would not have pictured it full of success? His wondering thoughts took wings; he was transported out of the present into that blissful future; he was sitting by Mme. de Restaud's side, when a sort of sigh, like the grunt of an overburdened St. Joseph, broke the silence of the night. It vibrated through the student, who took the sound for a death groan. He opened his door noiselessly, went out upon the landing, and saw a thin streak of light under Father Goriot's door. Eugene feared that his neighbor had been taken ill; he went over and looked through the keyhole; the old man was busily engaged in an occupation so singular and so suspicious that Rastignac thought he was only doing a piece of necessary service to society to watch the self-styled vermicelli maker's nocturnal industries.

°°°°The table was upturned, and Goriot had doubtless in some way secured a silver plate and cup to the bar before knotting a thick rope round them; he was pulling at this rope with such enormous force that they were being crushed and twisted out of shape; to all appearance he meant to convert the richly wrought metal into ingots.

°°°°"Peste! what a man!" said Rastignac, as he watched Goriot's muscular arms; there was not a sound in the room while the old man, with the aid of the rope, was kneading the silver like dough. "Was he then, indeed, a thief, or a receiver of stolen goods, who affected imbecility and decrepitude, and lived like a beggar that he might carry on his pursuits the more securely?" Eugene stood for a moment revolving these questions, then he looked again through the keyhole.

°°°°Father Goriot had unwound his coil of rope; he had covered the table with a blanket, and was now employed in rolling the flattened mass of silver into a bar, an operation which he performed with marvelous dexterity.

°°°°"Why, he must be as strong as Augustus, King of Poland!" said Eugene to himself when the bar was nearly finished.

°°°°Father Goriot looked sadly at his handiwork, tears fell from his eyes, he blew out the dip which had served him for a light while he manipulated the silver, and Eugene heard him sigh as he lay down again.

°°°°"He is mad," thought the student.

°°°°"Poor child!" Father Goriot said aloud. Rastignac, hearing those words, concluded to keep silence; he would not hastily condemn his neighbor. He was just in the doorway of his room when a strange sound from the staircase below reached his ears; it might have been made by two men coming up in list slippers. Eugene listened; two men there certainly were, he could hear their breathing. Yet there had been no sound of opening the street door, no footsteps in the passage. Suddenly, too, he saw a faint gleam of light on the second story; it came from M. Vautrin's room.

°°°°"There are a good many mysteries here for a lodging-house!" he said to himself.

°°°°He went part of the way downstairs and listened again. The rattle of gold reached his ears. In another moment the light was put out, and again he distinctly heard the breathing of two men, but no sound of a door being opened or shut. The two men went downstairs, the faint sounds growing fainter as they went.

°°°°"Who is there?" cried Mme. Vauquer out of her bedroom window.

°°°°"I, Mme. Vauquer," answered Vautrin's deep bass voice. "I am coming in."

°°°°"That is odd! Christophe drew the bolts," said Eugene, going back to his room. "You have to sit up at night, it seems, if you really mean to know all that is going on about you in Paris."

°°°°These incidents turned his thought from his ambitious dreams; he betook himself to his work, but his thought wandered back to Father Goriot's suspicious occupation; Mme. de Restaud's face swam again and again before his eyes like a vision of a brilliant future; and at last he lay down and slept with clenched fists. When a young man makes up his mind that he will work all night, the chances are that seven times out of ten he will sleep till morning. Such vigils do not begin before we are turned twenty.

°°°°The next morning Paris was wrapped in one of the dense fogs that throw the most punctual people out in their calculations as to the time; even the most business-like folk fail to keep their appointments in such weather, and ordinary mortals wake up at noon and fancy it is eight o'clock. On this morning it was half- past nine, and Mme. Vauquer still lay abed. Christophe was late, Sylvie was late, but the two sat comfortably taking their coffee as usual. It was Sylvie's custom to take the cream off the milk destined for the boarders' breakfast for her own, and to boil the remainder for some time, so that madame should not discover this illegal exaction.

°°°°"Sylvie," said Christophe, as he dipped a piece of toast into the coffee, "M. Vautrin, who is not such a bad sort, all the same, had two people come to see him again last night. If madame says anything, mind you say nothing about it."

°°°°"Has he given you something?"

°°°°"He gave me a five-franc piece this month, which is as good as saying, 'Hold your tongue.' "

°°°°"Except him and Mme. Couture, who doesn't look twice at every penny, there's no one in the house that doesn't try to get back with the left hand all that they give with the right at New Year," said Sylvie.

°°°°"And, after all," said Christophe, "what do they give you? A miserable five-franc piece. There is Father Goriot, who has cleaned his shoes himself these two years past. There is that old beggar Poiret, who goes without blacking altogether; he would sooner drink it than put it on his boots. Then there is that whipper-snapper of a student, who gives me a couple of francs, Two francs will not pay for my brushes, and he sells his old clothes, and gets more for them than they are worth. Oh! they're a shabby lot!"

°°°°"Pooh!" said Sylvie, sipping her coffee, "our places are the best in the Quarter, that I know. But about that great big chap Vautrin, Christophe; has any one told you anything about him?"

°°°°"Yes. I met a gentleman in the street a few days ago; he said to me, 'There's a gentleman in your place, isn't there? a tall man that dyes his whiskers?' I told him, 'No, sir; they aren't dyed. A gay fellow like him hasn't the time to do it.' And when I told M. Vautrin about it afterwards, he said, 'Quite right, my boy. That is the way to answer them. There is nothing more unpleasant than to have your little weaknesses known; it might spoil many a match.' "

°°°°"Well, and for my part," said Sylvie, "a man tried to humbug me at the market wanting to know if I had seen him put on his shirt. Such bosh! There," she cried, interrupting herself, "that's a quarter to ten striking at the Val-de-Grace, and not a soul stirring!"

°°°°"Pooh! they are all gone out. Mme. Couture and the girl went out at eight o'clock to take the wafer at Saint-Etienne. Father Goriot started off somewhere with a parcel, and the student won't be back from his lecture till ten o'clock. I saw them go while I was sweeping the stairs; Father Goriot knocked up against me, and his parcel was as hard as iron. What is the old fellow up to, I wonder? He is as good as a plaything for the rest of them; they can never let him alone; but he is a good man, all the same, and worth more than all of them put together. He doesn't give you much himself, but he sometimes sends you with a message to ladies who fork out famous tips; they are dressed grandly, too."

°°°°"His daughters, as he calls them, eh? There are a dozen of them."

°°°°"I have never been to more than two--the two who came here."

°°°°"There is madame moving overhead; I shall have to go, or she will raise a fine racket. Just keep an eye on the milk, Christophe; don't let the cat get at it."

°°°°Sylvie went up to her mistress' room.

°°°°"Sylvie! How is this? It's nearly ten o'clock, and you let me sleep like a dormouse! Such a thing has never happened before."

°°°°"It's the fog; it is that thick, you could cut it with a knife."

°°°°"But how about breakfast?"

°°°°"Bah! the boarders are possessed, I'm sure. They all cleared out before there was a wink of daylight."

°°°°"Do speak properly, Sylvie," Mme. Vauquer retorted; "say a blink of daylight."

°°°°"Ah, well, madame, whichever you please. Anyhow, you can have breakfast at ten o'clock. La Michonnette and Poiret have neither of them stirred. There are only those two upstairs, and they are sleeping like the logs they are."

°°°°"But, Sylvie, you put their names together as if----"

°°°°"As if what?" said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. "The two of them make a pair."

°°°°"It is a strange thing, isn't it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last night after Christophe had bolted the door?"

°°°°"Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?"

°°°°"Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears on the table, those at five a penny."

°°°°A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all haste.

°°°°"Mistigris!" she cried.

°°°°The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

°°°°"Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!" she said. "Sylvie! Sylvie!"

°°°°"Yes, madame; what is it?"

°°°°"Just see what the cat has done!"

°°°°"It is all that stupid Christophe's fault. I told him to stop and lay the table. What has become of him? Don't you worry, madame; Father Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won't know the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats."

°°°°"I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?" said Mme. Vauquer, setting the plates round the table.

°°°°"Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"I have overslept myself," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same."

°°°°The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the sitting-room, singing loudly:

°°°°" 'Tis the same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance . .

°°°°"Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!" he cried at the sight of his hostess, and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

°°°°"There! have done----"

°°°°" 'Impertinence!' Say it!" he answered. "Come, say it! Now, isn't that what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah! I am a nice man, am I not?

°°°°"For the locks of brown and the golden hair   A sighing lover . . .

°°°°"Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

°°°°. . . . led by chance."

°°°°"What?" asked the widow.

°°°°"Father Goriot in the goldsmith's shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there, and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that's not used to the trade."

°°°°"Really? You don't say so?"

°°°°"Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair. He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went into a money-lender's house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father's bones, a Turk, a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob HIM, for he puts all his coin into the Bank."

°°°°"Then what was Father Goriot doing there?"

°°°°"Doing?" said Vautrin. "Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----"

°°°°"There he is!" cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Christophe," cried Father Goriot's voice, "come upstairs with me."

°°°°Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

°°°°"Where are you going?" Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

°°°°"Out on an errand for M. Goriot."

°°°°"What may that be?" said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe's hand. "Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud," he read. "Where are you going with it?" he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

°°°°"To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands myself."

°°°°"What is there inside it?" said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the light. "A banknote? No." He peered into the envelope. "A receipted account!" he cried. "My word! 'tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you, old chap," he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe's head, and spinning the man round like a thimble; "you will have a famous tip."

°°°°By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme. Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

°°°°"The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance."

°°°°When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

°°°°"Where have you been this morning, fair lady?" said Mme. Vauquer, turning to Mme. Couture.

°°°°"We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She is trembling like a leaf," Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

°°°°"Warm yourself, Victorine," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften your father's heart," said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the orphan girl; "but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl needs a dowry nowadays."

°°°°"Poor child!" said Mme. Vauquer. "Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself."

°°°°Victorine's eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

°°°°"If we could only see him!" said the Commissary-General's widow; "if I could speak to him myself and give him his wife's last letter! I have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my handwriting----"

°°°°" 'Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!' " exclaimed Vautrin, breaking in upon her. "So that is how you are, is it? In a few days' time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall see."

°°°°"Oh! sir," said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin, who showed no sign of being touched by it, "if you know of any way of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his affection and my mother's honor are more to me than all the money in the world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----"

°°°°"The same old story everywhere," sang Vautrin, with a satirical intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven people thus assembled bade each other good- morning, and took their places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student's footstep was heard outside.

°°°°"Ah! here you are, M. Eugene," said Sylvie; "every one is breakfasting at home to-day."

°°°°The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside Goriot.

°°°°"I have just met with a queer adventure," he said, as he helped himself abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer's eyes gauged as usual.

°°°°"An adventure?" queried Poiret.

°°°°"Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?" Vautrin asked of Poiret. "M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing."

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

°°°°"Tell us about your adventure!" demanded M. Vautrin.

°°°°"Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a king---"

°°°°"Fisher," put in Vautrin, interrupting.

°°°°"What do you mean, sir?" said Eugene sharply.

°°°°"I said 'fisher,' because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than kings."

°°°°"Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a king," said Poiret the ditto-ist, "because----"

°°°°"In fact"--the law-student cut him short--"I danced with one of the handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this divine countess about nine o'clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how my heart beat! I began to think----"

°°°°"That she was coming here," said Vautrin, with a keen look at the student. "I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman's heart, you will find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder."

°°°°The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

°°°°"Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!" cried Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

°°°°"It is just as I guessed," said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme. Vauquer's ear.

°°°°Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own thoughts than he did at that moment.

°°°°"Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! there you are!" answered Vautrin. "Old Father Goriot there knew it quite well! and why should I not know it too?"

°°°°"M. Goriot?" the student cried.

°°°°"What is it?" asked the old man. "So she was very beautiful, was she, yesterday night?"

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"Look at the old wretch," said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; "how his eyes light up!"

°°°°"Then does he really keep her?" said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to the student.

°°°°"Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty," Eugene answered. Father Goriot watched him with eager eyes. "If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there, my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list, and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a galloping horse, or a woman dancing."

°°°°"So the wheel turns," said Vautrin; "yesterday night at a duchess' ball, this morning in a money-lender's office, on the lowest rung of the ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers' hearts to find something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside down. Just a Parisienne through and through!"

°°°°Father Goriot's face, which had shone at the student's words like the sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of Vautrin's.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. Vauquer, "but where is your adventure? Did you speak to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?"

°°°°"She did not see me," said Eugene. "But only think of meeting one of the prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o'clock! She could not have reached home after the ball till two o'clock this morning. Wasn't it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of adventures."

°°°°"Pshaw! much funnier things than THAT happen here!" exclaimed Vautrin.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

°°°°"Well, did you see?" said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest of the circle. "He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain."

°°°°"Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de Restaud is anything to Father Goriot," cried the student.

°°°°"Well, and if you don't," broke in Vautrin, "we are not set on convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed to be like the sound of a trumpet to a trooper's horse. "Aha!" said Vautrin, stopping in his speech to give her a searching glance, "so we have had our little experiences, have we?"

°°°°The old maid lowered her eyes like a nun who sees a statue.

°°°°"Well," he went on, "when folk of that kind get a notion into their heads, they cannot drop it. They must drink the water from some particular spring--it is stagnant as often as not; but they will sell their wives and families, they will sell their own souls to the devil to get it. For some this spring is play, or the stock-exchange, or music, or a collection of pictures or insects; for others it is some woman who can give them the dainties they like. You might offer these last all the women on earth--they would turn up their noses; they will have the only one who can gratify their passion. It often happens that the woman does not care for them at all, and treats them cruelly; they buy their morsels of satisfaction very dear; but no matter, the fools are never tired of it; they will take their last blanket to the pawnbroker's to give their last five-franc piece to her. Father Goriot here is one of that sort. He is discreet, so the Countess exploits him--just the way of the gay world. The poor old fellow thinks of her and of nothing else. In all other respects you see he is a stupid animal; but get him on that subject, and his eyes sparkle like diamonds. That secret is not difficult to guess. He took some plate himself this morning to the melting-pot, and I saw him at Daddy Gobseck's in the Rue des Gres. And now, mark what follows--he came back here, and gave a letter for the Comtesse de Restaud to that noodle of a Christophe, who showed us the address; there was a receipted bill inside it. It is clear that it was an urgent matter if the Countess also went herself to the old money lender. Father Goriot has financed her handsomely. There is no need to tack a tale together; the thing is self-evident. So that shows you, sir student, that all the time your Countess was smiling, dancing, flirting, swaying her peach-flower crowned head, with her gown gathered into her hand, her slippers were pinching her, as they say; she was thinking of her protested bills, or her lover's protested bills."

°°°°"You have made me wild to know the truth," cried Eugene; "I will go to call on Mme. de Restaud to-morrow."

°°°°"Yes," echoed Poiret; "you must go and call on Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"And perhaps you will find Father Goriot there, who will take payment for the assistance he politely rendered."

°°°°Eugene looked disgusted. "Why, then, this Paris of yours is a slough."

°°°°"And an uncommonly queer slough, too," replied Vautrin. "The mud splashes you as you drive through it in your carriage--you are a respectable person; you go afoot and are splashed--you are a scoundrel. You are so unlucky as to walk off with something or other belonging to somebody else, and they exhibit you as a curiosity in the Place du Palais-de-Justice; you steal a million, and you are pointed out in every salon as a model of virtue. And you pay thirty millions for the police and the courts of justice, for the maintenance of law and order! A pretty slate of things it is!"

°°°°"What," cried Mme. Vauquer, "has Father Goriot really melted down his silver posset-dish?"

°°°°"There were two turtle-doves on the lid, were there not?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that there were."

°°°°"Then, was he fond of it?" said Eugene. "He cried while he was breaking up the cup and plate. I happened to see him by accident."

°°°°"It was dear to him as his own life," answered the widow.

°°°°"There! you see how infatuated the old fellow is!" cried Vautrin. "The woman yonder can coax the soul out of him"

°°°°The student went up to his room. Vautrin went out, and a few moments later Mme. Couture and Victorine drove away in a cab which Sylvie had called for them. Poiret gave his arm to Mlle. Michonneau, and they went together to spend the two sunniest hours of the day in the Jardin des Plantes.

°°°°"Well, those two are as good as married," was the portly Sylvie's comment. "They are going out together to-day for the first time. They are such a couple of dry sticks that if they happen to strike against each other they will draw sparks like flint and steel."

°°°°"Keep clear of Mlle. Michonneau's shawl, then, said Mme. Vauquer, laughing; "it would flare up like tinder."

°°°°At four o'clock that evening, when Goriot came in, he saw, by the light of two smoky lamps, that Victorine's eyes were red. Mme. Vauquer was listening to the history of the visit made that morning to M. Taillefer; it had been made in vain. Taillefer was tired of the annual application made by his daughter and her elderly friend; he gave them a personal interview in order to arrive at an understanding with them.

°°°°"My dear lady," said Mme. Couture, addressing Mme. Vauquer, "just imagine it; he did not even ask Victorine to sit down, she was standing the whole time. He said to me quite coolly, without putting himself in a passion, that we might spare ourselves the trouble of going there; that the young lady (he would not call her his daughter) was injuring her cause by importuning him (IMPORTUNING! once a year, the wretch!); that as Victorine's mother had nothing when he married her, Victorine ought not to expect anything from him; in fact, he said the most cruel things, that made the poor child burst out crying. The little thing threw herself at her father's feet and spoke up bravely; she said that she only persevered in her visits for her mother's sake; that she would obey him without a murmur, but that she begged him to read her poor dead mother's farewell letter. She took it up and gave it to him, saying the most beautiful things in the world, most beautifully expressed; I do not know where she learned them; God

°°°°must have put them into her head, for the poor child was inspired to speak so nicely that it made me cry like a fool to hear her talk. And what do you think the monster was doing all the time? Cutting his nails! He took the letter that poor Mme. Taillefer had soaked with tears, and flung it on to the chimney-piece. 'That is all right,' he said. He held out his hands to raise his daughter, but she covered them with kisses, and he drew them away again. Scandalous, isn't it? And his great booby of a son came in and took no notice of his sister."

°°°°"What inhuman wretches they must be!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"And then they both went out of the room," Mme. Couture went on, without heeding the worthy vermicelli maker's exclamation; "father and son bowed to me, and asked me to excuse them on account of urgent business! That is the history of our call. Well, he has seen his daughter at any rate. How he can refuse to acknowledge her I cannot think, for they are as alike as two peas."

°°°°The boarders dropped in one after another, interchanging greetings and empty jokes that certain classes of Parisians regard as humorous and witty. Dulness is their prevailing ingredient, and the whole point consists in mispronouncing a word or a gesture. This kind of argot is always changing. The essence of the jest consists in some catchword suggested by a political event, an incident in the police courts, a street song, or a bit of burlesque at some theatre, and forgotten in a month. Anything and everything serves to keep up a game of battledore and shuttlecock with words and ideas. The diorama, a recent invention, which carried an optical illusion a degree further than panoramas, had given rise to a mania among art students for ending every word with RAMA. The Maison Vauquer had caught the infection from a young artist among the boarders.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur-r-r Poiret," said the employe from the Museum, "how is your health-orama?" Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned to Mme. Couture and Victorine with a "Ladies, you seem melancholy."

°°°°"Is dinner ready?" cried Horace Bianchon, a medical student, and a friend of Rastignac's; "my stomach is sinking usque ad talones."

°°°°"There is an uncommon frozerama outside," said Vautrin. "Make room there, Father Goriot! Confound it, your foot covers the whole front of the stove."

°°°°"Illustrious M. Vautrin," put in Bianchon, "why do you say frozerama? It is incorrect; it should be frozenrama."

°°°°"No, it shouldn't," said the official from the Museum; "frozerama is right by the same rule that you say 'My feet are froze.' "

°°°°"Ah! ah!"

°°°°"Here is his Excellency the Marquis de Rastignac, Doctor of the Law of Contraries," cried Bianchon, seizing Eugene by the throat, and almost throttling him.

°°°°"Hallo there! hallo!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau came noiselessly in, bowed to the rest of the party, and took her place beside the three women without saying a word.

°°°°"That old bat always makes me shudder," said Bianchon in a low voice, indicating Mlle. Michonneau to Vautrin. "I have studied Gall's system, and I am sure she has the bump of Judas."

°°°°"Then you have seen a case before?" said Vautrin.

°°°°"Who has not?" answered Bianchon. "Upon my word, that ghastly old maid looks just like one of the long worms that will gnaw a beam through, give them time enough."

°°°°"That is the way, young man," returned he of the forty years and the dyed whiskers:

°°°°"The rose has lived the life of a rose--   A morning's space."

°°°°"Aha! here is a magnificent soupe-au-rama," cried Poiret as Christophe came in bearing the soup with cautious heed.

°°°°"I beg your pardon, sir," said Mme. Vauquer; "it is soupe aux choux."

°°°°All the young men roared with laughter.

°°°°"Had you there, Poiret!"

°°°°"Poir-r-r-rette! she had you there!"

°°°°"Score two points to Mamma Vauquer," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Did any of you notice the fog this morning?" asked the official.

°°°°"It was a frantic fog," said Bianchon, "a fog unparalleled, doleful, melancholy, sea-green, asthmatical--a Goriot of a fog!"

°°°°"A Goriorama," said the art student, "because you couldn't see a thing in it."

°°°°"Hey! Milord Gaoriotte, they air talking about yoo-o-ou!"

°°°°Father Goriot, seated at the lower end of the table, close to the door through which the servant entered, raised his face; he had smelt at a scrap of bread that lay under his table napkin, an old trick acquired in his commercial capacity, that still showed itself at times.

°°°°"Well," Madame Vauquer cried in sharp tones, that rang above the rattle of spoons and plates and the sound of other voices, "and is there anything the matter with the bread?"

°°°°"Nothing whatever, madame," he answered; "on the contrary, it is made of the best quality of corn; flour from Etampes."

°°°°"How could you tell?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"By the color, by the flavor."

°°°°"You knew the flavor by the smell, I suppose," said Mme. Vauquer. "You have grown so economical, you will find out how to live on the smell of cooking at last."

°°°°"Take out a patent for it, then," cried the Museum official; "you would make a handsome fortune."

°°°°"Never mind him," said the artist; "he does that sort of thing to delude us into thinking that he was a vermicelli maker."

°°°°"Your nose is a corn-sampler, it appears?" inquired the official.

°°°°"Corn WHAT?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"Corn-el."

°°°°"Corn-et."

°°°°"Corn-elian."

°°°°"Corn-ice."

°°°°"Corn-ucopia."

°°°°"Corn-crake."

°°°°"Corn-cockle."

°°°°"Corn-orama."

°°°°The eight responses came like a rolling fire from every part of the room, and the laughter that followed was the more uproarious because poor Father Goriot stared at the others with a puzzled look, like a foreigner trying to catch the meaning of words in a language which he does not understand.

°°°°"Corn? . . ." he said, turning to Vautrin, his next neighbor.

°°°°"Corn on your foot, old man!" said Vautrin, and he drove Father Goriot's cap down over his eyes by a blow on the crown.

°°°°The poor old man thus suddenly attacked was for a moment too bewildered to do anything. Christophe carried off his plate, thinking that he had finished his soup, so that when Goriot had pushed back his cap from his eyes his spoon encountered the table. Every one burst out laughing. "You are a disagreeable joker, sir," said the old man, "and if you take any further liberties with me----"

°°°°"Well, what then, old boy?" Vautrin interrupted.

°°°°"Well, then, you shall pay dearly for it some day----"

°°°°"Down below, eh?" said the artist, "in the little dark corner where they put naughty boys."

°°°°"Well, mademoiselle," Vautrin said, turning to Victorine, "you are eating nothing. So papa was refractory, was he?"

°°°°"A monster!" said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"Mademoiselle might make application for aliment pending her suit; she is not eating anything. Eh! eh! just see how Father Goriot is staring at Mlle. Victorine."

°°°°The old man had forgotten his dinner, he was so absorbed in gazing at the poor girl; the sorrow in her face was unmistakable,--the slighted love of a child whose father would not recognize her.

°°°°"We are mistaken about Father Goriot, my dear boy," said Eugene in a low voice. "He is not an idiot, nor wanting in energy. Try your Gall system on him, and let me know what you think. I saw him crush a silver dish last night as if it had been made of wax; there seems to be something extra-ordinary going on in his mind just now, to judge by his face. His life is so mysterious that it must be worth studying. Oh! you may laugh, Bianchon; I am not joking."

°°°°"The man is a subject, is he?" said Bianchon; "all right! I will dissect him, if he will give me the chance."

°°°°"No; feel his bumps."

°°°°"Hm!--his stupidity might perhaps be contagious."

°°°°The next day Rastignac dressed himself very elegantly, and about three o'clock in the afternoon went to call on Mme. de Restaud. On the way thither he indulged in the wild intoxicating dreams which fill a young head so full of delicious excitement. Young men at his age take no account of obstacles nor of dangers; they see success in every direction; imagination has free play, and turns their lives into a romance; they are saddened or discouraged by the collapse of one of the visionary schemes that have no existence save in their heated fancy. If youth were not ignorant and timid, civilization would be impossible.

°°°°Eugene took unheard-of pains to keep himself in a spotless condition, but on his way through the streets he began to think about Mme. de Restaud and what he should say to her. He equipped himself with wit, rehearsed repartees in the course of an imaginary conversation, and prepared certain neat speeches a la Talleyrand, conjuring up a series of small events which should prepare the way for the declaration on which he had based his future; and during these musings the law student was bespattered with mud, and by the time he reached the Palais Royal he was obliged to have his boots blacked and his trousers brushed.

°°°°"If I were rich," he said, as he changed the five-franc piece he had brought with him in case anything might happen, "I would take a cab, then I could think at my ease."

°°°°At last he reached the Rue du Helder, and asked for the Comtesse de Restaud. He bore the contemptuous glances of the servants, who had seen him cross the court on foot, with the cold fury of a man who knows that he will succeed some day. He understood the meaning of their glances at once, for he had felt his inferiority as soon as he entered the court, where a smart cab was waiting. All the delights of life in Paris seemed to be implied by this visible and manifest sign of luxury and extravagance. A fine horse, in magnificent harness, was pawing the ground, and all at once the law student felt out of humor with himself. Every compartment in his brain which he had thought to find so full of wit was bolted fast; he grew positively stupid. He sent up his name to the Countess, and waited in the ante-chamber, standing on one foot before a window that looked out upon the court; mechanically he leaned his elbow against the sash, and stared before him. The time seemed long; he would have left the house but for the southern tenacity of purpose which works miracles when it is single-minded.

°°°°"Madame is in her boudoir, and cannot see any one at present, sir," said the servant. "She gave me no answer; but if you will go into the dining-room, there is some one already there."

°°°°Rastignac was impressed with a sense of the formidable power of the lackey who can accuse or condemn his masters by a word; he coolly opened the door by which the man had just entered the ante-chamber, meaning, no doubt, to show these insolent flunkeys that he was familiar with the house; but he found that he had thoughtlessly precipitated himself into a small room full of dressers, where lamps were standing, and hot-water pipes, on which towels were being dried; a dark passage and a back staircase lay beyond it. Stifled laughter from the ante-chamber added to his confusion.

°°°°"This way to the drawing-room, sir," said the servant, with the exaggerated respect which seemed to be one more jest at his expense.

°°°°Eugene turned so quickly that he stumbled against a bath. By good luck, he managed to keep his hat on his head, and saved it from immersion in the water; but just as he turned, a door opened at the further end of the dark passage, dimly lighted by a small lamp. Rastignac heard voices and the sound of a kiss; one of the speakers was Mme. de Restaud, the other was Father Goriot. Eugene followed the servant through the dining-room into the drawing- room; he went to a window that looked out into the courtyard, and stood there for a while. He meant to know whether this Goriot was really the Goriot that he knew. His heart beat unwontedly fast; he remembered Vautrin's hideous insinuations. A well-dressed young man suddenly emerged from the room almost as Eugene entered it, saying impatiently to the servant who stood at the door: "I am going, Maurice. Tell Madame la Comtesse that I waited more than half an hour for her."

°°°°Whereupon this insolent being, who, doubtless, had a right to be insolent, sang an Italian trill, and went towards the window where Eugene was standing, moved thereto quite as much by a desire to see the student's face as by a wish to look out into the courtyard.

°°°°"But M. le Comte had better wait a moment longer; madame is disengaged," said Maurice, as he returned to the ante-chamber.

°°°°Just at that moment Father Goriot appeared close to the gate; he had emerged from a door at the foot of the back staircase. The worthy soul was preparing to open his umbrella regardless of the fact that the great gate had opened to admit a tilbury, in which a young man with a ribbon at his button-hole was seated. Father Goriot had scarcely time to start back and save himself. The horse took fright at the umbrella, swerved, and dashed forward towards the flight of steps. The young man looked round in annoyance, saw Father Goriot, and greeted him as he went out with constrained courtesy, such as people usually show to a money- lender so long as they require his services, or the sort of respect they feel it necessary to show for some one whose reputation has been blown upon, so that they blush to acknowledge his acquaintance. Father Goriot gave him a little friendly nod and a good-natured smile. All this happened with lightning speed. Eugene was so deeply interested that he forgot that he was not alone till he suddenly heard the Countess' voice.

°°°°"Oh! Maxime, were you going away?" she said reproachfully, with a shade of pique in her manner. The Countess had not seen the incident nor the entrance of the tilbury. Rastignac turned abruptly and saw her standing before him, coquettishly dressed in a loose white cashmere gown with knots of rose-colored ribbon here and there; her hair was carelessly coiled about her head, as is the wont of Parisian women in the morning; there was a soft fragrance about her--doubtless she was fresh from a bath;--her graceful form seemed more flexible, her beauty more luxuriant. Her eyes glistened. A young man can see everything at a glance; he feels the radiant influence of woman as a plant discerns and absorbs its nutriment from the air; he did not need to touch her hands to feel their cool freshness. He saw faint rose tints through the cashmere of the dressing gown; it had fallen slightly open, giving glimpses of a bare throat, on which the student's eyes rested. The Countess had no need of the adventitious aid of corsets; her girdle defined the outlines of her slender waist; her throat was a challenge to love; her feet, thrust into slippers, were daintily small. As Maxime took her hand and kissed it, Eugene became aware of Maxime's existence, and the Countess saw Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! is that you M. de Rastignac? I am very glad to see you," she said, but there was something in her manner that a shrewd observer would have taken as a hint to depart.

°°°°Maxime, as the Countess Anastasie had called the young man with the haughty insolence of bearing, looked from Eugene to the lady, and from the lady to Eugene; it was sufficiently evident that he wished to be rid of the latter. An exact and faithful rendering of the glance might be given in the words: "Look here, my dear; I hope you intend to send this little whipper-snapper about his business."

°°°°The Countess consulted the young man's face with an intent submissiveness that betrays all the secrets of a woman's heart, and Rastignac all at once began to hate him violently. To begin with, the sight of the fair carefully arranged curls on the other's comely head had convinced him that his own crop was hideous; Maxime's boots, moreover, were elegant and spotless, while his own, in spite of all his care, bore some traces of his recent walk; and, finally, Maxime's overcoat fitted the outline of his figure gracefully, he looked like a pretty woman, while Eugene was wearing a black coat at half-past two. The quick- witted child of the Charente felt the disadvantage at which he was placed beside this tall, slender dandy, with the clear gaze and the pale face, one of those men who would ruin orphan children without scruple. Mme. de Restaud fled into the next room without waiting for Eugene to speak; shaking out the skirts of her dressing-gown in her flight, so that she looked like a white butterfly, and Maxime hurried after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant's ball; he guessed the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he said to himself, "This is my rival; I mean to cut him out."

°°°°Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls's eye twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and so sulkily, that Anastasie's fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, "Why do you not go?" a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make their exit.

°°°°Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

°°°°"Madame," he began, "I hastened to call upon you----"

°°°°He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess; he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime with a cordial "Good morning," that astonished Eugene not a little. The young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

°°°°"M. de Restaud," said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law student.

°°°°Eugene bowed profoundly.

°°°°"This gentleman," she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband, "is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last ball."

°°°°Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs! These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house, produced a magical effect. The Count's stiff manner relaxed at once as he returned the student's bow.

°°°°"Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance," he said.

°°°°Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a fairy's wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open again; Rastignac's carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer's lodging- house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

°°°°"I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct," the Comte de Restaud said, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, they are extinct," answered the law student. "My great- uncle, the Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family. They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault, Mme. de Beauseant's grandfather on the mother's side. We are the younger branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King's service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated."

°°°°"Was not your great-uncle in command of the Vengeur before 1789?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the Warwick."

°°°°Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who should say, "If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that fellow, it is all over with us." Anastasie understood the glance that M. de Trailles gave her. With a woman's admirable tact, she began to smile and said:

°°°°"Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the Warwick and the Vengeur."

°°°°She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the boudoir. The morganatic couple (to use a convenient German expression which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

°°°°"Anastasie!" he cried pettishly, "just stay a moment, dear; you know very well that----"

°°°°"I am coming back in a minute," she interrupted; "I have a commission for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it."

°°°°She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her husband's voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands' characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, "You are busy, I do not want to interrupt you; good-day," and he went.

°°°°"Just wait a moment, Maxime!" the Count called after him.

°°°°"Come and dine with us," said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure that Rastignac had taken his leave.

°°°°The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover, for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate, hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair typical Parisian.

°°°°"Anastasie!" the Count called again to his wife.

°°°°"Poor Maxime!" she said, addressing the young man. "Come, we must resign ourselves. This evening----"

°°°°"I hope, Nasie," he said in her ear, "that you will give orders not to admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you will compel me to kill him."

°°°°"Are you mad, Maxime?" she said. "A young lad of a student is, on the contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him."

°°°°Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip, and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had been closed after him.

°°°°"What do you think, dear?" cried the Count, her husband, "this gentleman's family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted."

°°°°"Delighted to find that we have acquaintances in common," said the Countess, with a preoccupied manner.

°°°°"More than you think," said Eugene, in a low voice.

°°°°"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

°°°°"Why, only just now," said the student, "I saw a gentleman go out at the gate, Father Goriot, my next door neighbor in the house where I am lodging."

°°°°At the sound of this name, and the prefix that embellished it, the Count, who was stirring the fire, let the tongs fall as though they had burned his fingers, and rose to his feet.

°°°°"Sir," he cried, "you might have called him 'Monsieur Goriot'!"

°°°°The Countess turned pale at first at the sight of her husband's vexation, then she reddened; clearly she was embarrassed, her answer was made in a tone that she tried to make natural, and with an air of assumed carelessness:

°°°°"You could not know any one who is dearer to us both . . ."

°°°°She broke off, glanced at the piano as if some fancy had crossed her mind, and asked, "Are you fond of music, M. de Rastignac?"

°°°°"Exceedingly," answered Eugene, flushing, and disconcerted by a dim suspicion that he had somehow been guilty of a clumsy piece of folly.

°°°°"Do you sing?" she cried, going to the piano, and, sitting down before it, she swept her fingers over the keyboard from end to end. R-r-r-rah!

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°The Comte de Restaud walked to and fro.

°°°°"That is a pity; you are without one great means of success.--Ca- ro, ca-a-ro, ca-a-a-ro, non du-bi-ta-re," sang the Countess.

°°°°Eugene had a second time waved a magic wand when he uttered Goriot's name, but the effect seemed to be entirely opposite to that produced by the formula "related to Mme. de Beauseant." His position was not unlike that of some visitor permitted as a favor to inspect a private collection of curiosities, when by inadvertence he comes into collision with a glass case full of sculptured figures, and three or four heads, imperfectly secured, fall at the shock. He wished the earth would open and swallow him. Mme. de Restaud's expression was reserved and chilly, her eyes had grown indifferent, and sedulously avoided meeting those of the unlucky student of law.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "you wish to talk with M. de Restaud; permit me to wish you good-day----"

°°°°The Countess interrupted him by a gesture, saying hastily, "Whenever you come to see us, both M. de Restaud and I shall be delighted to see you."

°°°°Eugene made a profound bow and took his leave, followed by M. de Restaud, who insisted, in spite of his remonstrances, on accompanying him into the hall.

°°°°"Neither your mistress nor I are at home to that gentleman when he calls," the Count said to Maurice.

°°°°As Eugene set foot on the steps, he saw that it was raining.

°°°°"Come," said he to himself, "somehow I have just made a mess of it, I do not know how. And now I am going to spoil my hat and coat into the bargain. I ought to stop in my corner, grind away at law, and never look to be anything but a boorish country magistrate. How can I go into society, when to manage properly you want a lot of cabs, varnished boots, gold watch chains, and all sorts of things; you have to wear white doeskin gloves that cost six francs in the morning, and primrose kid gloves every evening? A fig for that old humbug of a Goriot!"

°°°°When he reached the street door, the driver of a hackney coach, who had probably just deposited a wedding party at their door, and asked nothing better than a chance of making a little money for himself without his employer's knowledge, saw that Eugene had no umbrella, remarked his black coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, and varnished boots, and stopped and looked at him inquiringly. Eugene, in the blind desperation that drives a young man to plunge deeper and deeper into an abyss, as if he might hope to find a fortunate issue in its lowest depths, nodded in reply to the driver's signal, and stepped into the cab; a few stray petals of orange blossom and scraps of wire bore witness to its recent occupation by a wedding party.

°°°°"Where am I to drive, sir?" demanded the man, who, by this time, had taken off his white gloves.

°°°°"Confound it!" Eugene said to himself, "I am in for it now, and at least I will not spend cab-hire for nothing!--Drive to the Hotel Beauseant," he said aloud.

°°°°"Which?" asked the man, a portentous word that reduced Eugene to confusion. This young man of fashion, species incerta, did not know that there were two Hotels Beauseant; he was not aware how rich he was in relations who did not care about him.

°°°°"The Vicomte de Beauseant, Rue----"

°°°°"De Grenelle," interrupted the driver, with a jerk of his head. "You see, there are the hotels of the Marquis and Comte de Beauseant in the Rue Saint-Dominique," he added, drawing up the step.

°°°°"I know all about that," said Eugene, severely.--"Everybody is laughing at me to-day, it seems!" he said to himself, as he deposited his hat on the opposite seat. "This escapade will cost me a king's ransom, but, at any rate, I shall call on my so- called cousin in a thoroughly aristocratic fashion. Goriot has cost me ten francs already, the old scoundrel. My word! I will tell Mme. de Beauseant about my adventure; perhaps it may amuse her. Doubtless she will know the secret of the criminal relation between that handsome woman and the old rat without a tail. It would be better to find favor in my cousin's eyes than to come in contact with that shameless woman, who seems to me to have very expensive tastes. Surely the beautiful Vicomtesse's personal interest would turn the scale for me, when the mere mention of her name produces such an effect. Let us look higher. If you set yourself to carry the heights of heaven, you must face God."

°°°°The innumerable thoughts that surged through his brain might be summed up in these phrases. He grew calmer, and recovered something of his assurance as he watched the falling rain. He told himself that though he was about to squander two of the precious five-franc pieces that remained to him, the money was well laid out in preserving his coat, boots, and hat; and his cabman's cry of "Gate, if you please," almost put him in spirits. A Swiss, in scarlet and gold, appeared, the great door groaned on its hinges, and Rastignac, with sweet satisfaction, beheld his equipage pass under the archway and stop before the flight of steps beneath the awning. The driver, in a blue-and-red greatcoat, dismounted and let down the step. As Eugene stepped out of the cab, he heard smothered laughter from the peristyle. Three or four lackeys were making merry over the festal appearance of the vehicle. In another moment the law student was enlightened as to the cause of their hilarity; he felt the full force of the contrast between his equipage and one of the smartest broughams in Paris; a coachman, with powdered hair, seemed to find it difficult to hold a pair of spirited horses, who stood chafing the bit. In Mme. de Restaud's courtyard, in the Chaussee d'Antin, he had seen the neat turnout of a young man of six-and-twenty; in the Faubourg Saint-Germain he found the luxurious equipage of a man of rank; thirty thousand francs would not have purchased it.

°°°°"Who can be here?" said Eugene to himself. He began to understand, though somewhat tardily, that he must not expect to find many women in Paris who were not already appropriated, and that the capture of one of these queens would be likely to cost something more than bloodshed. "Confound it all! I expect my cousin also has her Maxime."

°°°°He went up the steps, feeling that he was a blighted being. The glass door was opened for him; the servants were as solemn as jackasses under the curry comb. So far, Eugene had only been in the ballroom on the ground floor of the Hotel Beauseant; the fete had followed so closely on the invitation, that he had not had time to call on his cousin, and had therefore never seen Mme. de Beauseant's apartments; he was about to behold for the first time a great lady among the wonderful and elegant surroundings that reveal her character and reflect her daily life. He was the more curious, because Mme. de Restaud's drawing-room had provided him with a standard of comparison.

°°°°At half-past four the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was visible. Five minutes earlier she would not have received her cousin, but Eugene knew nothing of the recognized routine of various houses in Paris. He was conducted up the wide, white-painted, crimson- carpeted staircase, between the gilded balusters and masses of flowering plants, to Mme. de Beauseant's apartments. He did not know the rumor current about Mme. de Beauseant, one of the biographies told, with variations, in whispers, every evening in the salons of Paris.

°°°°For three years past her name had been spoken of in connection with that of one of the most wealthy and distinguished Portuguese nobles, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto. It was one of those innocent liaisons which possess so much charm for the two thus attached to each other that they find the presence of a third person intolerable. The Vicomte de Beauseant, therefore, had himself set an example to the rest of the world by respecting, with as good a grace as might be, this morganatic union. Any one who came to call on the Vicomtesse in the early days of this friendship was sure to find the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto there. As, under the circumstances, Mme. de Beauseant could not very well shut her door against these visitors, she gave them such a cold reception, and showed so much interest in the study of the ceiling, that no one could fail to understand how much he bored her; and when it became known in Paris that Mme. de Beauseant was bored by callers between two and four o'clock, she was left in perfect solitude during that interval. She went to the Bouffons or to the Opera with M. de Beauseant and M. d'Ajuda-Pinto; and M. de Beauseant, like a well-bred man of the world, always left his wife and the Portuguese as soon as he had installed them. But M. d'Ajuda-Pinto must marry, and a Mlle. de Rochefide was the young lady. In the whole fashionable world there was but one person who as yet knew nothing of the arrangement, and that was Mme. de Beauseant. Some of her friends had hinted at the possibility, and she had laughed at them, believing that envy had prompted those ladies to try to make mischief. And now, though the bans were about to be published, and although the handsome Portuguese had come that day to break the news to the Vicomtesse, he had not found courage as yet to say one word about his treachery. How was it? Nothing is doubtless more difficult than the notification of an ultimatum of this kind. There are men who feel more at their ease when they stand up before another man who threatens their lives with sword or pistol than in the presence of a woman who, after two hours of lamentations and reproaches, falls into a dead swoon and requires salts. At this moment, therefore, M. d'Ajuda-Pinto was on thorns, and anxious to take his leave. He told himself that in some way or other the news would reach Mme. de Beauseant; he would write, it would be much better to do it by letter, and not to utter the words that should stab her to the heart.

°°°°So when the servant announced M. Eugene de Rastignac, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto trembled with joy. To be sure, a loving woman shows even more ingenuity in inventing doubts of her lover than in varying the monotony of his happiness; and when she is about to be forsaken, she instinctively interprets every gesture as rapidly as Virgil's courser detected the presence of his companion by snuffing the breeze. It was impossible, therefore, that Mme. de Beauseant should not detect that involuntary thrill of satisfaction; slight though it was, it was appalling in its artlessness.

°°°°Eugene had yet to learn that no one in Paris should present himself in any house without first making himself acquainted with the whole history of its owner, and of its owner's wife and family, so that he may avoid making any of the terrible blunders which in Poland draw forth the picturesque exclamation, "Harness five bullocks to your cart!" probably because you will need them all to pull you out of the quagmire into which a false step has plunged you. If, down to the present day, our language has no name for these conversational disasters, it is probably because they are believed to be impossible, the publicity given in Paris to every scandal is so prodigious. After the awkward incident at Mme. de Restaud's, no one but Eugene could have reappeared in his character of bullock-driver in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room. But if Mme. de Restaud and M. de Trailles had found him horribly in the way, M. d'Ajuda hailed his coming with relief.

°°°°"Good-bye," said the Portuguese, hurrying to the door, as Eugene made his entrance into a dainty little pink-and-gray drawing- room, where luxury seemed nothing more than good taste.

°°°°"Until this evening," said Mme. de Beauseant, turning her head to give the Marquis a glance. "We are going to the Bouffons, are we not?"

°°°°"I cannot go," he said, with his fingers on the door handle.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant rose and beckoned to him to return. She did not pay the slightest attention to Eugene, who stood there dazzled by the sparkling marvels around him; he began to think that this was some story out of the Arabian Nights made real, and did not know where to hide himself, when the woman before him seemed to be unconscious of his existence. The Vicomtesse had raised the forefinger of her right hand, and gracefully signed to the Marquis to seat himself beside her. The Marquis felt the imperious sway of passion in her gesture; he came back towards her. Eugene watched him, not without a feeling of envy.

°°°°"That is the owner of the brougham!" he said to himself. "But is it necessary to have a pair of spirited horses, servants in livery, and torrents of gold to draw a glance from a woman here in Paris?"

°°°°The demon of luxury gnawed at his heart, greed burned in his veins, his throat was parched with the thirst of gold.

°°°°He had a hundred and thirty francs every quarter. His father, mother, brothers, sisters, and aunt did not spend two hundred francs a month among them. This swift comparison between his present condition and the aims he had in view helped to benumb his faculties.

°°°°"Why not?" the Vicomtesse was saying, as she smiled at the Portuguese. "Why cannot you come to the Italiens?"

°°°°"Affairs! I am to dine with the English Ambassador."

°°°°"Throw him over."

°°°°When a man once enters on a course of deception, he is compelled to add lie to lie. M. d'Ajuda therefore said, smiling, "Do you lay your commands on me?"

°°°°"Yes, certainly."

°°°°"That was what I wanted to have you say to me," he answered, dissembling his feelings in a glance which would have reassured any other woman.

°°°°He took the Vicomtesse's hand, kissed it, and went.

°°°°Eugene ran his fingers through his hair, and constrained himself to bow. He thought that now Mme. de Beauseant would give him her attention; but suddenly she sprang forward, rushed to a window in the gallery, and watched M. d'Ajuda step into his carriage; she listened to the order that he gave, and heard the Swiss repeat it to the coachman:

°°°°"To M. de Rochefide's house."

°°°°Those words, and the way in which M. d'Ajuda flung himself back in the carriage, were like a lightning flash and a thunderbolt for her; she walked back again with a deadly fear gnawing at her heart. The most terrible catastrophes only happen among the heights. The Vicomtesse went to her own room, sat down at a table, and took up a sheet of dainty notepaper.

°°°°"When, instead of dining with the English Ambassador,"   she wrote, "you go to the Rochefides, you owe me an   explanation, which I am waiting to hear."

°°°°She retraced several of the letters, for her hand was trembling so that they were indistinct; then she signed the note with an initial C for "Claire de Bourgogne," and rang the bell.

°°°°"Jacques," she said to the servant, who appeared immediately, "take this note to M. de Rochefide's house at half-past seven and ask for the Marquis d'Ajuda. If M. d'Ajuda is there, leave the note without waiting for an answer; if he is not there, bring the note back to me."

°°°°"Madame la Vicomtess, there is a visitor in the drawing-room."

°°°°"Ah! yes, of course," she said, opening the door.

°°°°Eugene was beginning to feel very uncomfortable, but at last the Vicomtesse appeared; she spoke to him, and the tremulous tones of her voice vibrated through his heart.

°°°°"Pardon me, monsieur," she said; "I had a letter to write. Now I am quite at liberty."

°°°°She scarcely knew what she was saying, for even as she spoke she thought, "Ah! he means to marry Mlle. de Rochefide? But is he still free? This evening the marriage shall be broken off, or else . . . But before to-morrow I shall know."

°°°°"Cousin . . ." the student replied.

°°°°"Eh?" said the Countess, with an insolent glance that sent a cold shudder through Eugene; he understood what that "Eh?" meant; he had learned a great deal in three hours, and his wits were on the alert. He reddened:

°°°°"Madame . . ." he began; he hesitated a moment, and then went on. "Pardon me; I am in such need of protection that the nearest scrap of relationship could do me no harm."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant smiled but there was sadness in her smile; even now she felt forebodings of the coming pain, the air she breathed was heavy with the storm that was about to burst.

°°°°"If you knew how my family are situated," he went on, "you would love to play the part of a beneficent fairy godmother who graciously clears the obstacles from the path of her protege."

°°°°"Well, cousin," she said, laughing, "and how can I be of service to you?"

°°°°"But do I know even that? I am distantly related to you, and this obscure and remote relationship is even now a perfect godsend to me. You have confused my ideas; I cannot remember the things that I meant to say to you. I know no one else here in Paris. . . . Ah! if I could only ask you to counsel me, ask you to look upon me as a poor child who would fain cling to the hem of your dress, who would lay down his life for you."

°°°°"Would you kill a man for me?"

°°°°"Two," said Eugene.

°°°°"You, child. Yes, you are a child," she said, keeping back the tears that came to her eyes; "you would love sincerely."

°°°°"Oh!" he cried, flinging up his head.

°°°°The audacity of the student's answer interested the Vicomtesse in him. The southern brain was beginning to scheme for the first time. Between Mme. de Restaud's blue boudoir and Mme. de Beauseant's rose-colored drawing-room he had made a three years' advance in a kind of law which is not a recognized study in Paris, although it is a sort of higher jurisprudence, and, when well understood, is a highroad to success of every kind.

°°°°"Ah! that is what I meant to say!" said Eugene. "I met Mme. de Restaud at your ball, and this morning I went to see her.

°°°°"You must have been very much in the way," said Mme. de Beauseant, smiling as she spoke.

°°°°"Yes, indeed. I am a novice, and my blunders will set every one against me, if you do not give me your counsel. I believe that in Paris it is very difficult to meet with a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion who would be willing to teach me, what you women can explain so well--life. I shall find a M. de Trailles everywhere. So I have come to you to ask you to give me a key to a puzzle, to entreat you to tell me what sort of blunder I made this morning. I mentioned an old man----"

°°°°"Madame la Duchess de Langeais," Jacques cut the student short; Eugene gave expression to his intense annoyance by a gesture.

°°°°"If you mean to succeed," said the Vicomtesse in a low voice, "in the first place you must not be so demonstrative."

°°°°"Ah! good morning, dear," she continued, and rising and crossing the room, she grasped the Duchess' hands as affectionately as if they had been sisters; the Duchess responded in the prettiest and most gracious way.

°°°°"Two intimate friends!" said Rastignac to himself. "Henceforward I shall have two protectresses; those two women are great friends, no doubt, and this newcomer will doubtless interest herself in her friend's cousin."

°°°°"To what happy inspiration do I owe this piece of good fortune, dear Antoinette?" asked Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°"Well, I saw M. d'Ajuda-Pinto at M. de Rochefide's door, so I thought that if I came I should find you alone."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant's mouth did not tighten, her color did not rise, her expression did not alter, or rather, her brow seemed to clear as the Duchess uttered those deadly words.

°°°°"If I had known that you were engaged----" the speaker added, glancing at Eugene.

°°°°"This gentleman is M. Eugene de Rastignac, one of my cousins," said the Vicomtesse. "Have you any news of General de Montriveau?" she continued. "Serizy told me yesterday that he never goes anywhere now; has he been to see you to-day?"

°°°°It was believed that the Duchess was desperately in love with M. de Montriveau, and that he was a faithless lover; she felt the question in her very heart, and her face flushed as she answered:

°°°°"He was at the Elysee yesterday."

°°°°"In attendance?"

°°°°"Claire," returned the Duchess, and hatred overflowed in the glances she threw at Mme. de Beauseant; "of course you know that M. d'Ajuda-Pinto is going to marry Mlle. de Rochefide; the bans will be published to-morrow."

°°°°This thrust was too cruel; the Vicomtesse's face grew white, but she answered, laughing, "One of those rumors that fools amuse themselves with. What should induce M. d'Ajuda to take one of the noblest names in Portugal to the Rochefides? The Rochefides were only ennobled yesterday."

°°°°"But Bertha will have two hundred thousand livres a year, they say."

°°°°"M. d'Ajuda is too wealthy to marry for money."

°°°°"But, my dear, Mlle. de Rochefide is a charming girl."

°°°°"Indeed?"

°°°°"And, as a matter of fact, he is dining with them to-day; the thing is settled. It is very surprising to me that you should know so little about it."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant turned to Rastignac. "What was the blunder that you made, monsieur?" she asked. "The poor boy is only just launched into the world, Antoinette, so that he understands nothing of all this that we are speaking of. Be merciful to him, and let us finish our talk to-morrow. Everything will be announced to-morrow, you know, and your kind informal communication can be accompanied by official confirmation."

°°°°The Duchess gave Eugene one of those insolent glances that measure a man from head to foot, and leave him crushed and annihilated.

°°°°"Madame, I have unwittingly plunged a dagger into Mme. de Restaud's heart; unwittingly--therein lies my offence," said the student of law, whose keen brain had served him sufficiently well, for he had detected the biting epigrams that lurked beneath this friendly talk. "You continue to receive, possibly you fear, those who know the amount of pain that they deliberately inflict; but a clumsy blunderer who has no idea how deeply he wounds is looked upon as a fool who does not know how to make use of his opportunities, and every one despise him."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant gave the student a glance, one of those glances in which a great soul can mingle dignity and gratitude. It was like balm to the law student, who was still smarting under the Duchess' insolent scrutiny; she had looked at him as an auctioneer might look at some article to appraise its value.

°°°°"Imagine, too, that I had just made some progress with the Comte de Restaud; for I should tell you, madame," he went on, turning to the Duchess with a mixture of humility and malice in his manner, "that as yet I am only a poor devil of a student, very much alone in the world, and very poor----"

°°°°"You should not tell us that, M. de Rastignac. We women never care about anything that no one else will take."

°°°°"Bah!" said Eugene. "I am only two-and-twenty, and I must make up my mind to the drawbacks of my time of life. Besides, I am confessing my sins, and it would be impossible to kneel in a more charming confessional; you commit your sins in one drawing-room, and receive absolution for them in another."

°°°°The Duchess' expression grew colder, she did not like the flippant tone of these remarks, and showed that she considered them to be in bad taste by turning to the Vicomtesse with--"This gentleman has only just come----"

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant began to laugh outright at her cousin and at the Duchess both.

°°°°"He has only just come to Paris, dear, and is in search of some one who will give him lessons in good taste."

°°°°"Mme. la Duchesse," said Eugene, "is it not natural to wish to be initiated into the mysteries which charm us?" ("Come, now," he said to himself, "my language is superfinely elegant, I'm sure.")

°°°°"But Mme. de Restaud is herself, I believe, M. de Trailles' pupil," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Of that I had no idea, madame," answered the law student, "so I rashly came between them. In fact, I got on very well with the lady's husband, and his wife tolerated me for a time until I took it into my head to tell them that I knew some one of whom I had just caught a glimpse as he went out by a back staircase, a man who had given the Countess a kiss at the end of a passage."

°°°°"Who was it?" both women asked together.

°°°°"An old man who lives at the rate of two louis a month in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, where I, a poor student, lodge likewise. He is a truly unfortunate creature, everybody laughs at him--we all call him 'Father Goriot.' "

°°°°"Why, child that you are," cried the Vicomtesse, "Mme. de Restaud was a Mlle. Goriot!"

°°°°"The daughter of a vermicelli manufacturer," the Duchess added; "and when the little creature went to Court, the daughter of a pastry-cook was presented on the same day. Do you remember, Claire? The King began to laugh, and made some joke in Latin about flour. People--what was it?--people----"

°°°°"Ejusdem farinae," said Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that was it," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Oh! is that her father?" the law student continued, aghast.

°°°°"Yes, certainly; the old man had two daughters; he dotes on them, so to speak, though they will scarcely acknowledge him."

°°°°"Didn't the second daughter marry a banker with a German name?" the Vicomtesse asked, turning to Mme. de Langeais, "a Baron de Nucingen? And her name is Delphine, is it not? Isn't she a fair- haired woman who has a side-box at the Opera? She comes sometimes to the Bouffons, and laughs loudly to attract attention."

°°°°The Duchess smiled and said:

°°°°"I wonder at you, dear. Why do you take so much interest in people of that kind? One must have been as madly in love as Restaud was, to be infatuated with Mlle. Anastasie and her flour sacks. Oh! he will not find her a good bargain! She is in M. de Trailles' hands, and he will ruin her."

°°°°"And they do not acknowledge their father!" Eugene repeated.

°°°°"Oh! well, yes, their father, the father, a father," replied the Vicomtesse, "a kind father who gave them each five or six hundred thousand francs, it is said, to secure their happiness by marrying them well; while he only kept eight or ten thousand livres a year for himself, thinking that his daughters would always be his daughters, thinking that in them he would live his life twice over again, that in their houses he should find two homes, where he would be loved and looked up to, and made much of. And in two years' time both his sons-in-law had turned him out of their houses as if he were one of the lowest outcasts."

°°°°Tears came into Eugene's eyes. He was still under the spell of youthful beliefs, he had just left home, pure and sacred feelings had been stirred within him, and this was his first day on the battlefield of civilization in Paris. Genuine feeling is so infectious that for a moment the three looked at each other in silence.

°°°°"Eh, mon Dieu!" said Mme. de Langeais; "yes, it seems very horrible, and yet we see such things every day. Is there not a reason for it? Tell me, dear, have you ever really thought what a son-in-law is? A son-in-law is the man for whom we bring up, you and I, a dear little one, bound to us very closely in innumerable ways; for seventeen years she will be the joy of her family, its 'white soul,' as Lamartine says, and suddenly she will become its scourge. When HE comes and takes her from us, his love from the very beginning is like an axe laid to the root of all the old affection in our darling's heart, and all the ties that bound her to her family are severed. But yesterday our little daughter thought of no one but her mother and father, as we had no thought that was not for her; by to-morrow she will have become a hostile stranger. The tragedy is always going on under our eyes. On the one hand you see a father who has sacrificed himself to his son, and his daughter-in-law shows him the last degree of insolence. On the other hand, it is the son-in-law who turns his wife's mother out of the house. I sometimes hear it said that there is nothing dramatic about society in these days; but the Drama of the Son-in-law is appalling, to say nothing of our marriages, which have come to be very poor farces. I can explain how it all came about in the old vermicelli maker's case. I think I recollect that Foriot----"

°°°°"Goriot, madame."

°°°°"Yes, that Moriot was once President of his Section during the Revolution. He was in the secret of the famous scarcity of grain, and laid the foundation of his fortune in those days by selling flour for ten times its cost. He had as much flour as he wanted. My grandmother's steward sold him immense quantities. No doubt Noriot shared the plunder with the Committee of Public Salvation, as that sort of person always did. I recollect the steward telling my grandmother that she might live at Grandvilliers in complete security, because her corn was as good as a certificate of civism. Well, then, this Loriot, who sold corn to those butchers, has never had but one passion, they say--he idolizes his daughters. He settled one of them under Restaud's roof, and grafted the other into the Nucingen family tree, the Baron de Nucingen being a rich banker who had turned Royalist. You can quite understand that so long as Bonaparte was Emperor, the two sons-in-law could manage to put up with the old Ninety-three; but after the restoration of the Bourbons, M. de Restaud felt bored by the old man's society, and the banker was still more tired of it. His daughters were still fond of him; they wanted 'to keep the goat and the cabbage,' so they used to see Joriot whenever there was no one there, under pretence of affection. 'Come to- day, papa, we shall have you all to ourselves, and that will be much nicer!' and all that sort of thing. As for me, dear, I believe that love has second-sight: poor Ninety-three; his heart must have bled. He saw that his daughters were ashamed of him, that if they loved their husbands his visits must make mischief. So he immolated himself. He made the sacrifice because he was a father; he went into voluntary exile. His daughters were satisfied, so he thought that he had done the best thing he could; but it was a family crime, and father and daughters were accomplices. You see this sort of thing everywhere. What could this old Doriot have been but a splash of mud in his daughters' drawing-rooms? He would only have been in the way, and bored other people, besides being bored himself. And this that happened between father and daughters may happen to the prettiest woman in

°°°°Paris and the man she loves the best; if her love grows tiresome, he will go; he will descend to the basest trickery to leave her. It is the same with all love and friendship. Our heart is a treasury; if you pour out all its wealth at once, you are bankrupt. We show no more mercy to the affection that reveals its utmost extent than we do to another kind of prodigal who has not a penny left. Their father had given them all he had. For twenty years he had given his whole heart to them; then, one day, he gave them all his fortune too. The lemon was squeezed; the girls left the rest in the gutter."

°°°°"The world is very base," said the Vicomtesse, plucking at the threads of her shawl. She did not raise her head as she spoke; the words that Mme. de Langeais had meant for her in the course of her story had cut her to the quick.

°°°°"Base? Oh, no," answered the Duchess; "the world goes its own way, that is all. If I speak in this way, it is only to show that I am not duped by it. I think as you do," she said, pressing the Vicomtesse's hand. "The world is a slough; let us try to live on the heights above it."

°°°°She rose to her feet and kissed Mme. de Beauseant on the forehead as she said: "You look very charming to-day, dear. I have never seen such a lovely color in your cheeks before."

°°°°Then she went out with a slight inclination of the head to the cousin.

°°°°"Father Goriot is sublime!" said Eugene to himself, as he remembered how he had watched his neighbor work the silver vessel into a shapeless mass that night.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant did not hear him; she was absorbed in her own thoughts. For several minutes the silence remained unbroken till the law student became almost paralyzed with embarrassment, and was equally afraid to go or stay or speak a word.

°°°°"The world is basely ungrateful and ill-natured," said the Vicomtesse at last. "No sooner does a trouble befall you than a friend is ready to bring the tidings and to probe your heart with the point of a dagger while calling on you to admire the handle. Epigrams and sarcasms already! Ah! I will defend myself!"

°°°°She raised her head like the great lady that she was, and lightnings flashed from her proud eyes.

°°°°"Ah!" she said, as she saw Eugene, "are you there?"

°°°°"Still," he said piteously.

°°°°"Well, then, M. de Rastignac, deal with the world as it deserves. You are determined to succeed? I will help you. You shall sound the depths of corruption in woman; you shall measure the extent of man's pitiful vanity. Deeply as I am versed in such learning, there were pages in the book of life that I had not read. Now I know all. The more cold-blooded your calculations, the further you will go. Strike ruthlessly; you will be feared. Men and women for you must be nothing more than post-horses; take a fresh relay, and leave the last to drop by the roadside; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition. You will be nothing here, you see, unless a woman interests herself in you; and she must be young and wealthy, and a woman of the world. Yet, if you have a heart, lock it carefully away like a treasure; do not let any one suspect it, or you will be lost; you would cease to be the executioner, you would take the victim's place. And if ever you should love, never let your secret escape you! Trust no one until you are very sure of the heart to which you open your heart. Learn to mistrust every one; take every precaution for the sake of the love which does not exist as yet. Listen, Miguel"-- the name slipped from her so naturally that she did not notice her mistake--"there is something still more appalling than the ingratitude of daughters who have cast off their old father and wish that he were dead, and that is a rivalry between two sisters. Restaud comes of a good family, his wife has been received into their circle; she has been presented at court; and her sister, her wealthy sister, Mme. Delphine de Nucingen, the wife of a great capitalist, is consumed with envy, and ready to die of spleen. There is gulf set between the sisters--indeed, they are sisters no longer--the two women who refuse to acknowledge their father do not acknowledge each other. So Mme. de Nucingen would lap up all the mud that lies between the Rue Saint-Lazare and the Rue de Grenelle to gain admittance to my salon. She fancied that she should gain her end through de Marsay; she has made herself de Marsay's slave, and she bores him. De Marsay cares very little about her. If you will introduce her to me, you will be her darling, her Benjamin; she will idolize you. If, after that, you can love her, do so; if not, make her useful. I will ask her to come once or twice to one of my great crushes, but I will never receive her here in the morning. I will bow to her when I see her, and that will be quite sufficient. You have shut the Comtesse de Restaud's door against you by mentioning Father Goriot's name. Yes, my good friend, you may call at her house twenty times, and every time out of the twenty you will find that she is not at home. The servants have their orders, and will not admit you. Very well, then, now let Father Goriot gain the right of entry into her sister's house for you. The beautiful Mme. de Nucingen will give the signal for a battle. As soon as she singles you out, other women will begin to lose their heads about you, and her enemies and rivals and intimate friends will all try to take you from her. There are women who will fall in love with a man because another woman has chosen him; like the city madams, poor things, who copy our millinery, and hope thereby to acquire our manners. You will have a success, and in Paris success is everything; it is the key of power. If the women credit you with wit and talent, the men will follow suit so long as you do not undeceive them yourself. There will be nothing you may not aspire to; you will go everywhere, and you will find out what the world is--an assemblage of fools and knaves. But you must be neither the one nor the other. I am giving you my name like Ariadne's clue of thread to take with you into the labyrinth; make no unworthy use of it," she said, with a queenly glance and curve of her throat; "give it back to me unsullied. And now, go; leave me. We women also have our battles to fight."

°°°°"And if you should ever need some one who would gladly set a match to a train for you----"

°°°°"Well?" she asked.

°°°°He tapped his heart, smiled in answer to his cousin's smile, and went.

°°°°It was five o'clock, and Eugene was hungry; he was afraid lest he should not be in time for dinner, a misgiving which made him feel that it was pleasant to be borne so quickly across Paris. This sensation of physical comfort left his mind free to grapple with the thoughts that assailed him. A mortification usually sends a young man of his age into a furious rage; he shakes his fist at society, and vows vengeance when his belief in himself is shaken. Just then Rastignac was overwhelmed by the words, "You have shut the Countess' door against you."

°°°°"I shall call!" he said to himself, "and if Mme. de Beauseant is right, if I never find her at home--I . . . well, Mme. de Restaud shall meet me in every salon in Paris. I will learn to fence and have some pistol practice, and kill that Maxime of hers!"

°°°°"And money?" cried an inward monitor. "How about money, where is that to come from?" And all at once the wealth displayed in the Countess de Restaud's drawing-room rose before his eyes. That was the luxury which Goriot's daughter had loved too well, the gilding, the ostentatious splendor, the unintelligent luxury of the parvenu, the riotous extravagance of a courtesan. Then the attractive vision suddenly went under an eclipse as he remembered the stately grandeur of the Hotel de Beauseant. As his fancy wandered among these lofty regions in the great world of Paris, innumerable dark thoughts gathered in his heart; his ideas widened, and his conscience grew more elastic. He saw the world as it is; saw how the rich lived beyond the jurisdiction of law and public opinion, and found in success the ultima ratio mundi.

°°°°"Vautrin is right, success is virtue!" he said to himself.

°°°°Arrived in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, he rushed up to his room for ten francs wherewith to satisfy the demands of the cabman, and went in to dinner. He glanced round the squalid room, saw the eighteen poverty-stricken creatures about to feed like cattle in their stalls, and the sight filled him with loathing. The transition was too sudden, and the contrast was so violent that it could not but act as a powerful stimulant; his ambition developed and grew beyond all social bounds. On the one hand, he beheld a vision of social life in its most charming and refined forms, of quick-pulsed youth, of fair, impassioned faces invested with all the charm of poetry, framed in a marvelous setting of luxury or art; and, on the other hand, he saw a sombre picture, the miry verge beyond these faces, in which passion was extinct and nothing was left of the drama but the cords and pulleys and bare mechanism. Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, the words uttered in anger by the forsaken lady, her petulant offer, came to his mind, and poverty was a ready expositor. Rastignac determined to open two parallel trenches so as to insure success; he would be a learned doctor of law and a man of fashion. Clearly he was still a child! Those two lines are asymptotes, and will never meet.

°°°°"You are very dull, my lord Marquis," said Vautrin, with one of the shrewd glances that seem to read the innermost secrets of another mind.

°°°°"I am not in the humor to stand jokes from people who call me 'my lord Marquis,' " answered Eugene. "A marquis here in Paris, if he is not the veriest sham, ought to have a hundred thousand livres a year at least; and a lodger in the Maison Vauquer is not exactly Fortune's favorite."

°°°°Vautrin's glance at Rastignac was half-paternal, half- contemptuous. "Puppy!" it seemed to say; "I should make one mouthful of him!" Then he answered:

°°°°"You are in a bad humor; perhaps your visit to the beautiful Comtesse de Restaud was not a success."

°°°°"She has shut her door against me because I told her that her father dined at our table," cried Rastignac.

°°°°Glances were exchanged all round the room; Father Goriot looked down.

°°°°"You have sent some snuff into my eye," he said to his neighbor, turning a little aside to rub his hand over his face.

°°°°"Any one who molests Father Goriot will have henceforward to reckon with me," said Eugene, looking at the old man's neighbor; "he is worth all the rest of us put together.--I am not speaking of the ladies," he added, turning in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer.

°°°°Eugene's remarks produced a sensation, and his tone silenced the dinner-table. Vautrin alone spoke. "If you are going to champion Father Goriot, and set up for his responsible editor into the bargain, you had need be a crack shot and know how to handle the foils," he said, banteringly.

°°°°"So I intend," said Eugene.

°°°°"Then you are taking the field today?"

°°°°"Perhaps," Rastignac answered. "But I owe no account of myself to any one, especially as I do not try to find out what other people do of a night."

°°°°Vautrin looked askance at Rastignac.

°°°°"If you do not mean to be deceived by the puppets, my boy, you must go behind and see the whole show, and not peep through holes in the curtain. That is enough," he added, seeing that Eugene was about to fly into a passion. "We can have a little talk whenever you like."

°°°°There was a general feeling of gloom and constraint. Father Goriot was so deeply dejected by the student's remark that he did not notice the change in the disposition of his fellow-lodgers, nor know that he had met with a champion capable of putting an end to the persecution.

°°°°"Then, M. Goriot sitting there is the father of a countess," said Mme. Vauquer in a low voice.

°°°°"And of a baroness," answered Rastignac.

°°°°"That is about all he is capable of," said Bianchon to Rastignac; "I have taken a look at his head; there is only one bump--the bump of Paternity; he must be an ETERNAL FATHER."

°°°°Eugene was too intent on his thoughts to laugh at Bianchon's joke. He determined to profit by Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, and was asking himself how he could obtain the necessary money. He grew grave. The wide savannas of the world stretched before his eyes; all things lay before him, nothing was his. Dinner came to an end, the others went, and he was left in the dining-room.

°°°°"So you have seen my daughter?" Goriot spoke tremulously, and the sound of his voice broke in upon Eugene's dreams. The young man took the elder's hand, and looked at him with something like kindness in his eyes.

°°°°"You are a good and noble man," he said. "We will have some talk about your daughters by and by."

°°°°He rose without waiting for Goriot's answer, and went to his room. There he wrote the following letter to his mother:--

°°°°"My Dear Mother,--Can you nourish your child from your breast again? I am in a position to make a rapid fortune, but I want twelve hundred francs--I must have them at all costs. Say nothing about this to my father; perhaps he might make objections, and unless I have the money, I may be led to put an end to myself, and so escape the clutches of despair. I will tell you everything when I see you. I will not begin to try to describe my present situation; it would take volumes to put the whole story clearly and fully. I have not been gambling, my kind mother, I owe no one a penny; but if you would preserve the life that you gave me, you must send me the sum I mention. As a matter of fact, I go to see the Vicomtesse de Beauseant; she is using her influence for me; I am obliged to go into society, and I have not a penny to lay out on clean gloves. I can manage to exist on bread and water, or go without food, if need be, but I cannot do without the tools with which they cultivate the vineyards in this country. I must resolutely make up my mind at once to make my way, or stick in the mire for the rest of my days. I know that all your hopes are set on me, and I want to realize them quickly. Sell some of your old jewelry, my kind mother; I will give you other jewels very soon. I know enough of our affairs at home to know all that such a sacrifice means, and you must not think that I would lightly ask you to make it; I should be a monster if I could. You must think of my entreaty as a cry forced from me by imperative necessity. Our whole future lies in the subsidy with which I must begin my first campaign, for life in Paris is one continual battle. If you cannot otherwise procure the whole of the money, and are forced to sell our aunt's lace, tell her that I will send her some still handsomer," and so forth.

°°°°He wrote to ask each of his sisters for their savings--would they despoil themselves for him, and keep the sacrifice a secret from the family? To his request he knew that they would not fail to respond gladly, and he added to it an appeal to their delicacy by touching the chord of honor that vibrates so loudly in young and high-strung natures.

°°°°Yet when he had written the letters, he could not help feeling misgivings in spite of his youthful ambition; his heart beat fast, and he trembled. He knew the spotless nobleness of the lives buried away in the lonely manor house; he knew what trouble and what joy his request would cause his sisters, and how happy they would be as they talked at the bottom of the orchard of that dear brother of theirs in Paris. Visions rose before his eyes; a sudden strong light revealed his sisters secretly counting over their little store, devising some girlish stratagem by which the money could be sent to him incognito, essaying, for the first time in their lives, a piece of deceit that reached the sublime in its unselfishness.

°°°°"A sister's heart is a diamond for purity, a deep sea of tenderness!" he said to himself. He felt ashamed of those letters.

°°°°What power there must be in the petitions put up by such hearts; how pure the fervor that bears their souls to Heaven in prayer! What exquisite joy they would find in self-sacrifice! What a pang for his mother's heart if she could not send him all that he asked for! And this noble affection, these sacrifices made at such terrible cost, were to serve as the ladder by which he meant to climb to Delphine de Nucingen. A few tears, like the last grains of incense flung upon the sacred alter fire of the hearth, fell from his eyes. He walked up and down, and despair mingled with his emotion. Father Goriot saw him through the half-open door.

°°°°"What is the matter, sir?" he asked from the threshold.

°°°°"Ah! my good neighbor, I am as much a son and brother as you are a father. You do well to fear for the Comtesse Anastasie; there is one M. Maxime de Trailles, who will be her ruin."

°°°°Father Goriot withdrew, stammering some words, but Eugene failed to catch their meaning.

°°°°The next morning Rastignac went out to post his letters. Up to the last moment he wavered and doubted, but he ended by flinging them into the box. "I shall succeed!" he said to himself. So says the gambler; so says the great captain; but the three words that have been the salvation of some few, have been the ruin of many more.

°°°°A few days after this Eugene called at Mme. de Restaud's house; she was not at home. Three times he tried the experiment, and three times he found her doors closed against him, though he was careful to choose an hour when M. de Trailles was not there. The Vicomtesse was right.

°°°°The student studied no longer. He put in an appearance at lectures simply to answer to his name, and after thus attesting his presence, departed forthwith. He had been through a reasoning process familiar to most students. He had seen the advisability of deferring his studies to the last moment before going up for his examinations; he made up his mind to cram his second and third years' work into the third year, when he meant to begin to work in earnest, and to complete his studies in law with one great effort. In the meantime he had fifteen months in which to navigate the ocean of Paris, to spread the nets and set the lines that would bring him a protectress and a fortune. Twice during that week he saw Mme. de Beauseant; he did not go to her house until he had seen the Marquis d'Ajuda drive away.

°°°°Victory for yet a few more days was with the great lady, the most poetic figure in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; and the marriage of the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto with Mlle. de Rochefide was postponed. The dread of losing her happiness filled those days with a fever of joy unknown before, but the end was only so much the nearer. The Marquis d'Ajuda and the Rochefides agreed that this quarrel and reconciliation was a very fortunate thing; Mme. de Beauseant (so they hoped) would gradually become reconciled to the idea of the marriage, and in the end would be brought to sacrifice d'Ajuda's morning visits to the exigencies of a man's career, exigencies which she must have foreseen. In spite of the most solemn promises, daily renewed, M. d'Ajuda was playing a part, and the Vicomtesse was eager to be deceived. "Instead of taking a leap heroically from the window, she is falling headlong down the staircase," said her most intimate friend, the Duchesse de Langeais. Yet this after-glow of happiness lasted long enough for the Vicomtesse to be of service to her young cousin. She had a half-superstitious affection for him. Eugene had shown her sympathy and devotion at a crisis when a woman sees no pity, no real comfort in any eyes; when if a man is ready with soothing flatteries, it is because he has an interested motive.

°°°°Rastignac made up his mind that he must learn the whole of Goriot's previous history; he would come to his bearings before attempting to board the Maison de Nucingen. The results of his inquiries may be given briefly as follows:--

°°°°In the days before the Revolution, Jean-Joachim Goriot was simply a workman in the employ of a vermicelli maker. He was a skilful, thrifty workman, sufficiently enterprising to buy his master's business when the latter fell a chance victim to the disturbances of 1789. Goriot established himself in the Rue de la Jussienne, close to the Corn Exchange. His plain good sense led him to accept the position of President of the Section, so as to secure for his business the protection of those in power at that dangerous epoch. This prudent step had led to success; the foundations of his fortune were laid in the time of the Scarcity (real or artificial), when the price of grain of all kinds rose enormously in Paris. People used to fight for bread at the bakers' doors; while other persons went to the grocers' shops and bought Italian paste foods without brawling over it. It was during this year that Goriot made the money, which, at a later time, was to give him all the advantage of the great capitalist over the small buyer; he had, moreover, the usual luck of average ability; his mediocrity was the salvation of him. He excited no one's envy, it was not even suspected that he was rich till the peril of being rich was over, and all his intelligence was concentrated, not on political, but on commercial speculations. Goriot was an authority second to none on all questions relating to corn, flour, and "middlings"; and the production, storage, and quality of grain. He could estimate the yield of the harvest, and foresee market prices; he bought his cereals in Sicily, and imported Russian wheat. Any one who had heard him hold forth on the regulations that control the importation and exportation of grain, who had seen his grasp of the subject, his clear insight into the principles involved, his appreciation of weak points in the way that the system worked, would have thought that here was the stuff of which a minister is made. Patient, active, and persevering, energetic and prompt in action, he surveyed his business horizon with an eagle eye. Nothing there took him by surprise; he foresaw all things, knew all that was happening, and kept his own counsel; he was a diplomatist in his quick comprehension of a situation; and in the routine of business he was as patient and plodding as a soldier on the march. But beyond this business horizon he could not see. He used to spend his hours of leisure on the threshold of his shop, leaning against the framework of the door. Take him from his dark little counting-house, and he became once more the rough, slow-witted workman, a man who cannot understand a piece of reasoning, who is indifferent to all intellectual pleasures, and falls asleep at the play, a Parisian Dolibom in short, against whose stupidity other minds are powerless.

°°°°Natures of this kind are nearly all alike; in almost all of them you will find some hidden depth of sublime affection. Two all- absorbing affections filled the vermicelli maker's heart to the exclusion of every other feeling; into them he seemed to put all the forces of his nature, as he put the whole power of his brain into the corn trade. He had regarded his wife, the only daughter of a rich farmer of La Brie, with a devout admiration; his love for her had been boundless. Goriot had felt the charm of a lovely and sensitive nature, which, in its delicate strength, was the very opposite of his own. Is there any instinct more deeply implanted in the heart of man than the pride of protection, a protection which is constantly exerted for a fragile and defenceless creature? Join love thereto, the warmth of gratitude that all generous souls feel for the source of their pleasures, and you have the explanation of many strange incongruities in human nature.

°°°°After seven years of unclouded happiness, Goriot lost his wife. It was very unfortunate for him. She was beginning to gain an ascendency over him in other ways; possibly she might have brought that barren soil under cultivation, she might have widened his ideas and given other directions to his thoughts. But when she was dead, the instinct of fatherhood developed in him till it almost became a mania. All the affection balked by death seemed to turn to his daughters, and he found full satisfaction for his heart in loving them. More or less brilliant proposals were made to him from time to time; wealthy merchants or farmers with daughters vied with each other in offering inducements to him to marry again; but he determined to remain a widower. His father-in-law, the only man for whom he felt a decided friendship, gave out that Goriot had made a vow to be faithful to his wife's memory. The frequenters of the Corn Exchange, who could not comprehend this sublime piece of folly, joked about it among themselves, and found a ridiculous nickname for him. One of them ventured (after a glass over a bargain) to call him by it, and a blow from the vermicelli maker's fist sent him headlong into a gutter in the Rue Oblin. He could think of nothing else when his children were concerned; his love for them made him fidgety and anxious; and this was so well known, that one day a competitor, who wished to get rid of him to secure the field to himself, told Goriot that Delphine had just been knocked down by a cab. The vermicelli maker turned ghastly pale, left the Exchange at once, and did not return for several days afterwards; he was ill in consequence of the shock and the subsequent relief on discovering that it was a false alarm. This time, however, the offender did not escape with a bruised shoulder; at a critical moment in the man's affairs, Goriot drove him into bankruptcy, and forced him to disappear from the Corn Exchange.

°°°°As might have been expected, the two girls were spoiled. With an income of sixty thousand francs, Goriot scarcely spent twelve hundred on himself, and found all his happiness in satisfying the whims of the two girls. The best masters were engaged, that Anastasie and Delphine might be endowed with all the accomplishments which distinguish a good education. They had a chaperon--luckily for them, she was a woman who had good sense and good taste;--they learned to ride; they had a carriage for their use; they lived as the mistress of a rich old lord might live; they had only to express a wish, their father would hasten to give them their most extravagant desires, and asked nothing of them in return but a kiss. Goriot had raised the two girls to the level of the angels; and, quite naturally, he himself was left beneath them. Poor man! he loved them even for the pain that they gave him.

°°°°When the girls were old enough to be married, they were left free to choose for themselves. Each had half her father's fortune as her dowry; and when the Comte de Restaud came to woo Anastasie for her beauty, her social aspirations led her to leave her father's house for a more exalted sphere. Delphine wished for money; she married Nucingen, a banker of German extraction, who became a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire. Goriot remained a vermicelli maker as before. His daughters and his sons-in-law began to demur; they did not like to see him still engaged in trade, though his whole life was bound up with his business. For five years he stood out against their entreaties, then he yielded, and consented to retire on the amount realized by the sale of his business and the savings of the last few years. It was this capital that Mme. Vauquer, in the early days of his residence with her, had calculated would bring in eight or ten thousand livres in a year. He had taken refuge in her lodging- house, driven there by despair when he knew that his daughters were compelled by their husbands not only to refuse to receive him as an inmate in their houses, but even to see him no more except in private.

°°°°This was all the information which Rastignac gained from a M. Muret who had purchased Goriot's business, information which confirmed the Duchesse de Langeais' suppositions, and herewith the preliminary explanation of this obscure but terrible Parisian tragedy comes to an end.

°°°°Towards the end of the first week in December Rastignac received two letters--one from his mother, and one from his eldest sister. His heart beat fast, half with happiness, half with fear, at the sight of the familiar handwriting. Those two little scraps of paper contained life or death for his hopes. But while he felt a shiver of dread as he remembered their dire poverty at home, he knew their love for him so well that he could not help fearing that he was draining their very life-blood. His mother's letter ran as follows:--

°°°°"My Dear Child,--I am sending you the money that you asked for. Make a good use of it. Even to save your life I could not raise so large a sum a second time without your father's knowledge, and there would be trouble about it. We should be obliged to mortgage the land. It is impossible to judge of the merits of schemes of which I am ignorant; but what sort of schemes can they be, that you should fear to tell me about them? Volumes of explanation would not have been needed; we mothers can understand at a word, and that word would have spared me the anguish of uncertainty. I do not know how to hide the painful impression that your letter has made upon me, my dear son. What can you have felt when you were moved to send this chill of dread through my heart? It must have been very painful to you to write the letter that gave me so much pain as I read it. To what courses are you committed? You are going to appear to be something that you are not, and your whole life and success depends upon this? You are about to see a society into which you cannot enter without rushing into expense that you cannot afford, without losing precious time that is needed for your studies. Ah! my dear Eugene, believe your mother, crooked ways cannot lead to great ends. Patience and endurance are the two qualities most needed in your position. I am not scolding you; I do not want any tinge of bitterness to spoil our offering. I am only talking like a mother whose trust in you is as great as her foresight for you. You know the steps that you must take, and I, for my part, know the purity of heart, and how good your intentions are; so I can say to you without a doubt, 'Go forward, beloved!' If I tremble, it is because I am a mother, but my prayers and blessings will be with you at every step. Be very careful, dear boy. You must have a man's prudence, for it lies with you to shape the destinies of five others who are dear to you, and must look to you. Yes, our fortunes depend upon you, and your success is ours. We all pray to God to be with you in all that you do. Your aunt Marcillac has been most generous beyond words in this matter; she saw at once how it was, even down to your gloves. 'But I have a weakness for the eldest!' she said gaily. You must love your aunt very much, dear Eugene. I shall wait till you have succeeded before telling you all that she has done for you, or her money would burn your fingers. You, who are young, do not know what it is to part with something that is a piece of your past! But what would we not sacrifice for your sakes? Your aunt says that I am to send you a kiss on the forehead from her, and that kiss is to bring you luck again and again, she says. She would have written you herself, the dear kind-hearted woman, but she is troubled with the gout in her fingers just now. Your father is very well. The vintage of 1819 has turned out better than we expected. Good-bye, dear boy; I will say nothing about your sisters, because Laure is writing to you, and I must let her have the pleasure of giving you all the home news. Heaven send that you may succeed! Oh! yes, dear Eugene, you must succeed. I have come, through you, to a knowledge of a pain so sharp that I do not think I could endure it a second time. I have come to know what it is to be poor, and to long for money for my children's sake. There, good-bye! Do not leave us for long without news of you; and here, at the last, take a kiss from your mother."

°°°°By the time Eugene had finished the letter he was in tears. He thought of Father Goriot crushing his silver keepsake into a shapeless mass before he sold it to meet his daughter's bill of exchange.

°°°°"Your mother has broken up her jewels for you," he said to himself; "your aunt shed tears over those relics of hers before she sold them for your sake. What right have you to heap execrations on Anastasie? You have followed her example; you have selfishly sacrificed others to your own future, and she sacrifices her father to her lover; and of you two, which is the worse?"

°°°°He was ready to renounce his attempts; he could not bear to take that money. The fires of remorse burned in his heart, and gave him intolerable pain, the generous secret remorse which men seldom take into account when they sit in judgment upon their fellow-men; but perhaps the angels in heaven, beholding it, pardon the criminal whom our justice condemns. Rastignac opened his sister's letter; its simplicity and kindness revived his heart.

°°°°"Your letter came just at the right time, dear brother. Agathe and I had thought of so many different ways of spending our money, that we did not know what to buy with it; and now you have come in, and, like the servant who upset all the watches that belonged to the King of Spain, you have restored harmony; for, really and truly, we did not know which of all the things we wanted we wanted most, and we were always quarreling about it, never thinking, dear Eugene, of a way of spending our money which would satisfy us completely. Agathe jumped for you. Indeed, we have been like two mad things all day, 'to such a prodigious degree' (as aunt would say), that mother said, with her severe expression, 'Whatever can be the matter with you, mesdemoiselles?' I think if we had been scolded a little, we should have been still better pleased. A woman ought to be very glad to suffer for one she loves! I, however, in my inmost soul, was doleful and cross in the midst of all my joy. I shall make a bad wife, I am afraid, I am too fond of spending. I had bought two sashes and a nice little stiletto for piercing eyelet-holes in my stays, trifles that I really did not want, so that I have less than that slow-coach Agathe, who is so economical, and hoards her money like a magpie. She had two hundred francs! And I have only one hundred and fifty! I am nicely punished; I could throw my sash down the well; it will be painful to me to wear it now. Poor dear, I have robbed you. And Agathe was so nice about it. She said, 'Let us send the three hundred and fifty francs in our two names!' But I could not help telling you everything just as it happened.

°°°°"Do you know how we managed to keep your commandments? We took our glittering hoard, we went out for a walk, and when once fairly on the highway we ran all the way to Ruffec, where we handed over the coin, without more ado, to M. Grimbert of the Messageries Royales. We came back again like swallows on the wing. 'Don't you think that happiness has made us lighter?' Agathe said. We said all sorts of things, which I shall not tell you, Monsieur le Parisien, because they were all about you. Oh, we love you dearly, dear brother; it was all summed up in those few words. As for keeping the secret, little masqueraders like us are capable of anything (according to our aunt), even of holding our tongues. Our mother has been on a mysterious journey to Angouleme, and the aunt went with her, not without solemn councils, from which we were shut out, and M. le Baron likewise. They are silent as to the weighty political considerations that prompted their mission, and conjectures are rife in the State of Rastignac. The Infantas are embroidering a muslin robe with open- work sprigs for her Majesty the Queen; the work progresses in the most profound secrecy. There be but two more breadths to finish. A decree has gone forth that no wall shall be built on the side of Verteuil, but that a hedge shall be planted instead thereof. Our subjects may sustain some disappointment of fruit and espaliers, but strangers will enjoy a fair prospect. Should the heir-presumptive lack pocket-handkerchiefs, be it known unto him that the dowager Lady of Marcillac, exploring the recesses of her drawers and boxes (known respectively as Pompeii and Herculaneum), having brought to light a fair piece of cambric whereof she wotted not, the Princesses Agathe and Laure place at their brother's disposal their thread, their needles, and hands somewhat of the reddest. The two young Princes, Don Henri and Don Gabriel, retain their fatal habits of stuffing themselves with grape-jelly, of teasing their sisters, of taking their pleasure by going a-bird-nesting, and of cutting switches for themselves from the osier-beds, maugre the laws of the realm. Moreover, they list not to learn naught, wherefore the Papal Nuncio (called of the commonalty, M. le Cure) threateneth them with excommunication, since that they neglect the sacred canons of grammatical construction for the construction of other canon, deadly engines made of the stems of elder.

°°°°"Farewell, dear brother, never did letter carry so many wishes for your success, so much love fully satisfied. You will have a great deal to tell us when you come home! You will tell me everything, won't you? I am the oldest. From something the aunt let fall, we think you must have had some success.

°°°°"Something was said of a lady, but nothing more was said . . .

°°°°"Of course not, in our family! Oh, by-the-by, Eugene, would you rather that we made that piece of cambric into shirts for you instead of pocket-handkerchiefs? If you want some really nice shirts at once, we ought to lose no time in beginning upon them; and if the fashion is different now in Paris, send us one for a pattern; we want more particularly to know about the cuffs. Good- bye! Good-bye! Take my kiss on the left side of your forehead, on the temple that belongs to me, and to no one else in the world. I am leaving the other side of the sheet for Agathe, who has solemnly promised not to read a word that I have written; but, all the same, I mean to sit by her side while she writes, so as to be quite sure that she keeps her word.--Your loving sister, "Laure de Rastignac."

°°°°"Yes!" said Eugene to himself. "Yes! Success at all costs now! Riches could not repay such devotion as this. I wish I could give them every sort of happiness! Fifteen hundred and fifty francs," he went on after a pause. "Every shot must go to the mark! Laure is right. Trust a woman! I have only calico shirts. Where some one else's welfare is concerned, a young girl becomes as ingenious as a thief. Guileless where she herself is in question, and full of foresight for me,--she is like a heavenly angel forgiving the strange incomprehensible sins of earth."

°°°°The world lay before him. His tailor had been summoned and sounded, and had finally surrendered. When Rastignac met M. de Trailles, he had seen at once how great a part the tailor plays in a young man's career; a tailor is either a deadly enemy or a staunch friend, with an invoice for a bond of friendship; between these two extremes there is, alack! no middle term. In this representative of his craft Eugene discovered a man who understood that his was a sort of paternal function for young men at their entrance into life, who regarded himself as a stepping- stone between a young man's present and future. And Rastignac in gratitude made the man's fortune by an epigram of a kind in which he excelled at a later period of his life.

°°°°"I have twice known a pair of trousers turned out by him make a match of twenty thousand livres a year!"

°°°°Fifteen hundred francs, and as many suits of clothes as he chose to order! At that moment the poor child of the South felt no more doubts of any kind. The young man went down to breakfast with the indefinable air which the consciousness of the possession of money gives to youth. No sooner are the coins slipped into a student's pocket than his wealth, in imagination at least, is piled into a fantastic column, which affords him a moral support. He begins to hold up his head as he walks; he is conscious that he has a means of bringing his powers to bear on a given point; he looks you straight in the face; his gestures are quick and decided; only yesterday he was diffident and shy, any one might have pushed him aside; to-morrow, he will take the wall of a prime minister. A miracle has been wrought in him. Nothing is beyond the reach of his ambition, and his ambition soars at random; he is light-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic; in short, the fledgling bird has discovered that he has wings. A poor student snatches at every chance pleasure much as a dog runs all sorts of risks to steal a bone, cracking it and sucking the marrow as he flies from pursuit; but a young man who can rattle a few runaway gold coins in his pocket can take his pleasure deliberately, can taste the whole of the sweets of secure possession; he soars far above earth; he has forgotten what the word POVERTY means; all Paris is his. Those are days when the whole world shines radiant with light, when everything glows and sparkles before the eyes of youth, days that bring joyous energy that is never brought into harness, days of debts and of painful fears that go hand in hand with every delight. Those who do not know the left bank of the Seine between the Rue Saint-Jacques and the Rue des Saints-Peres know nothing of life.

°°°°"Ah! if the women of Paris but knew," said Rastignac, as he devoured Mme. Vauquer's stewed pears (at five for a penny), "they would come here in search of a lover."

°°°°Just then a porter from the Messageries Royales appeared at the door of the room; they had previously heard the bell ring as the wicket opened to admit him. The man asked for M. Eugene de Rastignac, holding out two bags for him to take, and a form of receipt for his signature. Vautrin's keen glance cut Eugene like a lash.

°°°°"Now you will be able to pay for those fencing lessons and go to the shooting gallery," he said.

°°°°"Your ship has come in," said Mme. Vauquer, eyeing the bags.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau did not dare to look at the money, for fear her eyes should betray her cupidity.

°°°°"You have a kind mother," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"You have a kind mother, sir," echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, mamma has been drained dry," said Vautrin, "and now you can have your fling, go into society, and fish for heiresses, and dance with countesses who have peach blossom in their hair. But take my advice, young man, and don't neglect your pistol practice."

°°°°Vautrin struck an attitude, as if he were facing an antagonist. Rastignac, meaning to give the porter a tip, felt in his pockets and found nothing. Vautrin flung down a franc piece on the table.

°°°°"Your credit is good," he remarked, eyeing the student, and Rastignac was forced to thank him, though, since the sharp encounter of wits at dinner that day, after Eugene came in from calling on Mme. de Beauseant, he had made up his mind that Vautrin was insufferable. For a week, in fact, they had both kept silence in each other's presence, and watched each other. The student tried in vain to account to himself for this attitude.

°°°°An idea, of course, gains in force by the energy with which it is expressed; it strikes where the brain sends it, by a law as mathematically exact as the law that determines the course of a shell from a mortar. The amount of impression it makes is not to be determined so exactly. Sometimes, in an impressible nature, the idea works havoc, but there are, no less, natures so robustly protected, that this sort of projectile falls flat and harmless on skulls of triple brass, as cannon-shot against solid masonry; then there are flaccid and spongy-fibred natures into which ideas from without sink like spent bullets into the earthworks of a redoubt. Rastignac's head was something of the powder-magazine order; the least shock sufficed to bring about an explosion. He was too quick, too young, not to be readily accessible to ideas; and open to that subtle influence of thought and feeling in others which causes so many strange phenomena that make an impression upon us of which we are all unconscious at the time. Nothing escaped his mental vision; he was lynx-eyed; in him the mental powers of perception, which seem like duplicates of the senses, had the mysterious power of swift projection that astonishes us in intellects of a high order--slingers who are quick to detect the weak spot in any armor.

°°°°In the past month Eugene's good qualities and defects had rapidly developed with his character. Intercourse with the world and the endeavor to satisfy his growing desires had brought out his defects. But Rastignac came from the South side of the Loire, and had the good qualities of his countrymen. He had the impetuous courage of the South, that rushes to the attack of a difficulty, as well as the southern impatience of delay or suspense. These traits are held to be defects in the North; they made the fortune of Murat, but they likewise cut short his career. The moral would appear to be that when the dash and boldness of the South side of the Loire meets, in a southern temperament, with the guile of the North, the character is complete, and such a man will gain (and keep) the crown of Sweden.

°°°°Rastignac, therefore, could not stand the fire from Vautrin's batteries for long without discovering whether this was a friend or a foe. He felt as if this strange being was reading his inmost soul, and dissecting his feelings, while Vautrin himself was so close and secretive that he seemed to have something of the profound and unmoved serenity of a sphinx, seeing and hearing all things and saying nothing. Eugene, conscious of that money in his pocket, grew rebellious.

°°°°"Be so good as to wait a moment," he said to Vautrin, as the latter rose, after slowly emptying his coffee-cup, sip by sip.

°°°°"What for?" inquired the older man, as he put on his large- brimmed hat and took up the sword-cane that he was wont to twirl like a man who will face three or four footpads without flinching.

°°°°"I will repay you in a minute," returned Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he spoke, counted out a hundred and forty francs, and pushed them towards Mme. Vauquer. "Short reckonings make good friends" he added, turning to the widow; "that clears our accounts till the end of the year. Can you give me change for a five-franc piece?"

°°°°"Good friends make short reckonings," echoed Poiret, with a glance at Vautrin.

°°°°"Here is your franc," said Rastignac, holding out the coin to the sphinx in the black wig.

°°°°"Any one might think that you were afraid to owe me a trifle," exclaimed this latter, with a searching glance that seemed to read the young man's inmost thoughts; there was a satirical and cynical smile on Vautrin's face such as Eugene had seen scores of times already; every time he saw it, it exasperated him almost beyond endurance.

°°°°"Well . . . so I am," he answered. He held both the bags in his hand, and had risen to go up to his room.

°°°°Vautrin made as if he were going out through the sitting-room, and the student turned to go through the second door that opened into the square lobby at the foot of the staircase.

°°°°"Do you know, Monsieur le Marquis de Rastignacorama, that what you were saying just now was not exactly polite?" Vautrin remarked, as he rattled his sword-cane across the panels of the sitting-room door, and came up to the student.

°°°°Rastignac looked coolly at Vautrin, drew him to the foot of the staircase, and shut the dining-room door. They were standing in the little square lobby between the kitchen and the dining-room; the place was lighted by an iron-barred fanlight above a door that gave access into the garden. Sylvie came out of her kitchen, and Eugene chose that moment to say:

°°°°MONSIEUR Vautrin, I am not a marquis, and my name is not Rastignacorama."

°°°°"They will fight," said Mlle. Michonneau, in an indifferent tone.

°°°°"Fight!" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Not they," replied Mme. Vauquer, lovingly fingering her pile of coins.

°°°°"But there they are under the lime-trees," cried Mlle. Victorine, who had risen so that she might see out into the garden. "Poor young man! he was in the right, after all."

°°°°"We must go upstairs, my pet," said Mme. Couture; "it is no business of ours."

°°°°At the door, however, Mme. Couture and Victorine found their progress barred by the portly form of Sylvie the cook.

°°°°"What ever can have happened?" she said. "M. Vautrin said to M. Eugene, 'Let us have an explanation!' then he took him by the arm, and there they are, out among the artichokes."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking. "Mamma Vauquer," he said smiling, "don't frighten yourself at all. I am only going to try my pistols under the lime-trees."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur," cried Victorine, clasping her hands as she spoke, "why do you want to kill M. Eugene?"

°°°°Vautrin stepped back a pace or two, and gazed at Victorine.

°°°°"Oh! this is something fresh!" he exclaimed in a bantering tone, that brought the color into the poor girl's face. "That young fellow yonder is very nice, isn't he?" he went on. "You have given me a notion, my pretty child; I will make you both happy."

°°°°Mme. Couture laid her hand on the arm of her ward, and drew the girl away, as she said in her ear:

°°°°"Why, Victorine, I cannot imagine what has come over you this morning."

°°°°"I don't want any shots fired in my garden," said Mme. Vauquer. "You will frighten the neighborhood and bring the police up here all in a moment."

°°°°"Come, keep cool, Mamma Vauquer," answered Vautrin. "There, there; it's all right; we will go to the shooting-gallery."

°°°°He went back to Rastignac, laying his hand familiarly on the young man's arm.

°°°°"When I have given you ocular demonstration of the fact that I can put a bullet through the ace on a card five times running at thirty-five paces," he said, "that won't take away your appetite, I suppose? You look to me to be inclined to be a trifle quarrelsome this morning, and as if you would rush on your death like a blockhead."

°°°°"Do you draw back?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Don't try to raise my temperature," answered Vautrin, "it is not cold this morning. Let us go and sit over there," he added, pointing to the green-painted garden seats; "no one can overhear us. I want a little talk with you. You are not a bad sort of youngster, and I have no quarrel with you. I like you, take Trump--(confound it!)--take Vautrin's word for it. What makes me like you? I will tell you by-and-by. Meantime, I can tell you that I know you as well as if I had made you myself, as I will prove to you in a minute. Put down your bags," he continued, pointing to the round table.

°°°°Rastignac deposited his money on the table, and sat down. He was consumed with curiosity, which the sudden change in the manner of the man before him had excited to the highest pitch. Here was a strange being who, a moment ago, had talked of killing him, and now posed as his protector.

°°°°"You would like to know who I really am, what I was, and what I do now," Vautrin went on. "You want to know too much, youngster. Come! come! keep cool! You will hear more astonishing things than that. I have had my misfortunes. Just hear me out first, and you shall have your turn afterwards. Here is my past in three words. Who am I? Vautrin. What do I do? Just what I please. Let us change the subject. You want to know my character. I am good- natured to those who do me a good turn, or to those whose hearts speak to mine. These last may do anything they like with me; they may bruise my shins, and I shall not tell them to 'mind what they are about'; but, nom d'une pipe, the devil himself is not an uglier customer than I can be if people annoy me, or if I don't happen to take to them; and you may just as well know at once that I think no more of killing a man than of that," and he spat before him as he spoke. "Only when it is absolutely necessary to do so, I do my best to kill him properly. I am what you call an artist. I have read Benvenuto Cellini's Memoirs, such as you see me; and, what is more, in Italian: A fine-spirited fellow he was! From him I learned to follow the example set us by Providence, who strikes us down at random, and to admire the beautiful whenever and wherever it is found. And, setting other questions aside, is it not a glorious part to play, when you pit yourself against mankind, and the luck is on your side? I have thought a good deal about the constitution of your present social Dis- order. A duel is downright childish, my boy! utter nonsense and folly! When one of two living men must be got out of the way, none but an idiot would leave chance to decide which it is to be; and in a duel it is a toss-up--heads or tails--and there you are! Now I, for instance, can hit the ace in the middle of a card five times running, send one bullet after another through the same hole, and at thirty-five paces, moreover! With that little accomplishment you might think yourself certain of killing your man, mightn't you. Well, I have fired, at twenty paces, and missed, and the rogue who had never handled a pistol in his life-- look here!"--(he unbuttoned his waistcoat and exposed his chest, covered, like a bear's back, with a shaggy fell; the student gave a startled shudder)--"he was a raw lad, but he made his mark on me," the extraordinary man went on, drawing Rastignac's fingers over a deep scar on his breast. But that happened when I myself was a mere boy; I was one-and-twenty then (your age), and I had some beliefs left--in a woman's love, and in a pack of rubbish that you will be over head and ears in directly. You and I were to have fought just now, weren't we? You might have killed me. Suppose that I were put under the earth, where would you be? You would have to clear out of this, go to Switzerland, draw on papa's purse--and he has none too much in it as it is. I mean to open your eyes to your real position, that is what I am going to do: but I shall do it from the point of view of a man who, after studying the world very closely, sees that there are but two alternatives--stupid obedience or revolt. I obey nobody; is that clear? Now, do you know how much you will want at the pace you are going? A million; and promptly, too, or that little head of ours will be swaying to and fro in the drag-nets at Saint-Cloud, while we are gone to find out whether or no there is a Supreme Being. I will put you in the way of that million."

°°°°He stopped for a moment and looked at Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! you do not look so sourly at papa Vautrin now! At the mention of the million you look like a young girl when somebody has said, 'I will come for you this evening!' and she betakes herself to her toilette as a cat licks its whiskers over a saucer of milk. All right. Come, now, let us go into the question, young man; all between ourselves, you know. We have a papa and mamma down yonder, a great-aunt, two sisters (aged eighteen and seventeen), two young brothers (one fifteen, and the other ten), that is about the roll-call of the crew. The aunt brings up the two sisters; the cure comes and teaches the boys Latin. Boiled chestnuts are oftener on the table than white bread. Papa makes a suit of clothes last a long while; if mamma has a different dress winter and summer, it is about as much as she has; the sisters manage as best they can. I know all about it; I have lived in the south.

°°°°"That is how things are at home. They send you twelve hundred francs a year, and the whole property only brings in three thousand francs all told. We have a cook and a manservant; papa is a baron, and we must keep up appearances. Then we have our ambitions; we are connected with the Beauseants, and we go afoot through the streets; we want to be rich, and we have not a penny; we eat Mme. Vauquer's messes, and we like grand dinners in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; we sleep on a truckle-bed, and dream of a mansion! I do not blame you for wanting these things. What sort of men do the women run after? Men of ambition. Men of ambition have stronger frames, their blood is richer in iron, their hearts are warmer than those of ordinary men. Women feel that when their power is greatest, they look their best, and that those are their happiest hours; they like power in men, and prefer the strongest even if it is a power that may be their own destruction. I am going to make an inventory of your desires in order to put the question at issue before you. Here it is:--

°°°°"We are as hungry as a wolf, and those newly-cut teeth of ours are sharp; what are we to do to keep the pot boiling? In the first place, we have the Code to browse upon; it is not amusing, and we are none the wiser for it, but that cannot be helped. So far so good. We mean to make an advocate of ourselves with a prospect of one day being made President of a Court of Assize, when we shall send poor devils, our betters, to the galleys with a T.F.* [*Travaux forces.] on their shoulders, so that the rich may be convinced that they can sleep in peace. There is no fun in that; and you are a long while coming to it; for, to begin with, there are two years of nauseous drudgery in Paris, we see all the lollipops that we long for out of our reach. It is tiresome to want things and never to have them. If you were a pallid creature of the mollusk order, you would have nothing to fear, but it is different when you have the hot blood of a lion and are ready to get into a score of scrapes every day of your life. This is the ghastliest form of torture known in this inferno of God's making, and you will give in to it. Or suppose that you are a good boy, drink nothing stronger than milk, and bemoan your hard lot; you, with your generous nature, will endure hardships that would drive a dog mad, and make a start, after long waiting, as deputy to some rascal or other in a hole of a place where the Government will fling you a thousand francs a year like the scraps that are thrown to the butcher's dog. Bark at thieves, plead the cause of the rich, send men of heart to the guillotine, that is your work! Many thanks! If you have no influence, you may rot in your provincial tribunal. At thirty you will be a Justice with twelve hundred francs a year (if you have not flung off the gown for good before then). By the time you are forty you may look to marry a miller's daughter, an heiress with some six thousand livres a year. Much obliged! If you have influence, you may possibly be a Public Prosecutor by the time you are thirty; with a salary of a thousand crowns, you could look to marry the mayor's daughter. Some petty piece of political trickery, such as mistaking Villele for Manuel in a bulletin (the names rhyme, and that quiets your conscience), and you will probably be a Procureur General by the time you are forty, with a chance of becoming a deputy. Please to observe, my dear boy, that our conscience will have been a little damaged in the process, and that we shall endure twenty years of drudgery and hidden poverty, and that our sisters are wearing Dian's livery. I have the honor to call your attention to another fact: to wit, that there are but twenty Procureurs Generaux at a time in all France, while there are some twenty thousand of you young men who aspire to that elevated position; that there are some mountebanks among you who would sell their family to screw their fortunes a peg higher. If this sort of thing sickens you, try another course. The Baron de Rastignac thinks of becoming an advocate, does he? There's a nice prospect for you! Ten years of drudgery straight away. You are obliged to live at the rate of a thousand francs a month; you must have a library of law books, live in chambers, go into society, go down on your knees to ask a solicitor for briefs, lick the dust off the floor of the Palais de Justice. If this kind of business led to anything, I should not say no; but just give me the names of five advocates here in Paris who by the time that they are fifty are making fifty thousand francs a year! Bah! I would sooner turn pirate on the high seas than have my soul shrivel up inside me like that. How will you find the capital? There is but one way, marry a woman who has money. There is no fun in it. Have you a mind to marry? You hang a stone around your neck; for if you marry for money, what becomes of our exalted notions of honor and so forth? You might as well fly in the face of social conventions at once. Is it nothing to crawl like a serpent before your wife, to lick her mother's feet, to descend to dirty actions that would sicken swine--faugh!--never mind if you at least make your fortune. But you will be as doleful as a dripstone if you marry for money. It is better to wrestle with men than to wrangle at home with your wife. You are at the crossway of the roads of life, my boy; choose your way.

°°°°"But you have chosen already. You have gone to see your cousin of Beauseant, and you have had an inkling of luxury; you have been to Mme. de Restaud's house, and in Father Goriot's daughter you have seen a glimpse of the Parisienne for the first time. That day you came back with a word written on your forehead. I knew it, I could read it--'SUCCESS!' Yes, success at any price. 'Bravo,' said I to myself, 'here is the sort of fellow for me.' You wanted money. Where was it all to come from? You have drained your sisters' little hoard (all brothers sponge more or less on their sisters). Those fifteen hundred francs of yours (got together, God knows how! in a country where there are more chestnuts than five-franc pieces) will slip away like soldiers after pillage. And, then, what will you do? Shall you begin to work? Work, or what you understand by work at this moment, means, for a man of Poiret's calibre, an old age in Mamma Vauquer's lodging-house. There are fifty thousand young men in your position at this moment, all bent as you are on solving one and the same problem--how to acquire a fortune rapidly. You are but a unit in that aggregate. You can guess, therefore, what efforts you must make, how desperate the struggle is. There are not fifty thousand good positions for you; you must fight and devour one another like spiders in a pot. Do you know how a man makes his way here? By brilliant genius or by skilful corruption. You must either cut your way through these masses of men like a cannon ball, or steal among them like a plague. Honesty is nothing to the purpose. Men bow before the power of genius; they hate it, and try to slander it, because genius does not divide the spoil; but if genius persists, they bow before it. To sum it all up in a phrase, if they fail to smother genius in the mud, they fall on their knees and worship it. Corruption is a great power in the world, and talent is scarce. So corruption is the weapon of superfluous mediocrity; you will be made to feel the point of it everywhere. You will see women who spend more than ten thousand francs a year on dress, while their husband's salary (his whole income) is six thousand francs. You will see officials buying estates on twelve thousand francs a year. You will see women who sell themselves body and soul to drive in a carriage belonging to the son of a peer of France, who has a right to drive in the middle rank at Longchamp. You have seen that poor simpleton of a Goriot obliged to meet a bill with his daughter's name at the back of it, though her husband has fifty thousand francs a year. I defy you to walk a couple of yards anywhere in Paris without stumbling on some infernal complication. I'll bet my head to a head of that salad that you will stir up a hornet's nest by taking a fancy to the first young, rich, and pretty woman you meet. They are all dodging the law, all at loggerheads with their husbands. If I were to begin to tell you all that vanity or necessity (virtue is not often mixed up in it, you may be sure), all that vanity and necessity drive them to do for lovers, finery, housekeeping, or children, I should never come to an end. So an honest man is the common enemy.

°°°°"But do you know what an honest man is? Here, in Paris, an honest man is the man who keeps his own counsel, and will not divide the plunder. I am not speaking now of those poor bond-slaves who do the work of the world without a reward for their toil--God Almighty's outcasts, I call them. Among them, I grant you, is virtue in all the flower of its stupidity, but poverty is no less their portion. At this moment, I think I see the long faces those good folk would pull if God played a practical joke on them and stayed away at the Last Judgment.

°°°°"Well, then, if you mean to make a fortune quickly, you must either be rich to begin with, or make people believe that you are rich. It is no use playing here except for high stakes; once take to low play, it is all up with you. If in the scores of professions that are open to you, there are ten men who rise very rapidly, people are sure to call them thieves. You can draw your own conclusions. Such is life. It is no cleaner than a kitchen; it reeks like a kitchen; and if you mean to cook your dinner, you must expect to soil your hands; the real art is in getting them clean again, and therein lies the whole morality of our epoch. If I take this tone in speaking of the world to you, I have the right to do so; I know it well. Do you think that I am blaming it? Far from it; the world has always been as it is now. Moralists' strictures will never change it. Mankind are not perfect, but one age is more or less hypocritical than another, and then simpletons say that its morality is high or low. I do not think that the rich are any worse than the poor; man is much the same, high or low, or wherever he is. In a million of these human cattle there may be half a score of bold spirits who rise above the rest, above the laws; I am one of them. And you, if you are cleverer than your fellows, make straight to your end, and hold your head high. But you must lay your account with envy and slander and mediocrity, and every man's hand will be against you. Napoleon met with a Minister of War, Aubry by name, who all but sent him to the colonies.

°°°°"Feel your pulse. Think whether you can get up morning after morning, strengthened in yesterday's purpose. In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline. Listen attentively. You see, I have an idea of my own. My idea is to live a patriarchal life on a vast estate, say a hundred thousand acres, somewhere in the Southern States of America. I mean to be a planter, to have slaves, to make a few snug millions by selling my cattle, timber, and tobacco; I want to live an absolute monarch, and to do just as I please; to lead such a life as no one here in these squalid dens of lath and plaster ever imagines. I am a great poet; I do not write my poems, I feel them, and act them. At this moment I have fifty thousand francs, which might possibly buy forty negroes. I want two hundred thousand francs, because I want to have two hundred negroes to carry out my notions of the patriarachal life properly. Negroes, you see, are like a sort of family ready grown, and there are no inquisitive public prosecutors out there to interfere with you. That investment in ebony ought to mean three or four million francs in ten years' time. If I am successful, no one will ask me who I am. I shall be Mr. Four Millions, an American citizen. I shall be fifty years old by then, and sound and hearty still; I shall enjoy life after my own fashion. In two words, if I find you an heiress with a million, will you give me two hundred thousand francs? Twenty per cent commission, eh? Is that too much? Your little wife will be very much in love with you. Once married, you will show signs of uneasiness and remorse; for a couple of weeks you will be depressed. Then, some night after sundry grimacings, comes the confession, between two kisses, 'Two hundred thousand francs of debts, my darling!' This sort of farce is played every day in Paris, and by young men of the highest fashion. When a young wife has given her heart, she will not refuse her purse. Perhaps you are thinking that you will lose the money for good? Not you. You will make two hundred thousand francs again by some stroke of business. With your capital and your brains you should be able to accumulate as large a fortune as you could wish. ERGO, in six months you will have made your own fortune, and our old friend Vautrin's, and made an amiable woman very happy, to say nothing of your people at home, who must blow on their fingers to warm them, in the winter, for lack of firewood. You need not be surprised at my proposal, nor at the demand I make. Forty-seven out of every sixty great matches here in Paris are made after just such a bargain as this. The Chamber of Notaries compels my gentleman to----"

°°°°"What must I do?" said Rastignac, eagerly interrupting Vautrin's speech.

°°°°"Next to nothing," returned the other, with a slight involuntary movement, the suppressed exultation of the angler when he feels a bite at the end of his line. "Follow me carefully! The heart of a girl whose life is wretched and unhappy is a sponge that will thirstily absorb love; a dry sponge that swells at the first drop of sentiment. If you pay court to a young girl whose existence is a compound of loneliness, despair, and poverty, and who has no suspicion that she will come into a fortune, good Lord! it is quint and quatorze at piquet; it is knowing the numbers of the lottery before-hand; it is speculating in the funds when you have news from a sure source; it is building up a marriage on an indestructible foundation. The girl may come in for millions, and she will fling them, as if they were so many pebbles, at your feet. 'Take it, my beloved! Take it, Alfred, Adolphe, Eugene!' or whoever it was that showed his sense by sacrificing himself for her. And as for sacrificing himself, this is how I understand it. You sell a coat that is getting shabby, so that you can take her to the Cadran bleu, treat her to mushrooms on toast, and then go to the Ambigu-Comique in the evening; you pawn your watch to buy her a shawl. I need not remind you of the fiddle-faddle sentimentality that goes down so well with all women; you spill a few drops of water on your stationery, for instance; those are the tears you shed while far away from her. You look to me as if you were perfectly acquainted with the argot of the heart. Paris, you see, is like a forest in the New World, where you have to deal with a score of varieties of savages--Illinois and Hurons, who live on the proceed of their social hunting. You are a hunter of millions; you set your snares; you use lures and nets; there are many ways of hunting. Some hunt heiresses, others a legacy; some fish for souls, yet others sell their clients, bound hand and foot. Every one who comes back from the chase with his game- bag well filled meets with a warm welcome in good society. In justice to this hospitable part of the world, it must be said that you have to do with the most easy and good-natured of great cities. If the proud aristocracies of the rest of Europe refuse admittance among their ranks to a disreputable millionaire, Paris stretches out a hand to him, goes to his banquets, eats his dinners, and hobnobs with his infamy."

°°°°"But where is such a girl to be found?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Under your eyes; she is yours already."

°°°°"Mlle. Victorine?"

°°°°"Precisely."

°°°°"And what was that you said?"

°°°°"She is in love with you already, your little Baronne de Rastignac!"

°°°°"She has not a penny," Eugene continued, much mystified.

°°°°"Ah! now we are coming to it! Just another word or two, and it will all be clear enough. Her father, Taillefer, is an old scoundrel; it is said that he murdered one of his friends at the time of the Revolution. He is one of your comedians that sets up to have opinions of his own. He is a banker--senior partner in the house of Frederic Taillefer and Company. He has one son, and means to leave all he has to the boy, to the prejudice of Victorine. For my part, I don't like to see injustice of this sort. I am like Don Quixote, I have a fancy for defending the weak against the strong. If it should please God to take that youth away from him, Taillefer would have only his daughter left; he would want to leave his money to some one or other; an absurd notion, but it is only human nature, and he is not likely to have any more children, as I know. Victorine is gentle and amiable; she will soon twist her father round her fingers, and set his head spinning like a German top by plying him with sentiment! She will be too much touched by your devotion to forget you; you will marry her. I mean to play Providence for you, and Providence is to do my will. I have a friend whom I have attached closely to myself, a colonel in the Army of the Loire, who has just been transferred into the garde royale. He has taken my advice and turned ultra-royalist; he is not one of those fools who never change their opinions. Of all pieces of advice, my cherub, I would give you this--don't stick to your opinions any more than to your words. If any one asks you for them, let him have them-- at a price. A man who prides himself on going in a straight line through life is an idiot who believes in infallibility. There are no such things as principles; there are only events, and there are no laws but those of expediency: a man of talent accepts events and the circumstances in which he finds himself, and turns everything to his own ends. If laws and principles were fixed and invariable, nations would not change them as readily as we change our shirts. The individual is not obliged to be more particular than the nation. A man whose services to France have been of the very slightest is a fetich looked on with superstitious awe because he has always seen everything in red; but he is good, at the most, to be put into the Museum of Arts and Crafts, among the automatic machines, and labeled La Fayette; while the prince at whom everybody flings a stone, the man who despises humanity so much that he spits as many oaths as he is asked for in the face of humanity, saved France from being torn in pieces at the Congress of Vienna; and they who should have given him laurels fling mud at him. Oh! I know something of affairs, I can tell you; I have the secrets of many men! Enough. When I find three minds in agreement as to the application of a principle, I shall have a fixed and immovable opinion--I shall have to wait a long while first. In the Tribunals you will not find three judges of the same opinion on a single point of law. To return to the man I was telling you of. He would crucify Jesus Christ again, if I bade him. At a word from his old chum Vautrin he will pick a quarrel with a scamp that will not send so much as five francs to his sister, poor girl, and" (here Vautrin rose to his feet and stood like a fencing-master about to lunge)--"turn him off into the dark!" he added.

°°°°"How frightful!" said Eugene. "You do not really mean it? M. Vautrin, you are joking!"

°°°°"There! there! Keep cool!" said the other. "Don't behave like a baby. But if you find any amusement in it, be indignant, flare up! Say that I am a scoundrel, a rascal, a rogue, a bandit; but do not call me a blackleg nor a spy! There, out with it, fire away! I forgive you; it is quite natural at your age. I was like that myself once. Only remember this, you will do worse things yourself some day. You will flirt with some pretty woman and take her money. You have thought of that, of course," said Vautrin, "for how are you to succeed unless love is laid under contribution? There are no two ways about virtue, my dear student; it either is, or it is not. Talk of doing penance for your sins! It is a nice system of business, when you pay for your crime by an act of contrition! You seduce a woman that you may set your foot on such and such a rung of the social ladder; you sow dissension among the children of a family; you descend, in short, to every base action that can be committed at home or abroad, to gain your own ends for your own pleasure or your profit; and can you imagine that these are acts of faith, hope, or charity? How is it that a dandy, who in a night has robbed a boy of half his fortune, gets only a couple of months in prison; while a poor devil who steals a banknote for a thousand francs, with aggravating circumstances, is condemned to penal servitude? Those are your laws. Not a single provision but lands you in some absurdity. That man with yellow gloves and a golden tongue commits many a murder; he sheds no blood, but he drains his victim's veins as surely; a desperado forces open a door with a crowbar, dark deeds both of them! You yourself will do every one of those things that I suggest to you to-day, bar the bloodshed. Do you believe that there is any absolute standard in this world? Despise mankind and find out the meshes that you can slip through in the net of the Code. The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out, because it was properly executed."

°°°°"Silence, sir! I will not hear any more; you make me doubt myself. At this moment my sentiments are all my science."

°°°°"Just as you please, my fine fellow; I did think you were so weak-minded," said Vautrin, "I shall say no more about it. One last word, however," and he looked hard at the student--"you have my secret," he said.

°°°°"A young man who refuses your offer knows that he must forget it."

°°°°"Quite right, quite right; I am glad to hear you say so. Somebody else might not be so scrupulous, you see. Keep in mind what I want to do for you. I will give you a fortnight. The offer is still open."

°°°°"What a head of iron the man has!" said Eugene to himself, as he watched Vautrin walk unconcernedly away with his cane under his arm. "Yet Mme. de Beauseant said as much more gracefully; he has only stated the case in cruder language. He would tear my heart with claws of steel. What made me think of going to Mme. de Nucingen? He guessed my motives before I knew them myself. To sum it up, that outlaw has told me more about virtue than all I have learned from men and books. If virtue admits of no compromises, I have certainly robbed my sisters," he said, throwing down the bags on the table.

°°°°He sat down again and fell, unconscious of his surroundings, into deep thought.

°°°°"To be faithful to an ideal of virtue! A heroic martyrdom! Pshaw! every one believes in virtue, but who is virtuous? Nations have made an idol of Liberty, but what nation on the face of the earth is free? My youth is still like a blue and cloudless sky. If I set myself to obtain wealth or power, does it mean that I must make up my mind to lie, and fawn, and cringe, and swagger, and flatter, and dissemble? To consent to be the servant of others who have likewise fawned, and lied, and flattered? Must I cringe to them before I can hope to be their accomplice? Well, then, I decline. I mean to work nobly and with a single heart. I will work day and night; I will owe my fortune to nothing but my own exertions. It may be the slowest of all roads to success, but I shall lay my head on the pillow at night untroubled by evil thoughts. Is there a greater thing than this--to look back over your life and know that it is stainless as a lily? I and my life are like a young man and his betrothed. Vautrin has put before me all that comes after ten years of marriage. The devil! my head is swimming. I do not want to think at all; the heart is a sure guide."

°°°°Eugene was roused from his musings by the voice of the stout Sylvie, who announced that the tailor had come, and Eugene therefore made his appearance before the man with the two money bags, and was not ill pleased that it should be so. When he had tried on his dress suit, he put on his new morning costume, which completely metamorphosed him.

°°°°"I am quite equal to M. de Trailles," he said to himself. "In short, I look like a gentleman."

°°°°"You asked me, sir, if I knew the houses where Mme. de Nucingen goes," Father Goriot's voice spoke from the doorway of Eugene's room."

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Very well then, she is going to the Marechale Carigliano's ball on Monday. If you can manage to be there, I shall hear from you whether my two girls enjoyed themselves, and how they were dressed, and all about it in fact."

°°°°"How did you find that out, my good Goriot?" said Eugene, putting a chair by the fire for his visitor.

°°°°"Her maid told me. I hear all about their doings from Therese and Constance," he added gleefully.

°°°°The old man looked like a lover who is still young enough to be made happy by the discovery of some little stratagem which brings him information of his lady-love without her knowledge.

°°°°"YOU will see them both!" he said, giving artless expression to a pang of jealousy.

°°°°"I do not know," answered Eugene. "I will go to Mme. de Beauseant and ask her for an introduction to the Marechale."

°°°°Eugene felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought of appearing before the Vicomtesse, dressed as henceforward he always meant to be. The "abysses of the human heart," in the moralists' phrase, are only insidious thoughts, involuntary promptings of personal interest. The instinct of enjoyment turns the scale; those rapid changes of purpose which have furnished the text for so much rhetoric are calculations prompted by the hope of pleasure. Rastignac beholding himself well dressed and impeccable as to gloves and boots, forgot his virtuous resolutions. Youth, moreover, when bent upon wrongdoing does not dare to behold himself in the mirror of consciousness; mature age has seen itself; and therein lies the whole difference between these two phases of life.

°°°°A friendship between Eugene and his neighbor, Father Goriot, had been growing up for several days past. This secret friendship and the antipathy that the student had begun to entertain for Vautrin arose from the same psychological causes. The bold philosopher who shall investigate the effects of mental action upon the physical world will doubtless find more than one proof of the material nature of our sentiments in other animals. What physiognomist is as quick to discern character as a dog is to discover from a stranger's face whether this is a friend or no? Those by-words--"atoms," "affinities"--are facts surviving in modern languages for the confusion of philosophic wiseacres who amuse themselves by winnowing the chaff of language to find its grammatical roots. We FEEL that we are loved. Our sentiments make themselves felt in everything, even at a great distance. A letter is a living soul, and so faithful an echo of the voice that speaks in it, that finer natures look upon a letter as one of love's most precious treasures. Father Goriot's affection was of the instinctive order, a canine affection raised to a sublime pitch; he had scented compassion in the air, and the kindly respect and youthful sympathy in the student's heart. This friendship had, however, scarcely reached the stage at which confidences are made. Though Eugene had spoken of his wish to meet Mme. de Nucingen, it was not because he counted on the old man to introduce him to her house, for he hoped that his own audacity might stand him in good stead. All that Father Goriot had said as yet about his daughters had referred to the remarks that the student had made so freely in public on that day of the two visits.

°°°°"How could you think that Mme. de Restaud bore you a grudge for mentioning my name?" he had said on the day following that scene at dinner. "My daughters are very fond of me; I am a happy father; but my sons-in-law have behaved badly to me, and rather than make trouble between my darlings and their husbands, I choose to see my daughters secretly. Fathers who can see their daughters at any time have no idea of all the pleasure that all this mystery gives me; I cannot always see mine when I wish, do you understand? So when it is fine I walk out in the Champs- Elysees, after finding out from their waiting-maids whether my daughters mean to go out. I wait near the entrance; my heart beats fast when the carriages begin to come; I admire them in their dresses, and as they pass they give me a little smile, and it seems as if everything was lighted up for me by a ray of bright sunlight. I wait, for they always go back the same way, and then I see them again; the fresh air has done them good and brought color into their cheeks; all about me people say, 'What a beautiful woman that is!' and it does my heart good to hear them.

°°°°"Are they not my own flesh and blood? I love the very horses that draw them; I envy the little lap-dog on their knees. Their happiness is my life. Every one loves after his own fashion, and mine does no one any harm; why should people trouble their heads about me? I am happy in my own way. Is there any law against going to see my girls in the evening when they are going out to a ball? And what a disappointment it is when I get there too late, and am told that 'Madame has gone out!' Once I waited till three o'clock in the morning for Nasie; I had not seen her for two whole days. I was so pleased, that it was almost too much for me! Please do not speak of me unless it is to say how good my daughters are to me. They are always wanting to heap presents upon me, but I will not have it. 'Just keep your money,' I tell them. 'What should I do with it? I want nothing.' And what am I, sir, after all? An old carcase, whose soul is always where my daughters are. When you have seen Mme. de Nucingen, tell me which you like the most," said the old man after a moment's pause, while Eugene put the last touches to his toilette. The student was about to go out to walk in the Garden of the Tuileries until the hour when he could venture to appear in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room.

°°°°That walk was a turning-point in Eugene's career. Several women noticed him; he looked so handsome, so young, and so well dressed. This almost admiring attention gave a new turn to his thoughts. He forgot his sisters and the aunt who had robbed herself for him; he no longer remembered his own virtuous scruples. He had seen hovering above his head the fiend so easy to mistake for an angel, the Devil with rainbow wings, who scatters rubies, and aims his golden shafts at palace fronts, who invests women with purple, and thrones with a glory that dazzles the eyes of fools till they forget the simple origins of royal dominion; he had heard the rustle of that Vanity whose tinsel seems to us to be the symbol of power. However cynical Vautrin's words had been, they had made an impression on his mind, as the sordid features of the old crone who whispers, "A lover, and gold in torrents," remain engraven on a young girl's memory.

°°°°Eugene lounged about the walks till it was nearly five o'clock, then he went to Mme. de Beauseant, and received one of the terrible blows against which young hearts are defenceless. Hitherto the Vicomtesse had received him with the kindly urbanity, the bland grace of manner that is the result of fine breeding, but is only complete when it comes from the heart.

°°°°Today Mme. de Beauseant bowed constrainedly, and spoke curtly:

°°°°"M. de Rastignac, I cannot possibly see you, at least not at this moment. I am engaged . . ."

°°°°An observer, and Rastignac instantly became an observer, could read the whole history, the character and customs of caste, in the phrase, in the tones of her voice, in her glance and bearing. He caught a glimpse of the iron hand beneath the velvet glove-- the personality, the egoism beneath the manner, the wood beneath the varnish. In short, he heard that unmistakable I THE KING that issues from the plumed canopy of the throne, and finds its last echo under the crest of the simplest gentleman.

°°°°Eugene had trusted too implicitly to the generosity of a woman; he could not believe in her haughtiness. Like all the unfortunate, he had subscribed, in all good faith, the generous compact which should bind the benefactor to the recipient, and the first article in that bond, between two large-hearted natures, is a perfect equality. The kindness which knits two souls together is as rare, as divine, and as little understood as the passion of love, for both love and kindness are the lavish generosity of noble natures. Rastignac was set upon going to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball, so he swallowed down this rebuff.

°°°°"Madame," he faltered out, "I would not have come to trouble you about a trifling matter; be so kind as to permit me to see you later, I can wait."

°°°°"Very well, come and dine with me," she said, a little confused by the harsh way in which she had spoken, for this lady was as genuinely kind-hearted as she was high-born.

°°°°Eugene was touched by this sudden relenting, but none the less he said to himself as he went away, "Crawl in the dust, put up with every kind of treatment. What must the rest of the world be like when one of the kindest of women forgets all her promises of befriending me in a moment, and tosses me aside like an old shoe? So it is every one for himself? It is true that her house is not a shop, and I have put myself in the wrong by needing her help. You should cut your way through the world like a cannon ball, as Vautrin said."

°°°°But the student's bitter thoughts were soon dissipated by the pleasure which he promised himself in this dinner with the Vicomtesse. Fate seemed to determine that the smallest accidents in his life should combine to urge him into a career, which the terrible sphinx of the Maison Vauquer had described as a field of battle where you must either slay or be slain, and cheat to avoid being cheated. You leave your conscience and your heart at the barriers, and wear a mask on entering into this game of grim earnest, where, as in ancient Sparta, you must snatch your prize without being detected if you would deserve the crown.

°°°°On his return he found the Vicomtesse gracious and kindly, as she had always been to him. They went together to the dining-room, where the Vicomte was waiting for his wife. In the time of the Restoration the luxury of the table was carried, as is well known, to the highest degree, and M. de Beauseant, like many jaded men of the world, had few pleasures left but those of good cheer; in this matter, in fact, he was a gourmand of the schools of Louis XVIII. and of the Duc d'Escars, and luxury was supplemented by splendor. Eugene, dining for the first time in a house where the traditions of grandeur had descended through many generations, had never seen any spectacle like this that now met his eyes. In the time of the Empire, balls had always ended with a supper, because the officers who took part in them must be fortified for immediate service, and even in Paris might be called upon to leave the ballroom for the battlefield. This arrangement had gone out of fashion under the Monarchy, and Eugene had so far only been asked to dances. The self-possession which pre-eminently distinguished him in later life already stood him in good stead, and he did not betray his amazement. Yet as he saw for the first time the finely wrought silver plate, the completeness of every detail, the sumptuous dinner, noiselessly served, it was difficult for such an ardent imagination not to prefer this life of studied and refined luxury to the hardships of the life which he had chosen only that morning.

°°°°His thoughts went back for a moment to the lodging-house, and with a feeling of profound loathing, he vowed to himself that at New Year he would go; prompted at least as much by a desire to live among cleaner surroundings as by a wish to shake off Vautrin, whose huge hand he seemed to feel on his shoulder at that moment. When you consider the numberless forms, clamorous or mute, that corruption takes in Paris, common-sense begins to wonder what mental aberration prompted the State to establish great colleges and schools there, and assemble young men in the capital; how it is that pretty women are respected, or that the gold coin displayed in the money-changer's wooden saucers does not take to itself wings in the twinkling of an eye; and when you come to think further, how comparatively few cases of crime there are, and to count up the misdemeanors committed by youth, is there not a certain amount of respect due to these patient Tantaluses who wrestle with themselves and nearly always come off victorious? The struggles of the poor student in Paris, if skilfully drawn, would furnish a most dramatic picture of modern civilization.

°°°°In vain Mme. de Beauseant looked at Eugene as if asking him to speak; the student was tongue-tied in the Vicomte's presence.

°°°°"Are you going to take me to the Italiens this evening?" the Vicomtesse asked her husband.

°°°°"You cannot doubt that I should obey you with pleasure," he answered, and there was a sarcastic tinge in his politeness which Eugene did not detect, "but I ought to go to meet some one at the Varietes."

°°°°"His mistress," said she to herself.

°°°°"Then, is not Ajuda coming for you this evening?" inquired the Vicomte.

°°°°"No," she answered, petulantly.

°°°°"Very well, then, if you really must have an arm, take that of M. de Rastignac."

°°°°The Vicomtess turned to Eugene with a smile.

°°°°"That would be a very compromising step for you," she said.

°°°°" 'A Frenchman loves danger, because in danger there is glory,' to quote M. de Chateaubriand," said Rastignac, with a bow.

°°°°A few moments later he was sitting beside Mme. de Beauseant in a brougham, that whirled them through the streets of Paris to a fashionable theatre. It seemed to him that some fairy magic had suddenly transported him into a box facing the stage. All the lorgnettes of the house were pointed at him as he entered, and at the Vicomtesse in her charming toilette. He went from enchantment to enchantment.

°°°°"You must talk to me, you know," said Mme. de Beauseant. "Ah! look! There is Mme. de Nucingen in the third box from ours. Her sister and M. de Trailles are on the other side."

°°°°The Vicomtesse glanced as she spoke at the box where Mlle. de Rochefide should have been; M. d'Ajuda was not there, and Mme. de Beauseant's face lighted up in a marvelous way.

°°°°"She is charming," said Eugene, after looking at Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"She has white eyelashes."

°°°°"Yes, but she has such a pretty slender figure!"

°°°°"Her hands are large."

°°°°"Such beautiful eyes!"

°°°°"Her face is long."

°°°°"Yes, but length gives distinction."

°°°°"It is lucky for her that she has some distinction in her face. Just see how she fidgets with her opera-glass! The Goriot blood shows itself in every movement," said the Vicomtesse, much to Eugene's astonishment.

°°°°Indeed, Mme. de Beauseant seemed to be engaged in making a survey of the house, and to be unconscious of Mme. Nucingen's existence; but no movement made by the latter was lost upon the Vicomtesse. The house was full of the loveliest women in Paris, so that Delphine de Nucingen was not a little flattered to receive the undivided attention of Mme. de Beauseant's young, handsome, and well-dressed cousin, who seemed to have no eyes for any one else.

°°°°"If you look at her so persistently, you will make people talk, M. de Rastignac. You will never succeed if you fling yourself at any one's head like that."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Eugene, "you have protected me indeed so far, and now if you would complete your work, I only ask of you a favor which will cost you but little, and be of very great service to me. I have lost my heart."

°°°°"Already!"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"And to that woman!"

°°°°"How could I aspire to find any one else to listen to me?" he asked, with a keen glance at his cousin. "Her Grace the Duchesse de Carigliano is a friend of the Duchesse de Berri," he went on, after a pause; "you are sure to see her, will you be so kind as to present me to her, and to take me to her ball on Monday? I shall meet Mme. de Nucingen there, and enter into my first skirmish."

°°°°"Willingly," she said. "If you have a liking for her already, your affairs of the heart are like to prosper. That is de Marsay over there in the Princesse Galathionne's box. Mme. de Nucingen is racked with jealousy. There is no better time for approaching a woman, especially if she happens to be a banker's wife. All those ladies of the Chaussee-d'Antin love revenge."

°°°°"Then, what would you do yourself in such a case?"

°°°°"I should suffer in silence."

°°°°At this point the Marquis d'Ajuda appeared in Mme. de Beauseant's box.

°°°°"I have made a muddle of my affairs to come to you," he said, "and I am telling you about it, so that it may not be a sacrifice."

°°°°Eugene saw the glow of joy on the Vicomtesse's face, and knew that this was love, and learned the difference between love and the affectations of Parisian coquetry. He admired his cousin, grew mute, and yielded his place to M. d'Ajuda with a sigh.

°°°°"How noble, how sublime a woman is when she loves like that!" he said to himself. "And HE could forsake her for a doll! Oh! how could any one forsake her?"

°°°°There was a boy's passionate indignation in his heart. He could have flung himself at Mme. de Beauseant's feet; he longed for the power of the devil if he could snatch her away and hide her in his heart, as an eagle snatches up some white yeanling from the plains and bears it to its eyrie. It was humiliating to him to think that in all this gallery of fair pictures he had not one picture of his own. "To have a mistress and an almost royal position is a sign of power," he said to himself. And he looked at Mme. de Nucingen as a man measures another who has insulted him.

°°°°The Vicomtesse turned to him, and the expression of her eyes thanked him a thousand times for his discretion. The first act came to an end just then.

°°°°"Do you know Mme. de Nucingen well enough to present M. de Rastignac to her?" she asked of the Marquis d'Ajuda.

°°°°"She will be delighted," said the Marquis. The handsome Portuguese rose as he spoke and took the student's arm, and in another moment Eugene found himself in Mme. de Nucingen's box.

°°°°"Madame," said the Marquis, "I have the honor of presenting to you the Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac; he is a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's. You have made so deep an impression upon him, that I thought I would fill up the measure of his happiness by bringing him nearer to his divinity."

°°°°Words spoken half jestingly to cover their somewhat disrespectful import; but such an implication, if carefully disguised, never gives offence to a woman. Mme. de Nucingen smiled, and offered Eugene the place which her husband had just left.

°°°°"I do not venture to suggest that you should stay with me, monsieur," she said. "Those who are so fortunate as to be in Mme. de Beauseant's company do not desire to leave it."

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, lowering his voice, "I think that to please my cousin I should remain with you. Before my lord Marquis came we were speaking of you and of your exceedingly distinguished appearance," he added aloud.

°°°°M. d'Ajuda turned and left them.

°°°°"Are you really going to stay with me, monsieur?" asked the Baroness. "Then we shall make each other's acquaintance. Mme. de Restaud told me about you, and has made me anxious to meet you."

°°°°"She must be very insincere, then, for she has shut her door on me."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Madame, I will tell you honestly the reason why; but I must crave your indulgence before confiding such a secret to you. I am your father's neighbor; I had no idea that Mme. de Restaud was his daughter. I was rash enough to mention his name; I meant no harm, but I annoyed your sister and her husband very much. You cannot think how severely the Duchesse de Langeais and my cousin blamed this apostasy on a daughter's part, as a piece of bad taste. I told them all about it, and they both burst out laughing. Then Mme. de Beauseant made some comparison between you and your sister, speaking in high terms of you, and saying how very fond you were of my neighbor, M. Goriot. And, indeed, how could you help loving him? He adores you so passionately that I am jealous already. We talked about you this morning for two hours. So this evening I was quite full of all that your father had told me, and while I was dining with my cousin I said that you could not be as beautiful as affectionate. Mme. de Beauseant meant to gratify such warm admiration, I think, when she brought me here, telling me, in her gracious way, that I should see you."

°°°°"Then, even now, I owe you a debt of gratitude, monsieur," said the banker's wife. "We shall be quite old friends in a little while."

°°°°"Although a friendship with you could not be like an ordinary friendship," said Rastignac; "I should never wish to be your friend."

°°°°Such stereotyped phrases as these, in the mouths of beginners, possess an unfailing charm for women, and are insipid only when read coldly; for a young man's tone, glance and attitude give a surpassing eloquence to the banal phrases. Mme. de Nucingen thought that Rastignac was adorable. Then, woman-like, being at a loss how to reply to the student's outspoken admiration, she answered a previous remark.

°°°°"Yes, it is very wrong of my sister to treat our poor father as she does," she said; "he has been a Providence to us. It was not until M. de Nucingen positively ordered me only to receive him in the mornings that I yielded the point. But I have been unhappy about it for a long while; I have shed many tears over it. This violence to my feelings, with my husband's brutal treatment, have been two causes of my unhappy married life. There is certainly no woman in Paris whose lot seems more enviable than mine, and yet, in reality, there is not one so much to be pitied. You will think I must be out of my senses to talk to you like this; but you know my father, and I cannot regard you as a stranger."

°°°°"You will find no one," said Eugene, "who longs as eagerly as I do to be yours. What do all women seek? Happiness." (He answered his own question in low, vibrating tones.) "And if happiness for a woman means that she is to be loved and adored, to have a friend to whom she can pour out her wishes, her fancies, her sorrows and joys; to whom she can lay bare her heart and soul, and all her fair defects and her gracious virtues, without fear of a betrayal; believe me, the devotion and the warmth that never fails can only be found in the heart of a young man who, at a bare sign from you, would go to his death, who neither knows nor cares to know anything as yet of the world, because you will be all the world to him. I myself, you see (you will laugh at my simplicity), have just come from a remote country district; I am quite new to this world of Paris; I have only known true and loving hearts; and I made up my mind that here I should find no love. Then I chanced to meet my cousin, and to see my cousin's heart from very near; I have divined the inexhaustible treasures of passion, and, like Cherubino, I am the lover of all women, until the day comes when I find THE woman to whom I may devote myself. As soon as I saw you, as soon as I came into the theatre this evening, I felt myself borne towards you as if by the current of a stream. I had so often thought of you already, but I had never dreamed that you would be so beautiful! Mme. de Beauseant told me that I must not look so much at you. She does not know the charm of your red lips, your fair face, nor see how soft your eyes are. . . . I also am beginning to talk nonsense; but let me talk."

°°°°Nothing pleases a woman better than to listen to such whispered words as these; the most puritanical among them listens even when she ought not to reply to them; and Rastignac, having once begun, continued to pour out his story, dropping his voice, that she might lean and listen; and Mme. de Nucingen, smiling, glanced from time to time at de Marsay, who still sat in the Princesse Galathionne's box.

°°°°Rastignac did not leave Mme. de Nucingen till her husband came to take her home.

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, "I shall have the pleasure of calling upon you before the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball."

°°°°"If Matame infites you to come," said the Baron, a thickset Alsatian, with indications of a sinister cunning in his full-moon countenance, "you are quide sure of being well receifed."

°°°°"My affairs seem to be in a promising way," said Eugene to himself.--" 'Can you love me?' I asked her, and she did not resent it. The bit is in the horse's mouth, and I have only to mount and ride;" and with that he went to pay his respects to Mme. de Beauseant, who was leaving the theatre on d'Ajuda's arm.

°°°°The student did not know that the Baroness' thoughts had been wandering; that she was even then expecting a letter from de Marsay, one of those letters that bring about a rupture that rends the soul; so, happy in his delusion, Eugene went with the Vicomtesse to the peristyle, where people were waiting till their carriages were announced.

°°°°"That cousin of yours is hardly recognizable for the same man," said the Portuguese laughingly to the Vicomtesse, when Eugene had taken leave of them. "He will break the bank. He is as supple as an eel; he will go a long way, of that I am sure. Who else could have picked out a woman for him, as you did, just when she needed consolation?"

°°°°"But it is not certain that she does not still love the faithless lover," said Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°The student meanwhile walked back from the Theatre-Italien to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, making the most delightful plans as he went. He had noticed how closely Mme. de Restaud had scrutinized him when he sat beside Mme. de Nucingen, and inferred that the Countess' doors would not be closed in the future. Four important houses were now open to him--for he meant to stand well with the Marechale; he had four supporters in the inmost circle of society in Paris. Even now it was clear to him that, once involved in this intricate social machinery, he must attach himself to a spoke of the wheel that was to turn and raise his fortunes; he would not examine himself too curiously as to the methods, but he was certain of the end, and conscious of the power to gain and keep his hold.

°°°°"If Mme. de Nucingen takes an interest in me, I will teach her how to manage her husband. That husband of hers is a great speculator; he might put me in the way of making a fortune by a single stroke."

°°°°He did not say this bluntly in so many words; as yet, indeed, he was not sufficient of a diplomatist to sum up a situation, to see its possibilities at a glance, and calculate the chances in his favor. These were nothing but hazy ideas that floated over his mental horizon; they were less cynical than Vautrin's notions; but if they had been tried in the crucible of conscience, no very pure result would have issued from the test. It is by a succession of such like transactions that men sink at last to the level of the relaxed morality of this epoch, when there have never been so few of those who square their courses with their theories, so few of those noble characters who do not yield to temptation, for whom the slightest deviation from the line of rectitude is a crime. To these magnificent types of uncompromising Right we owe two masterpieces--the Alceste of Moliere, and, in our own day, the characters of Jeanie Deans and her father in Sir Walter Scott's novel. Perhaps a work which should chronicle the opposite course, which should trace out all the devious courses through which a man of the world, a man of ambitions, drags his conscience, just steering clear of crime that he may gain his end and yet save appearances, such a chronicle would be no less edifying and no less dramatic.

°°°°Rastignac went home. He was fascinated by Mme. de Nucingen; he seemed to see her before him, slender and graceful as a swallow. He recalled the intoxicating sweetness of her eyes, her fair hair, the delicate silken tissue of the skin, beneath which it almost seemed to him that he could see the blood coursing; the tones of her voice still exerted a spell over him; he had forgotten nothing; his walk perhaps heated his imagination by sending a glow of warmth through his veins. He knocked unceremoniously at Goriot's door.

°°°°"I have seen Mme. Delphine, neighbor," said he.

°°°°"Where?"

°°°°"At the Italiens."

°°°°"Did she enjoy it?. . . . Just come inside," and the old man left his bed, unlocked the door, and promptly returned again.

°°°°It was the first time that Eugene had been in Father Goriot's room, and he could not control his feeling of amazement at the contrast between the den in which the father lived and the costume of the daughter whom he had just beheld. The window was curtainless, the walls were damp, in places the varnished wall- paper had come away and gave glimpses of the grimy yellow plaster beneath. The wretched bed on which the old man lay boasted but one thin blanket, and a wadded quilt made out of large pieces of Mme. Vauquer's old dresses. The floor was damp and gritty. Opposite the window stood a chest of drawers made of rosewood, one of the old-fashioned kind with a curving front and brass handles, shaped like rings of twisted vine stems covered with flowers and leaves. On a venerable piece of furniture with a wooden shelf stood a ewer and basin and shaving apparatus. A pair of shoes stood in one corner; a night-table by the bed had neither a door nor marble slab. There was not a trace of a fire in the empty grate; the square walnut table with the crossbar against which Father Goriot had crushed and twisted his posset- dish stood near the hearth. The old man's hat was lying on a broken-down bureau. An armchair stuffed with straw and a couple of chairs completed the list of ramshackle furniture. From the tester of the bed, tied to the ceiling by a piece of rag, hung a strip of some cheap material in large red and black checks. No poor drudge in a garret could be worse lodged than Father Goriot in Mme. Vauquer's lodging-house. The mere sight of the room sent a chill through you and a sense of oppression; it was like the worst cell in a prison. Luckily, Goriot could not see the effect that his surroundings produced on Eugene as the latter deposited his candle on the night-table. The old man turned round, keeping the bedclothes huddled up to his chin.

°°°°"Well," he said, "and which do you like the best, Mme. de Restaud or Mme. de Nucingen?"

°°°°"I like Mme. Delphine the best," said the law student, "because she loves you the best."

°°°°At the words so heartily spoken the old man's hand slipped out from under the bedclothes and grasped Eugene's.

°°°°"Thank you, thank you," he said, gratefully. "Then what did she say about me?"

°°°°The student repeated the Baroness' remarks with some embellishments of his own, the old man listening the while as though he heard a voice from Heaven.

°°°°"Dear child!" he said. "Yes, yes, she is very fond of me. But you must not believe all that she tells you about Anastasie. The two sisters are jealous of each other, you see, another proof of their affection. Mme. de Restaud is very fond of me too. I know she is. A father sees his children as God sees all of us; he looks into the very depths of their hearts; he knows their intentions; and both of them are so loving. Oh! if I only had good sons-in-law, I should be too happy, and I dare say there is no perfect happiness here below. If I might live with them-- simply hear their voices, know that they are there, see them go and come as I used to do at home when they were still with me; why, my heart bounds at the thought. . . . Were they nicely dressed?"

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene. "But, M. Goriot, how is it that your daughters have such fine houses, while you live in such a den as this?"

°°°°"Dear me, why should I want anything better?" he replied, with seeming carelessness. "I can't quite explain to you how it is; I am not used to stringing words together properly, but it all lies there----" he said, tapping his heart. "My real life is in my two girls, you see; and so long as they are happy, and smartly dressed, and have soft carpets under their feet, what does it matter what clothes I wear or where I lie down of a night? I shall never feel cold so long as they are warm; I shall never feel dull if they are laughing. I have no troubles but theirs. When you, too, are a father, and you hear your children's little voices, you will say to yourself, 'That has all come from me.' You will feel that those little ones are akin to every drop in your veins, that they are the very flower of your life (and what else are they?); you will cleave so closely to them that you seem to feel every movement that they make. Everywhere I hear their voices sounding in my ears. If they are sad, the look in their eyes freezes my blood. Some day you will find out that there is far more happiness in another's happiness than in your own. It is something that I cannot explain, something within that sends a glow of warmth all through you. In short, I live my life three times over. Shall I tell you something funny? Well, then, since I have been a father, I have come to understand God. He is everywhere in the world, because the whole world comes from Him. And it is just the same with my children, monsieur. Only, I love my daughters better than God loves the world, for the world is not so beautiful as God Himself is, but my children are more beautiful than I am. Their lives are so bound up with mine that I felt somehow that you would see them this evening. Great Heaven! If any man would make my little Delphine as happy as a wife is when she is loved, I would black his boots and run on his errands. That miserable M. de Marsay is a cur; I know all about him from her maid. A longing to wring his neck comes over me now and then. He does not love her! does not love a pearl of a woman, with a voice like a nightingale and shaped like a model. Where can her eyes have been when she married that great lump of an Alsatian? They ought both of them to have married young men, good-looking and good-tempered--but, after all, they had their own way."

°°°°Father Goriot was sublime. Eugene had never yet seen his face light up as it did now with the passionate fervor of a father's love. It is worthy of remark that strong feeling has a very subtle and pervasive power; the roughest nature, in the endeavor to express a deep and sincere affection, communicates to others the influence that has put resonance into the voice, and eloquence into every gesture, wrought a change in the very features of the speaker; for under the inspiration of passion the stupidest human being attains to the highest eloquence of ideas, if not of language, and seems to move in some sphere of light. In the old man's tones and gesture there was something just then of the same spell that a great actor exerts over his audience. But does not the poet in us find expression in our affections?

°°°°"Well," said Eugene, "perhaps you will not be sorry to hear that she is pretty sure to break with de Marsay before long. That sprig of fashion has left her for the Princesse Galathionne. For my part, I fell in love with Mme. Delphine this evening."

°°°°"Stuff!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"I did indeed, and she did not regard me with aversion. For a whole hour we talked of love, and I am to go to call on her on Saturday, the day after to-morrow."

°°°°"Oh! how I should love you, if she should like you. You are kind- hearted; you would never make her miserable. If you were to forsake her, I would cut your throat at once. A woman does not love twice, you see! Good heavens! what nonsense I am talking, M. Eugene! It is cold; you ought not to stay here. MON DIEU! so you have heard her speak? What message did she give you for me?"

°°°°"None at all," said Eugene to himself; aloud he answered, "She told me to tell you that your daughter sends you a good kiss."

°°°°"Good-night, neighbor! Sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you! I have mine already made for me by that message from her. May God grant you all your desires! You have come in like a good angel on me to-night, and brought with you the air that my daughter breathes."

°°°°"Poor old fellow!" said Eugene as he lay down. "It is enough to melt a heart of stone. His daughter no more thought of him than of the Grand Turk."

°°°°Ever after this conference Goriot looked upon his neighbor as a friend, a confidant such as he had never hoped to find; and there was established between the two the only relationship that could attach this old man to another man. The passions never miscalculate. Father Goriot felt that this friendship brought him closer to his daughter Delphine; he thought that he should find a warmer welcome for himself if the Baroness should care for Eugene. Moreover, he had confided one of his troubles to the younger man. Mme. de Nucingen, for whose happiness he prayed a thousand times daily, had never known the joys of love. Eugene was certainly (to make use of his own expression) one of the nicest young men that he had ever seen, and some prophetic instinct seemed to tell him that Eugene was to give her the happiness which had not been hers. These were the beginnings of a friendship that grew up between the old man and his neighbor; but for this friendship the catastrophe of the drama must have remained a mystery.

°°°°The affection with which Father Goriot regarded Eugene, by whom he seated himself at breakfast, the change in Goriot's face, which as a rule, looked as expressionless as a plaster cast, and a few words that passed between the two, surprised the other lodgers. Vautrin, who saw Eugene for the first time since their interview, seemed as if he would fain read the student's very soul. During the night Eugene had had some time in which to scan the vast field which lay before him; and now, as he remembered yesterday's proposal, the thought of Mlle. Taillefer's dowry came, of course, to his mind, and he could not help thinking of Victorine as the most exemplary youth may think of an heiress. It chanced that their eyes met. The poor girl did not fail to see that Eugene looked very handsome in his new clothes. So much was said in the glance, thus exchanged, that Eugene could not doubt but that he was associated in her mind with the vague hopes that lie dormant in a girl's heart and gather round the first attractive newcomer. "Eight hundred thousand francs!" a voice cried in his ears, but suddenly he took refuge in the memories of yesterday evening, thinking that his extemporized passion for Mme. de Nucingen was a talisman that would preserve him from this temptation.

°°°°"They gave Rossini's Barber of Seville at the Italiens yesterday evening," he remarked. "I never heard such delicious music. Good gracious! how lucky people are to have a box at the Italiens!"

°°°°Father Goriot drank in every word that Eugene let fall, and watched him as a dog watches his master's slightest movement.

°°°°"You men are like fighting cocks," said Mme. Vauquer; "you do what you like."

°°°°"How did you get back?" inquired Vautrin.

°°°°"I walked," answered Eugene.

°°°°"For my own part," remarked the tempter, "I do not care about doing things by halves. If I want to enjoy myself that way, I should prefer to go in my carriage, sit in my own box, and do the thing comfortably. Everything or nothing; that is my motto."

°°°°"And a good one, too," commented Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Perhaps you will see Mme. de Nucingen to-day," said Eugene, addressing Goriot in an undertone. "She will welcome you with open arms, I am sure; she would want to ask you for all sorts of little details about me. I have found out that she will do anything in the world to be known by my cousin Mme. de Beauseant; don't forget to tell her that I love her too well not to think of trying to arrange this."

°°°°Rastignac went at once to the Ecole de Droit. He had no mind to stay a moment longer than was necessary in that odious house. He wasted his time that day; he had fallen a victim to that fever of the brain that accompanies the too vivid hopes of youth. Vautrin's arguments had set him meditating on social life, and he was deep in these reflections when he happened on his friend Bianchon in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

°°°°"What makes you look so solemn?" said the medical student, putting an arm through Eugene's as they went towards the Palais.

°°°°"I am tormented by temptations."

°°°°"What kind? There is a cure for temptation."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Yielding to it."

°°°°"You laugh, but you don't know what it is all about. Have you read Rousseau?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Do you remember that he asks the reader somewhere what he would do if he could make a fortune by killing an old mandarin somewhere in China by mere force of wishing it, and without stirring from Paris?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Well, then?"

°°°°"Pshaw! I am at my thirty-third mandarin."

°°°°"Seriously, though. Look here, suppose you were sure that you could do it, and had only to give a nod. Would you do it?"

°°°°"Is he well stricken in years, this mandarin of yours? Pshaw! after all, young or old, paralytic, or well and sound, my word for it. . . . Well, then. Hang it, no!"

°°°°"You are a good fellow, Bianchon. But suppose you loved a woman well enough to lose your soul in hell for her, and that she wanted money for dresses and a carriage, and all her whims, in fact?"

°°°°"Why, here you are taking away my reason, and want me to reason!"

°°°°"Well, then, Bianchon, I am mad; bring me to my senses. I have two sisters as beautiful and innocent as angels, and I want them to be happy. How am I to find two hundred thousand francs apiece for them in the next five years? Now and then in life, you see, you must play for heavy stakes, and it is no use wasting your luck on low play."

°°°°"But you are only stating the problem that lies before every one at the outset of his life, and you want to cut the Gordian knot with a sword. If that is the way of it, dear boy, you must be an Alexander, or to the hulks you go. For my own part, I am quite contented with the little lot I mean to make for myself somewhere in the country, when I mean to step into my father's shoes and plod along. A man's affections are just as fully satisfied by the smallest circle as they can be by a vast circumference. Napoleon himself could only dine once, and he could not have more mistresses than a house student at the Capuchins. Happiness, old man, depends on what lies between the sole of your foot and the crown of your head; and whether it costs a million or a hundred louis, the actual amount of pleasure that you receive rests entirely with you, and is just exactly the same in any case. I am for letting that Chinaman live."

°°°°"Thank you, Bianchon; you have done me good. We will always be friends."

°°°°"I say," remarked the medical student, as they came to the end of a broad walk in the Jardin des Plantes, "I saw the Michonneau and Poiret a few minutes ago on a bench chatting with a gentleman whom I used to see in last year's troubles hanging about the Chamber of Deputies; he seems to me, in fact, to be a detective dressed up like a decent retired tradesman. Let us keep an eye on that couple; I will tell you why some time. Good-bye; it is nearly four o'clock, and I must be in to answer to my name."

°°°°When Eugene reached the lodging-house, he found Father Goriot waiting for him.

°°°°"Here," cried the old man, "here is a letter from her. Pretty handwriting, eh?"

°°°°Eugene broke the seal and read:--

°°°°"Sir,--I have heard from my father that you are fond of Italian music. I shall be delighted if you will do me the pleasure of accepting a seat in my box. La Fodor and Pellegrini will sing on Saturday, so I am sure that you will not refuse me. M. de Nucingen and I shall be pleased if you will dine with us; we shall be quite by ourselves. If you will come and be my escort, my husband will be glad to be relieved from his conjugal duties. Do not answer, but simply come.--Yours sincerely, D. DE N."

°°°°"Let me see it," said Father Goriot, when Eugene had read the letter. "You are going, aren't you?" he added, when he had smelled the writing-paper. "How nice it smells! Her fingers have touched it, that is certain."

°°°°"A woman does not fling herself at a man's head in this way," the student was thinking. "She wants to use me to bring back de Marsay; nothing but pique makes a woman do a thing like this."

°°°°"Well," said Father Goriot, "what are you thinking about?"

°°°°Eugene did not know the fever or vanity that possessed some women in those days; how should he imagine that to open a door in the Faubourg Saint-Germain a banker's wife would go to almost any length. For the coterie of the Faubourg Saint-Germain was a charmed circle, and the women who moved in it were at that time the queens of society; and among the greatest of these Dames du Petit-Chateau, as they were called, were Mme. de Beauseant and her friends the Duchesse de Langeais and the Duchesse de Maufrigneause. Rastignac was alone in his ignorance of the frantic efforts made by women who lived in the Chausee-d'Antin to enter this seventh heaven and shine among the brightest constellations of their sex. But his cautious disposition stood him in good stead, and kept his judgment cool, and the not altogether enviable power of imposing instead of accepting conditions.

°°°°"Yes, I am going," he replied.

°°°°So it was curiosity that drew him to Mme. de Nucingen; while, if she had treated him disdainfully, passion perhaps might have brought him to her feet. Still he waited almost impatiently for to-morrow, and the hour when he could go to her. There is almost as much charm for a young man in a first flirtation as there is in first love. The certainty of success is a source of happiness to which men do not confess, and all the charm of certain women lies in this. The desire of conquest springs no less from the easiness than from the difficulty of triumph, and every passion is excited or sustained by one or the other of these two motives which divide the empire of love. Perhaps this division is one result of the great question of temperaments; which, after all, dominates social life. The melancholic temperament may stand in need of the tonic of coquetry, while those of nervous or sanguine complexion withdraw if they meet with a too stubborn resistance. In other words, the lymphatic temperament is essentially despondent, and the rhapsodic is bilious.

°°°°Eugene lingered over his toilette with an enjoyment of all its little details that is grateful to a young man's self-love, though he will not own to it for fear of being laughed at. He thought, as he arranged his hair, that a pretty woman's glances would wander through the dark curls. He indulged in childish tricks like any young girl dressing for a dance, and gazed complacently at his graceful figure while he smoothed out the creases of his coat.

°°°°"There are worse figures, that is certain," he said to himself.

°°°°Then he went downstairs, just as the rest of the household were sitting down to dinner, and took with good humor the boisterous applause excited by his elegant appearance. The amazement with which any attention to dress is regarded in a lodging-house is a very characteristic trait. No one can put on a new coat but every one else must say his say about it.

°°°°"Clk! clk! clk!" cried Bianchon, making the sound with his tongue against the roof of his mouth, like a driver urging on a horse.

°°°°"He holds himself like a duke and a peer of France," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Are you going a-courting?" inquired Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried the artist.

°°°°"My compliments to my lady your wife," from the employe at the Museum.

°°°°"Your wife; have you a wife?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, in compartments, water-tight and floats, guaranteed fast color, all prices from twenty-five to forty sous, neat check patterns in the latest fashion and best taste, will wash, half- linen, half-cotton, half-wool; a certain cure for toothache and other complaints under the patronage of the Royal College of Physicians! children like it! a remedy for headache, indigestion, and all other diseases affecting the throat, eyes, and ears!" cried Vautrin, with a comical imitation of the volubility of a quack at a fair. "And how much shall we say for this marvel, gentlemen? Twopence? No. Nothing of the sort. All that is left in stock after supplying the Great Mogul. All the crowned heads of Europe, including the Gr-r-rand Duke of Baden, have been anxious to get a sight of it. Walk up! walk up! gentlemen! Pay at the desk as you go in! Strike up the music there! Brooum, la, la, trinn! la, la, boum! boum! Mister Clarinette, there you are out of tune!" he added gruffly; "I will rap your knuckles for you!"

°°°°"Goodness! what an amusing man!" said Mme. Vauquer to Mme. Couture; "I should never feel dull with him in the house."

°°°°This burlesque of Vautrin's was the signal for an outburst of merriment, and under cover of jokes and laughter Eugene caught a glance from Mlle. Taillefer; she had leaned over to say a few words in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"The cab is at the door," announced Sylvie.

°°°°"But where is he going to dine?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"With Madame la Baronne de Nucingen."

°°°°"M. Goriot's daughter," said the law student.

°°°°At this, all eyes turned to the old vermicelli maker; he was gazing at Eugene with something like envy in his eyes.

°°°°Rastignac reached the house in the Rue Saint-Lazare, one of those many-windowed houses with a mean-looking portico and slender columns, which are considered the thing in Paris, a typical banker's house, decorated in the most ostentatious fashion; the walls lined with stucco, the landings of marble mosaic. Mme. de Nucingen was sitting in a little drawing-room; the room was painted in the Italian fashion, and decorated like a restaurant. The Baroness seemed depressed. The effort that she made to hide her feelings aroused Eugene's interest; it was plain that she was not playing a part. He had expected a little flutter of excitement at his coming, and he found her dispirited and sad. The disappointment piqued his vanity.

°°°°"My claim to your confidence is very small, madame," he said, after rallying her on her abstracted mood; "but if I am in the way, please tell me so frankly; I count on your good faith."

°°°°"No, stay with me," she said; "I shall be all alone if you go. Nucingen is dining in town, and I do not want to be alone; I want to be taken out of myself."

°°°°"But what is the matter?"

°°°°"You are the very last person whom I should tell," she exclaimed.

°°°°"Then I am connected in some way in this secret. I wonder what it is?"

°°°°"Perhaps. Yet, no," she went on; "it is a domestic quarrel, which ought to be buried in the depths of the heart. I am very unhappy; did I not tell you so the day before yesterday? Golden chains are the heaviest of all fetters."

°°°°When a woman tells a young man that she is very unhappy, and when the young man is clever, and well dressed, and has fifteen hundred francs lying idle in his pocket, he is sure to think as Eugene said, and he becomes a coxcomb.

°°°°"What can you have left to wish for?" he answered. "You are young, beautiful, beloved, and rich."

°°°°"Do not let us talk of my affairs," she said shaking her head mournfully. "We will dine together tete-a-tete, and afterwards we will go to hear the most exquisite music. Am I to your taste?" she went on, rising and displaying her gown of white cashmere, covered with Persian designs in the most superb taste.

°°°°"I wish that you were altogether mine," said Eugene; "you are charming."

°°°°"You would have a forlorn piece of property," she said, smiling bitterly. "There is nothing about me that betrays my wretchedness; and yet, in spite of appearances, I am in despair. I cannot sleep; my troubles have broken my night's rest; I shall grow ugly."

°°°°"Oh! that is impossible," cried the law student; "but I am curious to know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface."

°°°°"Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me," she said. "Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else, for pity's sake," she added. "Let me show you my rooms."

°°°°"No; let us stay here," answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen's hand in his. She surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

°°°°"Listen," said Rastignac; "if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end to them, even if I have to kill half-a- dozen men; or I shall go, never to return."

°°°°"Very well," she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of despair, "I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes," she said to herself, "I have no other resource left."

°°°°She rang the bell.

°°°°"Are the horses put in for the master?" she asked of the servant.

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve dinner at seven o'clock."

°°°°"Now, come with me," she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in the banker's carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be dreaming.

°°°°"To the Palais-Royal," she said to the coachman; "stop near the Theatre-Francais."

°°°°She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

°°°°"Another moment and she will escape me," he said to himself.

°°°°When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

°°°°"Is it true that you love me?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes," he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the uneasiness that he felt.

°°°°"You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"Are you ready to do my bidding?"

°°°°"Blindly."

°°°°"Have you ever been to a gaming-house?" she asked in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Never."

°°°°"Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse," she said. "Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my troubles when you come back."

°°°°"Devil take me, I'm sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am about, but I will obey you," he added, with inward exultation, as he thought, "She has gone too far to draw back-- she can refuse me nothing now!"

°°°°Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand clothes-dealer, and hurried to number 9, which happened to be the nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his stakes.

°°°°"If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it turns up, you will win thirty-six louis," said a respectable- looking, white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

°°°°Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number 21 (his own age). There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had won.

°°°°"Take your money off, sir," said the old gentleman; "you don't often win twice running by that system."

°°°°Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once more.

°°°°"You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own," the old gentleman said in his ear. "Take my advice and go away with your winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable, you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck."

°°°°Rastignac's head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the white-haired man's possession, and went down-stairs with his seven thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his luck.

°°°°"So, that is over; and now where will you take me?" he asked, as soon as the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild embrace.

°°°°"You have saved me!" she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

°°°°"I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then," she went on, "I wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over disgracefully. If, at a woman's utmost need, SOMEBODY heaps gold upon her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever! But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept money in such a way? MON DIEU! is it not natural to share everything with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how, then, can our interests be separate?

°°°°"You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I longed to escape, to run away . . . where, I did not know. Half the women in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture. Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think of me as a woman whom he has paid." She tried to conceal her tears from him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

°°°°"It is hideous, is it not," she cried, "to speak in a breath of money and affection. You cannot love me after this," she added.

°°°°The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great, and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution of society, had thrown Eugene's thoughts into confusion; he uttered soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

°°°°"You will not remember this against me?" she asked; "promise me that you will not."

°°°°"Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so," he said. She took his hand and held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep gratitude.

°°°°"I am free and happy once more, thanks to you," she said. "Oh! I have felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this," she went on, as she took only six of the banknotes. "In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns, for I really ought to go halves with you."

°°°°Eugene's maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, "I am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy," he took the money.

°°°°"It shall be a last stake in reserve," he said, "in case of misfortune."

°°°°"That was what I was dreading to hear," she cried, turning pale. "Oh, if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you! I should die of sorrow!"

°°°°They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin's cynical words began to ring in his ears.

°°°°"Seat yourself there," said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside the fire. "I have a difficult letter to write," she added. "Tell me what to say."

°°°°"Say nothing," Eugene answered her. "Put the bills in an envelope, direct it, and send it by your maid."

°°°°"Why, you are a love of a man," she said. "Ah! see what it is to have been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through," she went on, smiling at him.

°°°°"She is charming," thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

°°°°"Do you like it?" she asked, as she rang for the maid.

°°°°"Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me."

°°°°Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

°°°°Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of the table which he had admired in his cousin's house.

°°°°"Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens afterwards," she said.

°°°°"I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am a poor student, and I have my way to make."

°°°°"Oh! you will succeed," she said laughing. "You will see. All that you wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy."

°°°°It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris, believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

°°°°Eugene took the Baroness' hand in his, and by some light pressure of the fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

°°°°"That was gratitude," she said, "for devotion that I did not dare to hope for, but now it would be a promise."

°°°°"And will you give me no promise, ingrate?"

°°°°He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a discontented air that delighted her.

°°°°"I shall see you at the ball on Monday," she said.

°°°°As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections. He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible excuses for appropriating it.

°°°°He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the stairhead he saw a light in Goriot's room; the old man had lighted a candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and go to his room without "telling him all about his daughter," to use his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without reserve.

°°°°"Then they think that I am ruined!" cried Father Goriot, in an agony of jealousy and desperation. "Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a year! MON DIEU! Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why did not YOU come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I had hold of them, I would wring their necks. MON DIEU! CRYING! Did you say she was crying?"

°°°°"With her head on my waistcoat," said Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! give it to me," said Father Goriot. "What! my daughter's tears have fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me have it. By the terms of her marriage- contract, she ought to have the use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth."

°°°°"Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the waistcoat."

°°°°Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student's hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

°°°°"You will succeed," the old man said. "God is just, you see. I know an honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to save one tear to either of them."

°°°°"An honest man!" said Eugene to himself as he lay down. "Upon my word, I think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey the voice of conscience." Perhaps none but believers in God do good in secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

°°°°The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant, who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball. The Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there. Delphine's dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene's eyes; she was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who can guess all that passes in a woman's mind. Who has not refrained from giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure; he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room; all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

°°°°Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

°°°°The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in a diabolical fashion.

°°°°"And do you suppose," cried that cold-blooded logician, "that a young man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, in the Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way, I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but, after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be out of place here, where we only aim at the purely patriarchalorama. If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend," Vautrin continued, with half-paternal jocularity, "you must have three horses, a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further. Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good- bye to your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe going to carry your billets-doux for you? Do you mean to employ the stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom of your elders!" he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each syllable. "Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously, and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way."

°°°°Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by which he had sought to corrupt the student's mind.

°°°°Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve in the small hours. He rose at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew. He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money, and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

°°°°One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in their youth and in the almost frantic eagerness with which youth grasps at pleasure. They are reckless with anything obtained on credit, while everything for which they must pay in ready money is made to last as long as possible; if they cannot have all that they want, they make up for it, it would seem, by squandering what they have. To state the matter simply--a student is far more careful of his hat than of his coat, because the latter being a comparatively costly article of dress, it is in the nature of things that a tailor should be a creditor; but it is otherwise with the hatter; the sums of money spent with him are so modest, that he is the most independent and unmanageable of his tribe, and it is almost impossible to bring him to terms. The young man in the balcony of a theatre who displays a gorgeous waistcoat for the benefit of the fair owners of opera glasses, has very probably no socks in his wardrobe, for the hosier is another of the genus of weevils that nibble at the purse. This was Rastignac's condition. His purse was always empty for Mme. Vauquer, always full at the demand of vanity; there was a periodical ebb and flow in his fortunes, which was seldom favorable to the payment of just debts. If he was to leave that unsavory and mean abode, where from time to time his pretensions met with humiliation, the first step was to pay his hostess for a month's board and lodging, and the second to purchase furniture worthy of the new lodgings he must take in his quality of dandy, a course that remained impossible. Rastignac, out of his winnings at cards, would pay his jeweler exorbitant prices for gold watches and chains, and then, to meet the exigencies of play, would carry them to the pawnbroker, that discreet and forbidding- looking friend of youth; but when it was a question of paying for board or lodging, or for the necessary implements for the cultivation of his Elysian fields, his imagination and pluck alike deserted him. There was no inspiration to be found in vulgar necessity, in debts contracted for past requirements. Like most of those who trust to their luck, he put off till the last moment the payment of debts that among the bourgeoisie are regarded as sacred engagements, acting on the plan of Mirabeau, who never settled his baker's bill until it underwent a formidable transformation into a bill of exchange.

°°°°It was about this time when Rastignac was down on his luck and fell into debt, that it became clear to the law student's mind that he must have some more certain source of income if he meant to live as he had been doing. But while he groaned over the thorny problems of his precarious situation, he felt that he could not bring himself to renounce the pleasures of this extravagant life, and decided that he must continue it at all costs. His dreams of obtaining a fortune appeared more and more chimerical, and the real obstacles grew more formidable. His initiation into the secrets of the Nucingen household had revealed to him that if he were to attempt to use this love affair as a means of mending his fortunes, he must swallow down all sense of decency, and renounce all the generous ideas which redeem the sins of youth. He had chosen this life of apparent splendor, but secretly gnawed by the canker worm of remorse, a life of fleeting pleasure dearly paid for by persistent pain; like Le Distrait of La Bruyere, he had descended so far as to make his bed in a ditch; but (also like Le Distrait) he himself was uncontaminated as yet by the mire that stained his garments.

°°°°"So we have killed our mandarin, have we?" said Bianchon one day as they left the dinner table.

°°°°"Not yet," he answered, "but he is at his last gasp."

°°°°The medical student took this for a joke, but it was not a jest. Eugene had dined in the house that night for the first time for a long while, and had looked thoughtful during the meal. He had taken his place beside Mlle. Taillefer, and stayed through the dessert, giving his neighbor an expressive glance from time to time. A few of the boarders discussed the walnuts at the table, and others walked about the room, still taking part in the conversation which had begun among them. People usually went when they chose; the amount of time that they lingered being determined by the amount of interest that the conversation possessed for them, or by the difficulty of the process of digestion. In winter-time the room was seldom empty before eight o'clock, when the four women had it all to themselves, and made up for the silence previously imposed upon them by the preponderating masculine element. This evening Vautrin had noticed Eugene's abstractedness, and stayed in the room, though he had seemed to be in a hurry to finish his dinner and go. All through the talk afterwards he had kept out of the sight of the law student, who quite believed that Vautrin had left the room. He now took up his position cunningly in the sitting-room instead of going when the last boarders went. He had fathomed the young man's thoughts, and felt that a crisis was at hand. Rastignac was, in fact, in a dilemma, which many another young man must have known.

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen might love him, or might merely be playing with him, but in either case Rastignac had been made to experience all the alternations of hope and despair of genuine passion, and all the diplomatic arts of a Parisienne had been employed on him. After compromising herself by continually appearing in public with Mme. de Beauseant's cousin she still hesitated, and would not give him the lover's privileges which he appeared to enjoy. For a whole month she had so wrought on his senses, that at last she had made an impression on his heart. If in the earliest days the student had fancied himself to be master, Mme. de Nucingen had since become the stronger of the two, for she had skilfully roused and played upon every instinct, good or bad, in the two or three men comprised in a young student in Paris. This was not the result of deep design on her part, nor was she playing a part, for women are in a manner true to themselves even through their grossest deceit, because their actions are prompted by a natural impulse. It may have been that Delphine, who had allowed this young man to gain such an ascendency over her, conscious that she had been too demonstrative, was obeying a sentiment of dignity, and either repented of her concessions, or it pleased her to suspend them. It is so natural to a Parisienne, even when passion has almost mastered her, to hesitate and pause before taking the plunge; to probe the heart of him to whom she intrusts her future. And once already Mme. de Nucingen's hopes had been betrayed, and her loyalty to a selfish young lover had been despised. She had good reason to be suspicious. Or it may have been that something in Eugene's manner (for his rapid success was making a coxcomb of him) had warned her that the grotesque nature of their position had lowered her somewhat in his eyes. She doubtless wished to assert her dignity; he was young, and she would be great in his eyes; for the lover who had forsaken her had held her so cheap that she was determined that Eugene should not think her an easy conquest, and for this very reason--he knew that de Marsay had been his predecessor. Finally, after the degradation of submission to the pleasure of a heartless young rake, it was so sweet to her to wander in the flower-strewn realms of love, that it was not wonderful that she should wish to dwell a while on the prospect, to tremble with the vibrations of love, to feel the freshness of the breath of its dawn. The true lover was suffering for the sins of the false. This inconsistency is unfortunately only to be expected so long as men do not know how many flowers are mown down in a young woman's soul by the first stroke of treachery.

°°°°Whatever her reasons may have been, Delphine was playing with Rastignac, and took pleasure in playing with him, doubtless because she felt sure of his love, and confident that she could put an end to the torture as soon as it was her royal pleasure to do so. Eugene's self-love was engaged; he could not suffer his first passage of love to end in a defeat, and persisted in his suit like a sportsman determined to bring down at least one partridge to celebrate his first Feast of Saint-Hubert. The pressure of anxiety, his wounded self-love, his despair, real or feigned, drew him nearer and nearer to this woman. All Paris credited him with this conquest, and yet he was conscious that he had made no progress since the day when he saw Mme. de Nucingen for the first time. He did not know as yet that a woman's coquetry is sometimes more delightful than the pleasure of secure possession of her love, and was possessed with helpless rage. If, at this time, while she denied herself to love, Eugene gathered the springtide spoils of his life, the fruit, somewhat sharp and green, and dearly bought, was no less delicious to the taste. There were moments when he had not a sou in his pockets, and at such times he thought in spite of his conscience of Vautrin's offer and the possibility of fortune by a marriage with Mlle. Taillefer. Poverty would clamor so loudly that more than once he was on the point of yielding to the cunning temptations of the terrible sphinx, whose glance had so often exerted a strange spell over him.

°°°°Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau went up to their rooms; and Rastignac, thinking that he was alone with the women in the dining-room, sat between Mme. Vauquer and Mme. Couture, who was nodding over the woolen cuffs that she was knitting by the stove, and looked at Mlle. Taillefer so tenderly that she lowered her eyes.

°°°°"Can you be in trouble, M. Eugene?" Victorine said after a pause.

°°°°"Who has not his troubles?" answered Rastignac. "If we men were sure of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should have no troubles."

°°°°For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible to mistake its meaning.

°°°°"You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to- day, but are you sure that it will never change?"

°°°°A smile flitted over the poor girl's lips; it seemed as if a ray of light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

°°°°"Ah! but suppose," he said, "that you should be rich and happy to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of poverty?"

°°°°A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

°°°°"Even if he were very poor?"

°°°°Again the same mute answer.

°°°°"What nonsense are you talking, you two?" exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Never mind," answered Eugene; "we understand each other."

°°°°"So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?" The words were uttered in Vautrin's deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door as he spoke.

°°°°"Oh! how you startled me!" Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed together.

°°°°"I might make a worse choice," said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin's voice had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

°°°°"No bad jokes, gentlemen!" said Mme. Couture. "My dear, let us go upstairs."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene and Vautrin were left alone.

°°°°"I felt sure you would come round to it," said the elder man with the coolness that nothing seemed to shake. "But stay a moment! I have as much delicacy as anybody else. Don't make up your mind on the spur of the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like."

°°°°The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes, which he fluttered before the student's eyes. Eugene was in a most painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis to the Marquis d'Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud's house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

°°°°"You must see," said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor, "that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself under any obligation to you."

°°°°"Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise," answered the tempter. "You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion, and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women. Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you? Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account," Vautrin went on, and a smile stole over his lips. "Take these bits of paper and write across this," he added, producing a piece of stamped paper, "Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day twelvemonth, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful. In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of strength, my boy."

°°°°"What manner of man are you?" cried Eugene. "Were you created to torment me?"

°°°°"Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes, and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your first fright will go off like a conscript's terror on the battlefield. You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, 'Here are a hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,' and you could sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won't compromise you in any way, and you hesitate. 'Tis an effeminate age."

°°°°Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for it.

°°°°"Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally," Vautrin continued. "I mean to leave this country in a few months' time for America, and set about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do; I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look at. What is a man's life to me? Not THAT," he said, and he snapped his thumb-nail against his teeth. "A man, in short, is everything to me, or just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret; you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin, but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A sentiment-- what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part, I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is my passion. I knew Venice Preserved by heart. Have you met many men plucky enough when a comrade says, 'Let us bury a dead body!' to go and do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!"

°°°°Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student's repudiation, he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying their blameworthy actions to themselves.

°°°°"He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is certain," said Eugene to himself.

°°°°He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of Vautrin's ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for his own ends, raised him in the student's eyes; but the thought of a compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de Restaud's.

°°°°For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid Messieurs de Trailles and d'Ajuda, played at whist for part of the evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to consider that his luck was heaven's reward for his perseverance in the right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin whether the bill he had given was still in the other's possession; and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand francs with a not unnatural relief.

°°°°"Everything is going on well," said Vautrin.

°°°°"But I am not your accomplice," said Eugene.

°°°°"I know, I know," Vautrin broke in. "You are still acting like a child. You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset."

°°°°Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not without good reason, his own suspicions.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," this M. Gondureau was saying, "I do not see any cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of Police----"

°°°°"Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter," said Gondureau.

°°°°Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by that word "police," and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers, confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where the BONUS flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature (an illegible scrawl) and by his title--"His Excellency Monseigneur le Ministre," five words which produce as much effect as the il Bondo Cani of the Calife de Bagdad, five words which in the eyes of this low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a moment? Pronounce the words "His Excellency," and these poor folk will forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests. Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences, annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the deus ex machina, the magical words "His Excellency," so as to dazzle Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

°°°°"If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister . . . Ah! that is quite another thing," said Poiret.

°°°°"You seem to be guided by this gentleman's opinion, and you hear what he says," said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau. "Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the nickname Trompe-la-Mort."

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort?" said Pioret. "Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves that nickname."

°°°°"Well, yes," said the detective. "They call him so because he has been so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----"

°°°°"Then is he a man of honor?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man's crime upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler, who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been unexceptionable."

°°°°"But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, why should he want me?" asked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Oh yes," said Poiret, "if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as to tell us, really knows for a certainty----"

°°°°"Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed Trompe-la- Mort, is in the confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing their affairs, which want a MAN OF MARK to see about them."

°°°°"Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?" asked Poiret. "This gentleman calls himself a MAN OF MARK because he is a MARKED MAN-- branded, you know."

°°°°"This so-called Vautrin," said the detective, "receives the money belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for their benefit."

°°°°"Their mistresses! You mean their wives," remarked Poiret.

°°°°"No, sir. A convict's wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We call them concubines."

°°°°"Then they all live in a state of concubinage?"

°°°°"Naturally."

°°°°"Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow. Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society."

°°°°"But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues, my dear sir----"

°°°°"Of course not, sir; but still----"

°°°°"Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie," said Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"You see how it is, mademoiselle," Gondureau continued. "The Government may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the Society of the Ten Thousand----"

°°°°"Ten Thousand Thieves!" cried Pioret in alarm.

°°°°"No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they won't touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society. If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds, we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again; they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, "What is there to hinder Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?"

°°°°"Oh!" said the detective, "a man is told off to follow him everywhere he goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions."

°°°°"You are quite right, sir," said Poiret, "utterly disgraced he would be."

°°°°"But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without more ado," remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but," he added in her ear, "keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.-- Trompe-la-Mort, when he came back here," he went on aloud "slipped into the skin of an honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning, that he is! You don't catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of consequence, who transacts a good deal of business."

°°°°"Naturally," said Poiret to himself.

°°°°"And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of the real Vautrin, he would put every one's back up among the business men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about."

°°°°"Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman," said Mlle. Michonneau briskly.

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him," said the detective. "I will tell you a secret--he does not like them."

°°°°"Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to identify him for two thousand francs."

°°°°"Nothing simpler," said the stranger. "I will send you a little bottle containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder, and PRESTO! the letters will appear."

°°°°"Why, that is just nothing at all," said Poiret.

°°°°"Well, do you agree?" said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

°°°°"But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all," said Mlle. Michonneau; "am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"What will you give me then?"

°°°°"Five hundred francs."

°°°°"It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir."

°°°°"I assure you," said Poiret, "that mademoiselle has a great deal of conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very intelligent."

°°°°"Well, now," Mlle. Michonneau went on, "make it three thousand francs if he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man."

°°°°"Done!" said Gondureau, "but on the condition that the thing is settled to-morrow."

°°°°"Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first."

°°°°"You are a sly one," said the detective as he rose to his feet. "Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M. Gondureau."

°°°°Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier's lecture, overheard the sufficiently striking nickname of Trompe-la-Mort, and caught the celebrated chief detective's "Done!"

°°°°"Why didn't you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a year," said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Why didn't I?" she asked. "Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without paying, and that would be an abominable sell."

°°°°"And suppose you did warn him," Poiret went on, "didn't that gentleman say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything."

°°°°"Anyhow," thought Mlle. Michonneau, "I can't abide him. He says nothing but disagreeable things to me."

°°°°"But you can do better than that," Poiret resumed. "As that gentleman said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief. Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into the bargain!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau's musings did not permit her to listen very closely to the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret's lips like water dripping from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

°°°°By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau versus Dame Morin, when he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

°°°°As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"I knew how it would end," remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. "They have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week past."

°°°°"Yes," he answered. "So she was found guilty."

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. Morin."

°°°°"I am talking about Mlle. Victorine," said Mlle, Michonneau, as she entered Poiret's room with an absent air, "and you answer, 'Mme. Morin.' Who may Mme. Morin be?"

°°°°"What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?" demanded Poiret.

°°°°"Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!"

°°°°That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel's voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac's face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately; he had said to himself that a woman's happiness should atone for this venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face; the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice broke in upon their bliss.

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity,"

°°°°he sang mockingly.

°°°°Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand, the light touch of Rastignac's hair against her cheek, a word whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student's warm breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love's sake in the most famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

°°°°"The thing is arranged," Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. "Our two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half- past eight in the morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father's fortune and affections. A funny way of putting it, isn't it? Taillefer's youngster is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know."

°°°°Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders likewise appeared.

°°°°"That is just as I intended." Vautrin said. "You know quite well what you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you."

°°°°He made as though he would take Eugene's hand, but Rastignac hastily withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

°°°°"Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes of virtue about us!" murmured Vautrin. "But Papa Doliban has three millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride's white dress, even in your own eyes."

°°°°Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, "You look melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me."

°°°°The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

°°°°"Let us go up to your room," the worthy soul remarked, when he had asked Sylvie for the law student's key. "This morning," he resumed, "you thought that SHE did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting ME! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move into it in three days' time. Don't split upon me. She wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn't bear to keep the secret from you. You will be in the Rue d'Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that won't run away."

°°°°Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student's back was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney- piece and set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac's arms stamped in gold on the leather.

°°°°"My dear boy," said the kind soul, "I have been up to the eyes in this business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?"

°°°°"What is it?"

°°°°"There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn't that so? I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say to myself, 'He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.' If I were ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs- Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my little girl again, so light- hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, 'I am very happy, papa!' When they say 'father' stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me 'papa,' it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else."

°°°°The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

°°°°"It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!" he said, raising his head after a pause. "All the time we were going about together she chatted away about you. 'He is so nice-looking, papa; isn't he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?' Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no sign, and he was dying of impatience.

°°°°Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were written:

°°°°"I want you to think of me every hour, BECAUSE . . .   "DELPHINE."

°°°°That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as well as for his daughter's sake.

°°°°"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera- dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me with you, will you not?"

°°°°"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

°°°°"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you! Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

°°°°"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to her this evening, will you not?"

°°°°"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

°°°°"Can I be of any use?"

°°°°"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening; it is a matter of life and death."

°°°°"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance; "are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were saying down below? . . . TONNERRE DE DIEU! you have no notion what a tap A LA GORIOT is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh! the thing is impossible!"

°°°°"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

°°°°"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

°°°°"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to- morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

°°°°"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

°°°°"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting in an appearance----"

°°°°Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing at the threshold of his door and singing:

°°°°"Oh! Richard, oh my king!   All the world abandons thee!   Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

°°°°The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a . . . tra la la."

°°°°"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is waiting for you."

°°°°"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my Bordeaux."

°°°°"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste, hasn't she? Eh?"

°°°°Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and, all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

°°°°Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with consternation.

°°°°"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as merry as a skylark."

°°°°"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

°°°°"Bargain?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on, seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.

°°°°"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules," said the young painter.

°°°°"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

°°°°"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

°°°°"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

°°°°"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and the cheese."

°°°°"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach besides."

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme. Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

°°°°"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

°°°°Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

°°°°"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this, Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right- hand side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

°°°°"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a hundred chestnuts."

°°°°"Oh! oh!"

°°°°"Booououh!"

°°°°"Prrr!"

°°°°These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a set firework.

°°°°"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called Vautrin.

°°°°"Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for it, I have some currant cordial."

°°°°"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered the medical student.

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for it," he added.

°°°°"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little cakes."

°°°°"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out the biscuits."

°°°°The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously struck up with the following variations:

°°°°"Scissors to grind!"

°°°°"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

°°°°"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

°°°°"China to mend!"

°°°°"Boat ahoy!"

°°°°"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

°°°°"Old clo'!"

°°°°"Cherries all ripe!"

°°°°But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

°°°°A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

°°°°"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs. When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer, telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the bread is ready for the oven; to- morrow we will eat it up and whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? . . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

°°°°Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

°°°°"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the widow.

°°°°These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

°°°°"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

°°°°"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two ladies----"

°°°°"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your young lady."

°°°°"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

°°°°"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

°°°°He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead, and began to sing:

°°°°"Sleep, little darlings;   I watch while you slumber."

°°°°"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

°°°°"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. " 'Tis your duty as a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "the young fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife-- there's your fortune for you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I go out and call a cab--all my own self."

°°°°And he started out, singing as he went:

°°°°"Oh! sun! divine sun!   Ripening the pumpkins every one."

°°°°"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over. HE never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't lose what he hadn't got-- Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

°°°°Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just as he was, like a package, across the bed.

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know what dissipation is."

°°°°"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

°°°°"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such things----"

°°°°"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

°°°°"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer. It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

°°°°"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

°°°°"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

°°°°"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

°°°°"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress as she spoke.

°°°°Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.

°°°°"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

°°°°The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face, so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet, austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught something of the golden glory of heaven.

°°°°"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing her fingers through Eugene's hair.

°°°°"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

°°°°There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

°°°°"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though you had nothing on."

°°°°"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

°°°°"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint- Pierre (good soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme. Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now, don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will idolize you."

°°°°The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady; "we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments with all the care of an antiquary."

°°°°"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine. "Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them."

°°°°"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M. Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

°°°°"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

°°°°"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two women were alone together.

°°°°"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady; "just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

°°°°"Oh! mamma."

°°°°"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in for."

°°°°"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life," said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

°°°°"MON DIEU! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

°°°°With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room, Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned, and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

°°°°That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

°°°°But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the scent.

°°°°"A delusion," he said. "Collin's sorbonne is the most dangerous that has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the Place de Greve."

°°°°As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible expressions borrowed from thieves' Latin, thieves, of all people, being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking-- his council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth after the axe has done its work.

°°°°"Collin is playing us off," he continued. "When we come across a man like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la- Mort's paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent crime than to punish it."

°°°°"And you do a service to our country," said Poiret.

°°°°"Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you are," said the head of the department. "Yes, of course, we are serving our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle. I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get it back for you."

°°°°"Well, now," Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, "there are idiots who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as saying 'Good-day.' "

°°°°The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like apparition of the sham Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her boarders so long as she lived.

°°°°In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till close upon eleven o'clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin's first bottle of wine), was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme. Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o'clock, and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested, therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup belonging to Vautrin--it was standing with the others in the bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business. The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen. It ran thus:--

°°°°"I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my friend. Till two o'clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity's sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line will be enough. Say, 'I will hasten to you,' or else, 'I am ill.' But if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have happened? . . ."

°°°°"Yes, indeed, what has happened?" exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any more. "What time is it?"

°°°°"Half-past eleven," said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his coffee.

°°°°The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M. Taillefer's servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," he cried, "your father is asking for you-- something terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious."

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" exclaimed Vautrin. "How can people brawl when they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people have bad manners, and that is a fact."

°°°°"Sir!" cried Eugene.

°°°°"Well, what then, you big baby!" said Vautrin, swallowing down his coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. "Are there not duels every morning in Paris?" added Vautrin.

°°°°"I will go with you, Victorine," said Mme. Couture, and the two women hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance that said--"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me tears!"

°°°°"Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"I am all sorts of things," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Queer, isn't it?" said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession of commonplaces suited to the occasion. "Death takes us off without asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have other complaints that men don't suffer from. We bear children, and it takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her father will have to acknowledge her now!"

°°°°"There!" said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, "yesterday she had not a penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune."

°°°°"I say, M. Eugene!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "you have landed on your feet!"

°°°°At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the crumpled letter still in his hand.

°°°°"You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to be like the rest of them?" he asked.

°°°°"Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine," said Eugene, turning to Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised the onlookers at this scene.

°°°°Father Goriot caught the student's hand and grasped it warmly. He could have kissed it.

°°°°"Oh, ho!" said Vautrin, "the Italians have a good proverb--Col tempo."

°°°°"Is there any answer?" said Mme. de Nucingen's messenger, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Say that I will come directly."

°°°°The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he could not be prudent.

°°°°"What is to be done?" he exclaimed aloud. "There are no proofs!"

°°°°Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, "Luck comes to us while we sleep, young man," and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck dead.

°°°°"So there is a Divine Justice!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?"

°°°°"A stroke!" cried Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor," called the widow. "Oh, M. Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel."

°°°°Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.

°°°°"Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist's and ask for something that's good for the apoplexy."

°°°°Christophe likewise went.

°°°°"Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs."

°°°°Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow staircase, and laid upon his bed.

°°°°"I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter," said M. Goriot.

°°°°"Selfish old thing!" cried Mme. Vauquer. "Yes, go; I wish you may die like a dog."

°°°°"Just go and see if you can find some ether," said Mlle. Michonneau to Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the sick man's clothes.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress of the situation.

°°°°"Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be of some use in sparing my modesty," she said to Poiret, "instead of standing there like a stock."

°°°°Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

°°°°"There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily," exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on the shirt again.--"Ouf! How heavy he is," he added, as he laid the convict down.

°°°°"Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!" said the old maid briskly; her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of the furniture with greedy eyes. "Could we find some excuse for opening that desk?"

°°°°"It mightn't be quite right," responded Poiret to this.

°°°°"Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it doesn't belong to any one now. But we haven't time, there is the Vauquer."

°°°°"Here is the ether," said that lady. "I must say that this is an eventful day. Lord! that man can't have had a stroke; he is as white as curds."

°°°°"White as curds?" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"And his pulse is steady," said the widow, laying her hand on his breast.

°°°°"Steady?" said the astonished Poiret.

°°°°"He is all right."

°°°°"Do you think so?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look, mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears a wig. They say that red- haired people are either the worst or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?"

°°°°"Good to hang," said Poiret.

°°°°"Round a pretty woman's neck, you mean," said Mlle Michonneau, hastily. "Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman's duty to nurse you men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take yourself off," she added. "Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of dear M. Vautrin.

°°°°Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the room by his master.

°°°°Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself might be implicated. Vautrin's coolness still further dismayed him.

°°°°"Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?" Rastignac asked himself.

°°°°He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

°°°°"Well?" shouted Bianchon, "you have seen the Pilote?"

°°°°The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local journals.

°°°°"There is a wonderful history in it," said the house student of the Hopital Cochin. "Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?"

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----"

°°°°"You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master Taillefer's money!"

°°°°"Are all the devils of hell at my heels?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand," said Bianchon, "and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish."

°°°°"Just go to Mother Vauquer's," said Rastignac; "that scoundrel Vautrin has dropped down like one dead."

°°°°"Aha!" said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, "you confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself."

°°°°The law student's long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot's confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue d'Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.

°°°°"Such a love is my anchor of safety," he said to himself. "How the old man's heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!"

°°°°He took out his watch and admired it.

°°°°"I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?"

°°°°Rastignac's battle with himself went on for a long while; and though the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison Vauquer through the gathering dusk.

°°°°Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau's officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer's duel. They were anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the probable change in Victorine's prospects. Father Goriot alone was absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the same look that had read his thoughts before--the look that had such power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.

°°°°"Well, dear boy," said the escaped convict, "I am likely to cheat death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors."

°°°°"A bull you might say," cried the widow.

°°°°"You really might be sorry to see me still alive," said Vautrin in Rastignac's ear, thinking that he guessed the student's thoughts. "You must be mighty sure of yourself."

°°°°"Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort," said Bianchon; "and, upon my word, that name would do very well for you."

°°°°Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle. Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature had dropped from the convict's face; from the unmistakable ferocity of that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the sitting-room.

°°°°"In the name of the King and the Law!" said an officer, but the words were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.

°°°°Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men, who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden, and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin's face was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair, the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines, his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor. Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.

°°°°"You are not in the politest of humors to-day," he remarked to the chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his head.

°°°°"Gentlemen," he said, "put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call on those present to witness that I make no resistance."

°°°°A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally sudden cessation.

°°°°"There's a sell for you, master crusher," the convict added, looking at the famous director of police.

°°°°"Come, strip!" said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.

°°°°"Why?" asked Collin. "There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and surrender."

°°°°He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to overwhelm his audience.

°°°°"Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle," he went on, addressing a little, white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table; and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to draw up a document. "I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin, otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years' penal servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my nickname.--If I had as much as raised my hand," he went on, addressing the other lodgers, "those three sneaking wretches yonder would have drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer's domestic hearth. The rogues have laid their heads together to set a trap for me."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.

°°°°"Good Lord!" she cried, "this does give one a turn; and me at the Gaite with him only last night!" she said to Sylvie.

°°°°"Summon your philosophy, mamma," Collin resumed. "Is it a misfortune to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me." His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his eyes.--"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept any time you like! Do you understand?" And he sang:

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity."

°°°°"Don't you trouble yourself," he went on; "I can get in my money. They are too much afraid of me to swindle me."

°°°°The convicts' prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur, its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the speaker's discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno, wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own evil thoughts.

°°°°"Who betrayed me?" said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"It was you, old cat!" he said. "That sham stroke of apoplexy was your doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs," he shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession of his effects. "The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here," he said tapping his forehead. "Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?" he said, turning to the chief. "It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?" he asked of the police officers. "A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money," he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. "These folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?" he asked proudly. "There is some good there," he said tapping his heart; "I have never betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut," he said to the old maid, "they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them sick. Rake in your gains."

°°°°He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers' faces.

°°°°"What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before? A convict of Collin's stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and I am a match for them all."

°°°°"Ye gods!" cried the painter, "what a magnificent sketch one might make of him!"

°°°°"Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master of ceremonies to the widow" (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given by prisoners to the guillotine), "be a good fellow, and tell me if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don't want him to suffer for some one else, that would not be fair."

°°°°But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Collin, addressing the lodgers, "they will take me away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me to send you figs from Provence."

°°°°He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at Rastignac.

°°°°"Good-bye, Eugene," he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange transition from his previous rough and stern manner. "If you should be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend," and, in spite of his shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, "One, two!" like a fencing-master, and lunged. "If anything goes wrong, apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service."

°°°°The strange speaker's manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the pantomime.

°°°°As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house, Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress' temples with vinegar, looked round at the bewildered lodgers.

°°°°"Well," said she, "he was a man, he was, for all that."

°°°°Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead- alive, mummy-like figure, crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, "If that creature is going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out."

°°°°In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save Poiret, was of the medical student's opinion, so that the latter, strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

°°°°"You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us," he said; "speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at once."

°°°°"At once!" echoed Poiret in amazement.

°°°°Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in her ear.

°°°°"I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here as any one else," she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

°°°°"Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Monsieur is taking Collin's part" she said, with a questioning, malignant glance at the law student; "it is not difficult to guess why."

°°°°Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

°°°°"Let her alone!" cried the boarders.

°°°°Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

°°°°"Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas," said the painter, turning to Mme. Vauquer. "If you don't show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are."

°°°°At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in them.

°°°°"Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness," she cried, interrupting herself, "I can't help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is moving----"

°°°°"Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux's in the Place Sorbonne," cried Bianchon.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Come, now," she said; "you would not be the ruin of my establishment, would you, eh? There's a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening."

°°°°"Never a bit of it!" cried the boarders. "She must go, and go this minute!"

°°°°"But the poor lady has had no dinner," said Poiret, with piteous entreaty.

°°°°"She can go and dine where she likes," shouted several voices.

°°°°"Turn her out, the spy!"

°°°°"Turn them both out! Spies!"

°°°°"Gentlemen," cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love gives to the ovine male, "respect the weaker sex."

°°°°"Spies are of no sex!" said the painter.

°°°°"A precious sexorama!"

°°°°"Turn her into the streetorama!"

°°°°"Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house, it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We have paid our money, and we are not going," said Poiret, putting on his cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer was remonstrating.

°°°°"Naughty boy!" said the painter, with a comical look; "run away, naughty little boy!"

°°°°"Look here," said Bianchon; "if you do not go, all the rest of us will," and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room- door.

°°°°"Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?" cried Mme. Vauquer. "I am a ruined woman. You can't stay here; they will go further, do something violent."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

°°°°"She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn't."

°°°°These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions, borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low voice in her hostess' ear, and then--"I shall go to Mme. Buneaud's," she said, with a threatening look.

°°°°"Go where you please, mademoiselle," said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. "Go and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the food is cheap and nasty."

°°°°The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out laughing at the sight of him.

°°°°"Hist!--st!--st! Poiret," shouted the painter. "Hallo! I say, Poiret, hallo!" The employe from the Museum began to sing:

°°°°"Partant pour la Syrie,   Le jeune et beau Dunois . . ."

°°°°"Get along with you; you must be dying to go, trahit sua quemque voluptas!" said Bianchon.

°°°°"Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil," said the tutor.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret's arm, with an appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together, the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause, followed by peals of laughter.

°°°°"Bravo, Poiret!"

°°°°"Who would have thought it of old Poiret!"

°°°°"Apollo Poiret!"

°°°°"Mars Poiret!"

°°°°"Intrepid Poiret!"

°°°°A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

°°°°"The house might as well be burned down at once," cried she, "if there are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three o'clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those ladies at that poor man's expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me to send their things, because they are going to live with her father. M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone! . . ."

°°°°She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

°°°°"Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think," she cried.

°°°°Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

°°°°"What! another windfall for somebody!" was Sylvie's comment.

°°°°But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

°°°°"Goriot in a cab!" cried the boarders; "the world is coming to an end."

°°°°The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man's arm.

°°°°"Come," he said, with gladness in his eyes.

°°°°"Then you haven't heard the news?" said Eugene. "Vautrin was an escaped convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead."

°°°°"Very well, but what business is it of ours?" replied Father Goriot. "I am going to dine with my daughter in YOUR HOUSE, do you understand? She is expecting you. Come!"

°°°°He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

°°°°"Now, let us have dinner," cried the painter, and every one drew his chair to the table.

°°°°"Well, I never," said the portly Sylvie. "Nothing goes right to- day! The haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it is, more's the pity!"

°°°°Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day's events; but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels, jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day. Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope was the portly Sylvie.

°°°°That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in the cab. The old man's voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears like words spoken in a dream.

°°°°"It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don't know what pretty ways she has; at table she will look after me, 'Here, papa, just try this, it is nice.' And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her."

°°°°"It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down."

°°°°"Upside down?" repeated Father Goriot. "Why, the world has never been so right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood would be as sweet as honey."

°°°°"I feel as if I were coming back to life again," said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, hurry up there!" cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in front. "Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the place I told you of in ten minutes time."

°°°°With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous celerity.

°°°°"How that fellow crawls!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"But where are you taking me?" Eugene asked him.

°°°°"To your own house," said Goriot.

°°°°The cab stopped in the Rue d'Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning to bachelor ways.

°°°°"Come along upstairs," he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard, and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen's maid. Eugene found himself in a charming set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description, the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

°°°°"So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to understand!"

°°°°Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just witnessed was too much for Rastignac's over- wrought nerves, after the day's strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was almost overcome by it.

°°°°"I felt sure myself that he loved you," murmured Father Goriot, while Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring about this final transformation scene.

°°°°"But you must see your rooms," said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed, down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of Delphine's apartment.

°°°°"There is no bed," said Rastignac.

°°°°"No, monsieur," she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene, looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

°°°°"You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for ever," he said in her ear. "Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret."

°°°°"Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose," growled the father.

°°°°"You know quite well that 'we' means you."

°°°°"Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a good idea of mine to say to you, 'There are some nice rooms to let in the Rue d'Artois; let us furnish them for him?' And she would not hear of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers else."

°°°°"Was that how it happened?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----"

°°°°Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low though the sound was.

°°°°The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was wanting there.

°°°°"Have we guessed your wishes rightly?" she asked, as they returned to the drawing-room for dinner.

°°°°"Yes," he said, "only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----"

°°°°"Ah! ah! you say me nay already," she said with arch imperiousness, and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman's way of laughing away scruples.

°°°°But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self- questioning, and Vautrin's arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into abandoning his high- minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled his mind.

°°°°"Do you really mean to refuse?" said Mme. de Nucingen. "And do you know what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying my affection? If you love me, if I-- love you, why should you shrink back from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment, you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this. . . . Ah!" she cried, as Eugene's passionate glance was turned on her, "and you are making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you. Speak!-- Father," she said after a pause, "make him listen to reason. Can he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?"

°°°°Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

°°°°"Child that you are!" she cried again, catching Eugene's hand. "You are just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man finds insurmountable; a woman's hand opens the way and you shrink back! Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to repay me my loan of today? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your garret must be if it is like papa's room! See, dinner is waiting all this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don't you answer?" she said, shaking his hand. "MON DIEU! papa, make up his mind for him, or I will go away and never see him any more."

°°°°"I will make up your mind," said Goriot, coming down from the clouds. "Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews, isn't it?"

°°°°"There is positively no help for it," said Eugene.

°°°°"All right, I will give you credit," said the other, drawing out a cheap leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. "I have turned Jew myself; I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you can return it some time or other."

°°°°Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot's warmly.

°°°°"Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?"

°°°°"Oh! my poor father," said Mme. de Nucingen, "how did you do it?"

°°°°"Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you, and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to myself, 'She will never be able to pay for them.' The attorney says that those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year, and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, 'How happy they are going to be!' and--well, now, are you not happy?"

°°°°"Oh papa! papa!" cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright and radiant.

°°°°"Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel for you now?"

°°°°"Why, children, why Delphinette!" cried Goriot, who had not felt his daughter's heart beat against his breast for ten years, "do you want me to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are quits already." And the old man strained her to his breast with such fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

°°°°"Oh! you are hurting me!" she said.

°°°°"I am hurting you!" He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men. Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his fingers had grasped too roughly.

°°°°"Oh! no, no," he cried. "I have not hurt you, have I?" and his smile seemed to repeat the question. "YOU have hurt me with that cry just now.--The things cost rather more than that," he said in her ear, with another gentle kiss, "but I had to deceive him about it, or he would have been angry."

°°°°Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration which shapes the beliefs of youth.

°°°°"I will be worthy of all this," he cried.

°°°°"Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said," and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law student on the forehead.

°°°°"He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you," said Father Goriot. "Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus."

°°°°"Oh! why did you tell her?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"Eugene," Delphine said in his ear, "I have one regret now this evening. Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!"

°°°°"This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!" cried Goriot. "God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer through you, and I can still say, 'In this short month of February I had more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.'--Look at me, Fifine!" he said to his daughter. "She is very beautiful, is she not? Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell instead. Come, let us have dinner," he added, scarcely knowing what he said, "everything is ours."

°°°°"Poor dear father!"

°°°°He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a kiss on the plaits of hair. "If you only knew, little one, how happy you can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me, say that you will!"

°°°°"Yes, dear father."

°°°°"Say it again."

°°°°"Yes, I will, my kind father."

°°°°"Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed my own wishes. Let us have dinner."

°°°°The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot's spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter's feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more tender.

°°°°"You see!" Delphine said with a look at Eugene, "so long as my father is with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes."

°°°°Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

°°°°"And when will the rooms be ready?" asked Eugene, looking round. "We must all leave them this evening, I suppose."

°°°°"Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me," she answered, with an eloquent glance. "It is our night at the Italiens."

°°°°"I shall go to the pit," said her father.

°°°°It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen's carriage was waiting for her, and Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing that the father's self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her father's adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future of love.

°°°°They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso's lamentations as recorded in Byron's poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force of truth they fall far short of the widow's cry from the depths.

°°°°"Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life, now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people! The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and Christophe will have to go!"

°°°°The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said, "Madame," questioningly.

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Sylvie, "he is like a dog."

°°°°"In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a little dog."

°°°°"Lord!" said Sylvie, flinging up her head, "those old maids are up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"There's that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict," the widow went on. "Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I can't bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny on the nail too."

°°°°"And open-handed he was!" said Christophe.

°°°°"There is some mistake," said Sylvie.

°°°°"Why, no there isn't! he said so himself!" said Mme. Vauquer. "And to think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it's like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap; we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again; there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred, will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that is just what it is!"

°°°°"And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear," cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Don't speak of her, she is a wicked woman!" said Mme. Vauquer. "She is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed and murdered people in her time. SHE ought to be put in jail for life instead of that poor dear----"

°°°°Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

°°°°"Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers," said the widow, sighing.

°°°°But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d'Antin.

°°°°"Sylvie!" cried the widow, "this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There's a weight on my chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow, Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen," and she went.

°°°°"What is the matter now?" Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

°°°°"Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a bit. It's the first time she has cried since I've been with her."

°°°°By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had "made up her mind to it." True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A lover's farewell glance at his lady-love's window is not more mournful than Mme. Vauquer's survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take his (Rastignac's) place; that the official from the Museum had often expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture's rooms; and that in a very few days her household would be on the old footing.

°°°°"God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here. There'll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you'll see," and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining- room. "Whose turn will it be, I wonder?"

°°°°"It is just as well that we are moving out," said Eugene to Father Goriot in a low voice.

°°°°"Madame," said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, "I have not seen Mistigris these three days."

°°°°"Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if HE has gone and left us, I----"

°°°°The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this dreadful portent.

°°°°By twelve o'clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse's great ball, which had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was slipped in with the card.

°°°°"I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to   interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the   card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make   the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud's sister. Pray introduce that   charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your   affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.   "VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT."

°°°°"Well," said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, "Mme. de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de Nucingen."

°°°°He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of Paris--will never have a rival.

°°°°Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country, it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love exist there without that wealth?

°°°°If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water, without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls, waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look with pity upon those of earth.

°°°°Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it. In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one man, but of a whole nation.

°°°°But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a brilliant future.

°°°°So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

°°°°"Madame is in her room," Therese came to tell him. The woman's voice made him start.

°°°°He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid the blossom.

°°°°"Well," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "here you are."

°°°°"Guess what I bring for you," said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He took possession of her arm to kiss her hand

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

°°°°"And I owe this happiness to you--to THEE" (she whispered the more intimate word in his ear); "but Therese is in my dressing- room, let us be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes to me through YOU--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint- Germain, it is because I shall meet you there."

°°°°"Mme. de Beauseant's note seems to say very plainly that she does not expect to see the BARON de Nucingen at her ball; don't you think so?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, yes," said the Baroness as she returned the letter. "Those women have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go. My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully dressed.--Eugene," she went on, lowering her voice, "she will go to dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a woman's character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband's mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant's ball in tissue of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I mean to be perfectly happy."

°°°°At one o'clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In the midst of their lovers' farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to come, she said in a troubled voice, "I am very fearful, superstitious. Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe."

°°°°"Child!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?" she asked, laughingly.

°°°°Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left its sweetness on the lips.

°°°°"Well?" cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene; "I will tell you everything to-morrow."

°°°°"Everything, will you not?" cried the old man. "Go to bed. To- morrow our happy life will begin."

°°°°Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging- house, and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it; but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran lightly upstairs.

°°°°It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d'Artois at four o'clock; but Rastignac's name had been called early on the list at the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this, Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin's signature lying in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot's room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him; but after the first few words, the conversation between the father and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his attention.

°°°°"Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe to talk?" she added.

°°°°"Yes, there is no one in the house," said her father faintly.

°°°°"What is the matter with you?" asked Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!" said the old man. "You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d'Artois."

°°°°"Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the subject with him. Wasn't that what you told me to tell him?"

°°°°"Yes, quite right," answered Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then," Delphine continued, "he told me all about his affairs. He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations; they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes, on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy (in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him."

°°°°"Do you really believe that silly rubbish?" . . . cried her father. "It was all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No, no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them, and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that's holiest in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked! and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers. If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don't give way, don't make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he can't do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once; I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know for certain that your fortune is secure."

°°°°"Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile, it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we drive him to despair, I am lost."

°°°°"Why, then, the man is a rogue?"

°°°°"Well, yes, father," she said, flinging herself into a chair, "I wanted to keep it from you to spare your feelings," and she burst into tears; "I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his stalking- horse."

°°°°"But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons- in-law of that sort," cried her father; "why, I would guillotine him myself if there was no headsman to do it."

°°°°"No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says, stripped of all his circumlocutions--'Take your choice, you and no one else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through myself.' Is that plain speaking? He MUST have my assistance. He is assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to be Eugene's wife in all but name. 'I connive at your errors, and you allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!' Is that sufficiently explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get possession of those bills?"

°°°°Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on his knees.

°°°°"Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child! forgive me!" cried the old man.

°°°°"Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame," said Delphine. "We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us! Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa," she said, kissing him.

°°°°"Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your husband's winding."

°°°°"No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me, well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters. No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant's ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene! . . . Come, let us see his room."

°°°°But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve, and the sound of Mme. de Restaud's voice came from the staircase. "Is my father in?" she asked of Sylvie.

°°°°This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

°°°°"Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?" said Delphine, when she heard her sister speak. "It looks as though some strange things had happened in that family."

°°°°"What sort of things?" asked Goriot. "This is like to be the death of me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune."

°°°°"Good-morning, father," said the Countess from the threshold. "Oh! Delphine, are you here?"

°°°°Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister's presence.

°°°°"Good-morning, Nasie," said the Baroness. "What is there so extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day."

°°°°"Since when?"

°°°°"If you came yourself you would know."

°°°°"Don't tease, Delphine," said the Countess fretfully. "I am very miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!"

°°°°"What is it, Nasie?" cried Goriot. "Tell us all about it, child! How white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will love you even better, if that were possible."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. "We are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see."

°°°°The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

°°°°"This will kill me!" said their father. "There," he went on, stirring the smouldering fire, "come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it, Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----"

°°°°"Well, then, my husband knows everything," said the Countess. "Just imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime's some time ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that. About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled. He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively. Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard; for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I had eaten up all that you had----"

°°°°"No," said Goriot; "I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet."

°°°°The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when the father's love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice, revealed the depths of his despair.

°°°°"I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell," and the Countess burst into tears.

°°°°Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister's shoulder, and cried too.

°°°°"Then it is all true," she said.

°°°°Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her, kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

°°°°"I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie," she said.

°°°°"My angels," murmured Goriot faintly. "Oh, why should it be trouble that draws you together?"

°°°°This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

°°°°"To save Maxime's life," she said, "to save all my own happiness, I went to the money-lender you know of, a man of iron forged in hell-fire; nothing can melt him; I took all the family diamonds that M. de Restaud is so proud of--his and mine too--and sold them to that M. Gobseck. SOLD THEM! Do you understand? I saved Maxime, but I am lost. Restaud found it all out."

°°°°"How? Who told him? I will kill him," cried Goriot.

°°°°"Yesterday he sent to tell me to come to his room. I went. . . . 'Anastasie,' he said in a voice--oh! such a voice; that was enough, it told me everything--'where are your diamonds?'--'In my room----'--'No,' he said, looking straight at me, 'there they are on that chest of drawers----' and he lifted his handkerchief and showed me the casket. 'Do you know where they came from?' he said. I fell at his feet. . . . I cried; I besought him to tell me the death he wished to see me die."

°°°°"You said that!" cried Goriot. "By God in heaven, whoever lays a hand on either of you so long as I am alive may reckon on being roasted by slow fires! Yes, I will cut him in pieces like . . ."

°°°°Goriot stopped; the words died away in his throat.

°°°°"And then, dear, he asked something worse than death of me. Oh! heaven preserve all other women from hearing such words as I heard then!"

°°°°"I will murder that man," said Goriot quietly. "But he has only one life, and he deserves to die twice.--And then, what next?" he added, looking at Anastasie.

°°°°"Then," the Countess resumed, "there was a pause, and he looked at me. 'Anastasie,' he said, 'I will bury this in silence; there shall be no separation; there are the children. I will not kill M. de Trailles. I might miss him if we fought, and as for other ways of getting rid of him, I should come into collision with the law. If I killed him in your arms, it would bring dishonor on THOSE children. But if you do not want to see your children perish, nor their father nor me, you must first of all submit to two conditions. Answer me. Have I a child of my own?' I answered, 'Yes,'--'Which?'--'Ernest, our eldest boy.'--'Very well,' he said, 'and now swear to obey me in this particular from this time forward.' I swore. 'You will make over your property to me when I require you to do so.' "

°°°°"Do nothing of the kind!" cried Goriot. "Aha! M. de Restaud, you could not make your wife happy; she has looked for happiness and found it elsewhere, and you make her suffer for your own ineptitude? He will have to reckon with me. Make yourself easy, Nasie. Aha! he cares about his heir! Good, very good. I will get hold of the boy; isn't he my grandson? What the blazes! I can surely go to see the brat! I will stow him away somewhere; I will take care of him, you may be quite easy. I will bring Restaud to terms, the monster! I shall say to him, 'A word or two with you! If you want your son back again, give my daughter her property, and leave her to do as she pleases.' "

°°°°"Father!"

°°°°"Yes. I am your father, Nasie, a father indeed! That rogue of a great lord had better not ill-treat my daughter. Tonnerre! What is it in my veins? There is the blood of a tiger in me; I could tear those two men to pieces! Oh! children, children! so this is what your lives are! Why, it is death! . . . What will become of you when I shall be here no longer? Fathers ought to live as long as their children. Ah! Lord God in heaven! how ill Thy world is ordered! Thou hast a Son, if what they tell us is true, and yet Thou leavest us to suffer so through our children. My darlings, my darlings! to think that trouble only should bring you to me, that I should only see you with tears on your faces! Ah! yes, yes, you love me, I see that you love me. Come to me and pour out your griefs to me; my heart is large enough to hold them all. Oh! you might rend my heart in pieces, and every fragment would make a father's heart. If only I could bear all your sorrows for you! . . . Ah! you were so happy when you were little and still with me. . . ."

°°°°"We have never been happy since," said Delphine. "Where are the old days when we slid down the sacks in the great granary?"

°°°°"That is not all, father," said Anastasie in Goriot's ear. The old man gave a startled shudder. "The diamonds only sold for a hundred thousand francs. Maxime is hard pressed. There are twelve thousand francs still to pay. He has given me his word that he will be steady and give up play in future. His love is all that I have left in the world. I have paid such a fearful price for it that I should die if I lose him now. I have sacrificed my fortune, my honor, my peace of mind, and my children for him. Oh! do something, so that at the least Maxime may be at large and live undisgraced in the world, where he will assuredly make a career for himself. Something more than my happiness is at stake; the children have nothing, and if he is sent to Sainte-Pelagie all his prospects will be ruined."

°°°°"I haven't the money, Nasie. I have NOTHING--nothing left. This is the end of everything. Yes, the world is crumbling into ruin, I am sure. Fly! Save yourselves! Ah!--I have still my silver buckles left, and half-a-dozen silver spoons and forks, the first I ever had in my life. But I have nothing else except my life annuity, twelve hundred francs . . ."

°°°°"Then what has become of your money in the funds?"

°°°°"I sold out, and only kept a trifle for my wants. I wanted twelve thousand francs to furnish some rooms for Delphine."

°°°°"In your own house?" asked Mme. de Restaud, looking at her sister.

°°°°"What does it matter where they were?" asked Goriot. "The money is spent now."

°°°°"I see how it is," said the Countess. "Rooms for M. de Rastignac. Poor Delphine, take warning by me!"

°°°°"M. de Rastignac is incapable of ruining the woman he loves, dear."

°°°°"Thanks! Delphine. I thought you would have been kinder to me in my troubles, but you never did love me."

°°°°"Yes, yes, she loves you, Nasie," cried Goriot; "she was saying so only just now. We were talking about you, and she insisted that you were beautiful, and that she herself was only pretty!"

°°°°"Pretty!" said the Countess. "She is as hard as a marble statue."

°°°°"And if I am?" cried Delphine, flushing up, "how have you treated me? You would not recognize me; you closed the doors of every house against me; you have never let an opportunity of mortifying me slip by. And when did I come, as you were always doing, to drain our poor father, a thousand francs at a time, till he is left as you see him now? That is all your doing, sister! I myself have seen my father as often as I could. I have not turned him out of the house, and then come and fawned upon him when I wanted money. I did not so much as know that he had spent those twelve thousand francs on me. I am economical, as you know; and when papa has made me presents, it has never been because I came and begged for them."

°°°°"You were better off than I. M. de Marsay was rich, as you have reason to know. You always were as slippery as gold. Good-bye; I have neither sister nor----"

°°°°"Oh! hush, hush, Nasie!" cried her father.

°°°°"Nobody else would repeat what everybody has ceased to believe. You are an unnatural sister!" cried Delphine.

°°°°"Oh, children, children! hush! hush! or I will kill myself before your eyes."

°°°°"There, Nasie, I forgive you," said Mme. de Nucingen; "you are very unhappy. But I am kinder than you are. How could you say THAT just when I was ready to do anything in the world to help you, even to be reconciled with my husband, which for my own sake I---- Oh! it is just like you; you have behaved cruelly to me all through these nine years."

°°°°"Children, children, kiss each other!" cried the father. "You are angels, both of you."

°°°°"No. Let me alone," cried the Countess shaking off the hand that her father had laid on her arm. "She is more merciless than my husband. Any one might think she was a model of all the virtues herself!"

°°°°"I would rather have people think that I owed money to M. de Marsay than own that M. de Trailles had cost me more than two hundred thousand francs," retorted Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"DELPHINE!" cried the Countess, stepping towards her sister.

°°°°"I shall tell you the truth about yourself if you begin to slander me," said the Baroness coldly.

°°°°"Delphine! you are a ----"

°°°°Father Goriot sprang between them, grasped the Countess' hand, and laid his own over her mouth.

°°°°"Good heavens, father! What have you been handling this morning?" said Anastasie.

°°°°"Ah! well, yes, I ought not to have touched you," said the poor father, wiping his hands on his trousers, "but I have been packing up my things; I did not know that you were coming to see me."

°°°°He was glad that he had drawn down her wrath upon himself.

°°°°"Ah!" he sighed, as he sat down, "you children have broken my heart between you. This is killing me. My head feels as if it were on fire. Be good to each other and love each other! This will be the death of me! Delphine! Nasie! come, be sensible; you are both in the wrong. Come, Dedel," he added, looking through his tears at the Baroness, "she must have twelve thousand francs, you see; let us see if we can find them for her. Oh, my girls, do not look at each other like that!" and he sank on his knees beside Delphine. "Ask her to forgive you--just to please me," he said in her ear. "She is more miserable than you are. Come now, Dedel."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Delphine, alarmed at the wild extravagant grief in her father's face, "I was in the wrong, kiss me----"

°°°°"Ah! that is like balm to my heart," cried Father Goriot. "But how are we to find twelve thousand francs? I might offer myself as a substitute in the army----"

°°°°"Oh! father dear!" they both cried, flinging their arms about him. "No, no!"

°°°°"God reward you for the thought. We are not worth it, are we, Nasie?" asked Delphine.

°°°°"And besides, father dear, it would only be a drop in the bucket," observed the Countess.

°°°°"But is flesh and blood worth nothing?" cried the old man in his despair. "I would give body and soul to save you, Nasie. I would do a murder for the man who would rescue you. I would do, as Vautrin did, go to the hulks, go----" he stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and put both hands to his head. "Nothing left!" he cried, tearing his hair. "If I only knew of a way to steal money, but it is so hard to do it, and then you can't set to work by yourself, and it takes time to rob a bank. Yes, it is time I was dead; there is nothing left me to do but to die. I am no good in the world; I am no longer a father! No. She has come to me in her extremity, and, wretch that I am, I have nothing to give her. Ah! you put your money into a life annuity, old scoundrel; and had you not daughters? You did not love them. Die, die in a ditch, like the dog that you are! Yes, I am worse than a dog; a beast would not have done as I have done! Oh! my head . . . it throbs as if it would burst."

°°°°"Papa!" cried both the young women at once, "do, pray, be reasonable!" and they clung to him to prevent him from dashing his head against the wall. There was a sound of sobbing.

°°°°Eugene, greatly alarmed, took the bill that bore Vautrin's signature, saw that the stamp would suffice for a larger sum, altered the figures, made it into a regular bill for twelve thousand francs, payable to Goriot's order, and went to his neighbor's room.

°°°°"Here is the money, madame," he said, handing the piece of paper to her. "I was asleep; your conversation awoke me, and by this means I learned all that I owed to M. Goriot. This bill can be discounted, and I shall meet it punctually at the due date."

°°°°The Countess stood motionless and speechless, but she held the bill in her fingers.

°°°°"Delphine," she said, with a white face, and her whole frame quivering with indignation, anger, and rage, "I forgave you everything; God is my witness that I forgave you, but I cannot forgive this! So this gentleman was there all the time, and you knew it! Your petty spite has let you to wreak your vengeance on me by betraying my secrets, my life, my children's lives, my shame, my honor! There, you are nothing to me any longer. I hate you. I will do all that I can to injure you. I will . . ."

°°°°Anger paralyzed her; the words died in her dry parched throat.

°°°°"Why, he is my son, my child; he is your brother, your preserver!" cried Goriot. "Kiss his hand, Nasie! Stay, I will embrace him myself," he said, straining Eugene to his breast in a frenzied clasp. "Oh my boy! I will be more than a father to you; if I had God's power, I would fling worlds at your feet. Why don't you kiss him, Nasie? He is not a man, but an angel, a angel out of heaven."

°°°°"Never mind her, father; she is mad just now."

°°°°"Mad! am I? And what are you?" cried Mme. de Restaud.

°°°°"Children, children, I shall die if you go on like this," cried the old man, and he staggered and fell on the bed as if a bullet had struck him.--"They are killing me between them," he said to himself.

°°°°The Countess fixed her eyes on Eugene, who stood stock still; all his faculties were numbed by this violent scene.

°°°°"Sir? . . ." she said, doubt and inquiry in her face, tone, and bearing; she took no notice now of her father nor of Delphine, who was hastily unfastening his waistcoat.

°°°°"Madame," said Eugene, answering the question before it was asked, "I will meet the bill, and keep silence about it."

°°°°"You have killed our father, Nasie!" said Delphine, pointing to Goriot, who lay unconscious on the bed. The Countess fled.

°°°°"I freely forgive her," said the old man, opening his eyes; "her position is horrible; it would turn an older head than hers. Comfort Nasie, and be nice to her, Delphine; promise it to your poor father before he dies," he asked, holding Delphine's hand in a convulsive clasp.

°°°°"Oh! what ails you, father?" she cried in real alarm.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing," said Goriot; "it will go off. There is something heavy pressing on my forehead, a little headache. . . . Ah! poor Nasie, what a life lies before her!"

°°°°Just as he spoke, the Countess came back again and flung herself on her knees before him. "Forgive me!" she cried.

°°°°"Come," said her father, "you are hurting me still more."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Countess said, turning to Rastignac, "misery made me unjust to you. You will be a brother to me, will you not?" and she held out her hand. Her eyes were full of tears as she spoke.

°°°°"Nasie," cried Delphine, flinging her arms round her sister, "my little Nasie, let us forget and forgive."

°°°°"No, no," cried Nasie; "I shall never forget!"

°°°°"Dear angels," cried Goriot, "it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won't it?"

°°°°"I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?"

°°°°"There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No, after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in future."

°°°°Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

°°°°"Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper," said Mme. de Nucingen, "but she has a good heart."

°°°°"She came back for the endorsement," said Eugene in Delphine's ear.

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her," he answered, raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did not venture to express.

°°°°"Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent."

°°°°"How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"I should like to go to sleep," he replied.

°°°°Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

°°°°"This evening at the Italiens," she said to Eugene, "and you can let me know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go into your room.--Oh! how frightful!" she cried on the threshold. "Why, you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps of gold."

°°°°A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot's bedside; to all appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, "They are not happy!" Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they were spoken went to his daughter's heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

°°°°"Ah! Delphine!" he said.

°°°°"How are you now?" she asked.

°°°°"Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently. Don't stay with me, children; go, go and be happy."

°°°°Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room, and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

°°°°"Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin," said Eugene.

°°°°Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him next to the old lodger.

°°°°"What is wrong with him?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning."

°°°°"Is there any cure for it?"

°°°°"None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on? There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way."

°°°°"Yes, there was," said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had struck blow on blow at their father's heart.

°°°°"But Delphine at any rate loves her father," he said to himself.

°°°°That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

°°°°"Do not be anxious about him," she said, however, as soon as Eugene began, "our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear. At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake. To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me; what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh! no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in life when everything turns to bitterness."

°°°°Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression on him.

°°°°Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love, they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme. de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

°°°°"What are you thinking about?" she asked.

°°°°"I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me."

°°°°She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more words, and she feared for her self- control.

°°°°"Eugene," she said, changing the conversation, "I wonder whether you know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant's to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d'Ajuda have agreed to keep the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be there. People are wondering what will happen?"

°°°°"The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill Mme. de Beauseant."

°°°°"Oh, no," said Delphine, smiling, "you do not know that kind of woman. Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for your sake."

°°°°"Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set in circulation here."

°°°°"We shall know the truth to-morrow."

°°°°Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d'Artois. Yesterday evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o'clock in the morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot's existence. The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four o'clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

°°°°"Aha!" said the painter as Eugene came in, "Father Goriot has broken down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of its brightest ornaments."

°°°°Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

°°°°"Hey! Monsieur Eugene!"

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you," shouted Sylvie.

°°°°"It is this, sir," said the widow. "You and M. Goriot should by rights have moved out on the 15th of February. That was three days ago; to-day is the 18th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied."

°°°°"Why can't you trust him?"

°°°°"Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died, those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won't fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and forks he has left, I don't know why. He had got himself up to look quite young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks; he looked quite young again."

°°°°"I will be responsible," said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he foresaw the end.

°°°°He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot's room. The old man was tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

°°°°"Good-evening, father," said Eugene.

°°°°The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

°°°°"How is SHE?"

°°°°"She is quite well. But how are you?"

°°°°"There is nothing much the matter."

°°°°"Don't tire him," said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the room.

°°°°"Well?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in; I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are acting."

°°°°"Is it possible to move him?"

°°°°"Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as quiet as possible----"

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," said Eugene, "we will nurse him between us."

°°°°"I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him."

°°°°"And what did he say?"

°°°°"He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went, and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his strength. One of his daughters has been here."

°°°°"Was it the Countess?" asked Eugene. "A tall, dark-haired woman, with large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Leave him to me for a bit," said Rastignac. "I will make him confess; he will tell me all about it."

°°°°"And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is still some hope left."

°°°°"All right."

°°°°"How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow," said Father Goriot when they were alone. "They are going to a grand ball."

°°°°"What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this evening that you have to stop in bed?"

°°°°"Nothing."

°°°°"Did not Anastasie come to see you?" demanded Rastignac.

°°°°"Yes," said Father Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then, don't keep anything from me. What more did she want of you?"

°°°°"Oh, she was very miserable," he answered, gathering up all his strength to speak. "It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds, Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie's waiting-woman advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie's maid saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair. She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that heartless scoundrel and say, 'I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker; pay her for me!' She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there too in a superb toilette, and Anastasie ought not to be outshone by her younger sister. And then--she was drowned in tears, poor girl! I felt so humbled yesterday when I had not the twelve thousand francs, that I would have given the rest of my miserable life to wipe out that wrong. You see, I could have borne anything once, but latterly this want of money has broken my heart. Oh! I did not do it by halves; I titivated myself up a bit, and went out and sold my spoons and forks and buckles for six hundred francs; then I went to old Daddy Gobseck, and sold a year's interest on my annuity for four hundred francs down. Pshaw! I can live on dry bread, as I did when I was a young man; if I have done it before, I can do it again. My Nasie shall have one happy evening, at any rate. She shall be smart. The banknote for a thousand francs is under my pillow; it warms me to have it lying there under my head, for it is going to make my poor Nasie happy. She can turn that bad girl Victoire out of the house. A servant that cannot trust her mistress, did any one ever hear the like! I shall be quite well to-morrow. Nasie is coming at ten o'clock. They must not think that I am ill, or they will not go to the ball; they will stop and take care of me. To-morrow Nasie will come and hold me in her arms as if I were one of her children; her kisses will make me well again. After all, I might have spent the thousand francs on physic; I would far rather give them to my little Nasie, who can charm all the pain away. At any rate, I am some comfort to her in her misery; and that makes up for my unkindness in buying an annuity. She is in the depths, and I cannot draw her out of them now. Oh! I will go into business again, I will buy wheat in Odessa; out there, wheat fetches a quarter of the price it sells for here. There is a law against the importation of grain, but the good folk who made the law forgot to prohibit the introduction of wheat products and food stuffs made from corn. Hey! hey! . . . That struck me this morning. There is a fine trade to be done in starch."

°°°°Eugene, watching the old man's face, thought that his friend was light-headed.

°°°°"Come," he said, "do not talk any more, you must rest----" Just then Bianchon came up, and Eugene went down to dinner.

°°°°The two students sat up with him that night, relieving each other in turn. Bianchon brought up his medical books and studied; Eugene wrote letters home to his mother and sisters. Next morning Bianchon thought the symptoms more hopeful, but the patient's condition demanded continual attention, which the two students alone were willing to give--a task impossible to describe in the squeamish phraseology of the epoch. Leeches must be applied to the wasted body, the poultices and hot foot-baths, and other details of the treatment required the physical strength and devotion of the two young men. Mme. de Restaud did not come; but she sent a messenger for the money.

°°°°"I expected she would come herself; but it would have been a pity for her to come, she would have been anxious about me," said the father, and to all appearances he was well content.

°°°°At seven o'clock that evening Therese came with a letter from Delphine.

°°°°"What are you doing, dear friend? I have been loved for a very   little while, and I am neglected already? In the confidences of   heart and heart, I have learned to know your soul--you are too   noble not to be faithful for ever, for you know that love with   all its infinite subtle changes of feeling is never the same.   Once you said, as we were listening to the Prayer in Mose in   Egitto, 'For some it is the monotony of a single note; for   others, it is the infinite of sound.' Remember that I am   expecting you this evening to take me to Mme. de Beauseant's   ball. Every one knows now that the King signed M. d'Ajuda's   marriage-contract this morning, and the poor Vicomtesse knew   nothing of it until two o'clock this afternoon. All Paris will   flock to her house, of course, just as a crowd fills the Place de   Greve to see an execution. It is horrible, is it not, to go out   of curiosity to see if she will hide her anguish, and whether she   will die courageously? I certainly should not go, my friend, if I   had been at her house before; but, of course, she will not   receive society any more after this, and all my efforts would be   in vain. My position is a very unusual one, and besides, I am   going there partly on your account. I am waiting for you. If you   are not beside me in less than two hours, I do not know whether I   could forgive such treason."

°°°°Rastignac took up a pen and wrote:

°°°°"I am waiting till the doctor comes to know if there is any hope   of your father's life. He is lying dangerously ill. I will come   and bring you the news, but I am afraid it may be a sentence of   death. When I come you can decide whether you can go to the   ball.--Yours a thousand times."

°°°°At half-past eight the doctor arrived. He did not take a very hopeful view of the case, but thought that there was no immediate danger. Improvements and relapses might be expected, and the good man's life and reason hung in the balance.

°°°°"It would be better for him to die at once," the doctor said as he took leave.

°°°°Eugene left Goriot to Bianchon's care, and went to carry the sad news to Mme. de Nucingen. Family feeling lingered in her, and this must put an end for the present to her plans of amusement.

°°°°"Tell her to enjoy her evening as if nothing had happened," cried Goriot. He had been lying in a sort of stupor, but he suddenly sat upright as Eugene went out.

°°°°Eugene, half heartbroken, entered Delphine's. Her hair had been dressed; she wore her dancing slippers; she had only to put on her ball-dress; but when the artist is giving the finishing stroke to his creation, the last touches require more time than the whole groundwork of the picture.

°°°°"Why, you are not dressed!" she cried.

°°°°"Madame, your father----"

°°°°"My father again!" she exclaimed, breaking in upon him. "You need not teach me what is due to my father, I have known my father this long while. Not a word, Eugene. I will hear what you have to say when you are dressed. My carriage is waiting, take it, go round to your rooms and dress, Therese has put out everything in readiness for you. Come back as soon as you can; we will talk about my father on the way to Mme. de Beauseant's. We must go early; if we have to wait our turn in a row of carriages, we shall be lucky if we get there by eleven o'clock."

°°°°"Madame----"

°°°°"Quick! not a word!" she cried, darting into her dressing-room for a necklace.

°°°°"Do go, Monsieur Eugene, or you will vex madame," said Therese, hurrying him away; and Eugene was too horror-stricken by this elegant parricide to resist.

°°°°He went to his rooms and dressed, sad, thoughtful, and dispirited. The world of Paris was like an ocean of mud for him just then; and it seemed that whoever set foot in that black mire must needs sink into it up to the chin.

°°°°"Their crimes are paltry," said Eugene to himself. "Vautrin was greater."

°°°°He had seen society in its three great phases--Obedience, Struggle, and Revolt; the Family, the World, and Vautrin; and he hesitated in his choice. Obedience was dull, Revolt impossible, Struggle hazardous. His thoughts wandered back to the home circle. He thought of the quiet uneventful life, the pure happiness of the days spent among those who loved him there. Those loving and beloved beings passed their lives in obedience to the natural laws of the hearth, and in that obedience found a deep and constant serenity, unvexed by torments such as these. Yet, for all his good impulses, he could not bring himself to make profession of the religion of pure souls to Delphine, nor to prescribe the duties of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was capable of stepping over her father's corpse to go to the ball; and within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the courage to leave her to go alone.

°°°°"She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it," he said to himself. Then he turned the doctor's dictum over in his mind; he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of traitorous excuses for Delphine's conduct. She did not know how ill her father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations; and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family life that excuse the apparent offence.

°°°°Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his, and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, "how is my father?"

°°°°"Very dangerously ill," he answered; "if you will grant me a proof of your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way."

°°°°"Very well," she said. "Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice, and don't preach to me. Come."

°°°°They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

°°°°"What is it now?" she asked.

°°°°"I can hear the death-rattle in your father's throat," he said almost angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of Mme. de Restaud's vanity and cruelty, of her father's final act of self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie's golden embroideries. Delphine cried.

°°°°"I shall look frightful," she thought. She dried her tears.

°°°°"I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside," she said aloud.

°°°°"Ah! now you are as I would have you," exclaimed Rastignac.

°°°°The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the Vicomtesse.

°°°°The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

°°°°Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a last audience of one of its sovereigns.

°°°°"I was afraid that you would not come," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°"Madame," he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a reproach, "I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here."

°°°°"Good," she said, and she took his hand. "You are perhaps the only one I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a woman."

°°°°She took Rastignac's arm, and went towards a sofa in the card- room.

°°°°"I want you to go to the Marquis," she said. "Jacques, my footman, will go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one shall bring me word."

°°°°She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

°°°°Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d'Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide, feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave a casket to the student, saying as he did so, "They are all there."

°°°°He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes, and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

°°°°"Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene." He grasped Rastignac's hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him. Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the Vicomtesse's room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey. He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

°°°°"Ah! my friend! . . ." said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid her hand on Rastignac's shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin's uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it in the fire, and watched it burn.

°°°°"They are dancing," she said. "They all came very early; but death will be long in coming. Hush! my friend," and she laid a finger on Rastignac's lips, seeing that he was about to speak. "I shall never see Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o'clock this morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my arrangements; since three o'clock this afternoon I have been busy signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I could send to . . ."

°°°°She broke off.

°°°°"He was sure to be . . ."

°°°°Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are impossible to utter.

°°°°"And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service this evening," she said. "I should like to give you some pledge of friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay," she said, glancing about her, "there is this box that has held my gloves. Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer. Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to you in the Rue d'Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my tears. One last look round first."

°°°°She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and took the student's arm.

°°°°"Let us go!" she said.

°°°°This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene's arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her husband's eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten Rastignac's sad thougths; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

°°°°"Come," she said, "I must not deprive you of a pleasure."

°°°°Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover's feet the homage she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move henceforth.

°°°°"What do you think of Nasie?" she asked him.

°°°°"She has discounted everything, even her own father's death," said Rastignac.

°°°°Towards four o'clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M. de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, "It is a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among us."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an exclamation broke from her.

°°°°"I saw how it was, Clara," said Mme. de Langeais. "You are going from among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you have heard me, until we have understood each other."

°°°°She took her friend's arm, and they went together into the next room. There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

°°°°"I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself. You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words. One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night; do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night, Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail, I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?"

°°°°"Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!" called the Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was waiting there.

°°°°The student knelt to kiss his cousin's hand.

°°°°"Good-bye, Antoinette!" said Mme. de Beauseant. "May you be happy."--She turned to the student. "You are young," she said; "you have some beliefs still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of this world."

°°°°It was nearly five o'clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

°°°°"There is no hope for poor Father Goriot," said Bianchon, as Rastignac came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then he turned to his friend. "Dear fellow, you are content with the modest career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world, nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden away under the covering of gems and gold."

°°°°At two o'clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

°°°°"Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours," he said; "but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result, nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he had not a farthing of his own. What have you?"

°°°°"I have twenty francs left," said Rastignac; "but I will take them to the roulette table, I shall be sure to win."

°°°°"And if you lose?"

°°°°"Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for money."

°°°°"And suppose they refuse?" Bianchon retorted. "The most pressing thing just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides, Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him till I come back."

°°°°The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying. Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot's face, so livid, distorted, and feeble.

°°°°"How are you, papa?" he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came into his eyes.

°°°°"Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?"

°°°°"No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the smell was something horrible.

°°°°"MON DIEU!" said Rastignac. "To think of those daughters of his."

°°°°"One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this," said the house student, pointing to a large white jar. "If he begins to groan, and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon, a pupil of Gall's came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised; whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here," said Bianchon, touching the back of the head, "very strange things have been known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives."

°°°°"Did they enjoy themselves?" It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had recognized Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters," said Bianchon. "Scores of times last night he said to me, 'They are dancing now! She has her dress.' He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take it, calling with that tone in his voice, for 'Delphine! my little Delphine! and Nasie!' Upon my word," said the medical student, "it was enough to make any one burst out crying."

°°°°"Delphine," said the old man, "she is there, isn't she? I knew she was there," and his eyes sought the door.

°°°°"I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready," said Bianchon. "They ought to go on at once."

°°°°Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was shocking to see.

°°°°"Noble natures cannot dwell in this world," he said; "Mme de Beauseant has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and feelings?"

°°°°Pictures of yesterday's ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

°°°°"I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to the base of the spine, and send round for us."

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," exclaimed Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view," said the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

°°°°"So!" said Eugene. "Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old man for his own sake?"

°°°°"You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning," returned Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. "Doctors who have seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my dear fellow, I can see the patient still."

°°°°He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

°°°°"Ah! dear boy, is that you?" said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

°°°°"Do you feel better?" asked the law student, taking his hand.

°°°°"Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man here, who has burned up all my bark fuel."

°°°°"I can hear Christophe coming upstairs," Eugene answered. "He is bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you."

°°°°"Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!) Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left now."

°°°°Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man's ear, "I will pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble."

°°°°"My daughters told you that they were coming, didn't they, Christophe? Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once again before I die. Tell them that, but don't alarm them more than you can help."

°°°°Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

°°°°"They will come before long," the old man went on. "I know them so well. My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die; and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning. 'Good-morning, papa!' they used to say, and I would take them on my knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they loved me with all their hearts. MON DIEU! why could they not always be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah! forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for you have used me to endure pain. MON DIEU! if only I held their hands in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. HE will see them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked. They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this is! what pain this is! . . . ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they MUST have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make millions. (Oh! this is agony!)"

°°°°Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength to endure the pain.

°°°°"If they were here, I should not complain," he said. "So why should I complain now?"

°°°°He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

°°°°"First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse," he said; "but she and her husband were so busy that I couldn't get to speak to her. When I insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and went on like this: 'M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important business, when it is all finished she can go.' The gentleman looked angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said, 'Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.' As for Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, 'Ah yes, but madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It will be time enough then to tell her bad news!' I begged and I prayed, but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was out."

°°°°"To think that neither of his daughters should come!" exclaimed Rastignac. "I will write to them both."

°°°°"Neither of them!" cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. "They are busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not. Not until you are dying do you know your children. . . . Oh! my friend, do not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it. No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it."

°°°°The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

°°°°"Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and THEY would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money? If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God! who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh! this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was 'My kind father' here, 'My dear father' there. There was always a place for me at their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought. How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening parties. In fact, they acknowleged me their father; publicly they owned that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see, and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence, but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law's ear, 'Who may that gentleman be?'--'The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very rich.'--'The devil, e is!' they would say, and look again at me with the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one thing I did learn thoroughly --I knew that I was not wanted here on earth.

°°°°"The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that was how they both turned me out of the house.

°°°°"Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured; Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to- day? Have I not more than expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

°°°°"Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see, my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! MON DIEU! These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie! Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to ruin if a father's rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see. The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them, my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know what it means to trample on a father's corpse? There is a God in heaven who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

°°°°"Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss; one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault. I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so. It is no one's affair but mine; man's justice and God's justice have nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly; I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch, I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through love.

°°°°"My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should be present at their father's deathbed; the law is on my side. It would only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit, as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine, mine!" and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak spoke of menace.

°°°°"There, there, dear father," said Eugene, "lie down again; I will write to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them myself, if they do not come before."

°°°°"If they do not come?" repeated the old man, sobbing. "Why, I shall be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life; they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one. . . . Go to them; just tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud as I do now, 'Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who has been so kind to you is lying ill!'--Not a sound; no one comes! Then am I do die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them. I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all, my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh? . . . What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister. . . . Eugene, you are my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me nothing but my heart."

°°°°"Christophe!" shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man moaned, and by his cries, "go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to you."

°°°°"Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military, anything and everything, but make them come!" He looked at Eugene, and a last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. "Go to the authorities, to the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!"

°°°°"But you have cursed them."

°°°°"Who said that!" said the old man in dull amazement. "You know quite well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I can see them. . . . Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay their hands there, I think I should get better. . . . MON DIEU! who will recover their money for them when I am gone? . . . I will manufacture vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes."

°°°°"Here is something to drink," said Eugene, supporting the dying man on his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot's lips.

°°°°"How you must love your own father and mother!" said the old man, and grasped the student's hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling grasp. "I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that has been my life for the last ten years. . . . I have no daughters, my sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl's mind and contaminates her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid them! . . . Kill them! . . . Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They have murdered me between them! . . . Death or my daughters! . . . Ah! it is too late, I am dying, and they are not here! . . . Dying without them! . . . Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----"

°°°°"Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest; don't worry yourself, don't think."

°°°°"I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!"

°°°°"You SHALL see them."

°°°°"Really?" cried the old man, still wandering. "Oh! shall I see them; I shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my fingers . . . their hair . . ."

°°°°His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his daughters' hair.

°°°°"My blessing on them . . ." he said, making an effort, "my blessing . . ."

°°°°His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

°°°°"I met Christophe," he said; "he is gone for your cab."

°°°°Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath had grown.

°°°°"He will not get over this, I am sure," said Bianchon. He felt the old man's pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

°°°°"The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be better for him to die."

°°°°"Ah! my word, it would!"

°°°°"What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death."

°°°°"Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard. . . . There is a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

°°°°"We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come from?"

°°°°Rastignac took out his watch.

°°°°"There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall have to pay the cabman when I get home again."

°°°°Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder. The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de Restaud's house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could see no one.

°°°°"But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying," Rastignac told the man.

°°°°"The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----"

°°°°"If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at once."

°°°°The man went out.

°°°°Eugene waited for a long while. "Perhaps her father is dying at this moment," he thought.

°°°°Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte," said Rastignac, "M. Goriot, your father-in- law, is lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter. He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----"

°°°°"I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are aware," the Count answered coolly. "His character has been compromised in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much more important matters to think about than the things that fools and chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a few seconds; it lies entirely with her----"

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct; you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her, and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I ask."

°°°°"You can tell her yourself," the Count answered, impressed by the thrill of indignation in Eugene's voice.

°°°°The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her. Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to speak.

°°°°"I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all he would forgive me. . . . I did not think there was such torture in the world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not give way as long as I live," she said, turning to her husband. "I am a mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of appearances!" she cried aloud in her despair.

°°°°Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess' life. M. de Restaud's manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in bed.

°°°°"Poor dear Eugene, I am ill," she said. "I caught cold after the ball, and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come."

°°°°"If you were at death's door," Eugene broke in, "you must be carried somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer."

°°°°"Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just as you wish. As for HIM, he would die of grief I know if I went out to see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as I have seen the doctor.--Ah!" she cried out, "you are not wearing your watch, how is that?"

°°°°Eugene reddened.

°°°°"Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it. . . . Oh! it would be very wrong of you!"

°°°°The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, "Do you want to know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch has been pawned, for I had nothing either."

°°°°Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

°°°°"I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why, I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before you.--Therese," she called to the waiting-woman, "ask M. de Nucingen to come upstairs at once and speak to me."

°°°°Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve; he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine's purse for money, so as to dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse. He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient's back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of science, and it was tried in vain.

°°°°"Can you feel them?" asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of Rastignac, and answered, "They are coming, are they not?"

°°°°"There is hope yet," said the surgeon; "he can speak."

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene, "Delphine is coming."

°°°°"Oh! that is nothing!" said Bianchon; "he has been talking about his daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for water, they say----"

°°°°"We may as well give up," said the physician, addressing the surgeon. "Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless."

°°°°Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his loathsome bed.

°°°°"But the sheets ought to be changed," added the physician. "Even if there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come back again, Bianchon," he said, turning to the medical student. "If he complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm."

°°°°He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

°°°°"Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy," said Bianchon, as soon as they were alone; "we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help us to make the bed."

°°°°Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a customer.

°°°°"My dear Monsieur Eugene," she said, when he had spoken, "you know quite as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes, you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you; altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make."

°°°°Eugene hurried up to Goriot's room.

°°°°"Bianchon," he cried, "the money or the watch?"

°°°°"There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money."

°°°°Rastignac hurried downstairs.

°°°°"Here, madame" he said in disgust, "let us square accounts. M. Goriot will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----"

°°°°"Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman," she said, counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

°°°°"Let us get this over," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen."

°°°°"You won't forget Sylvie," said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene's ear; "she has been sitting up these two nights."

°°°°As soon as Eugene's back was turned, the old woman hurried after her handmaid.

°°°°"Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number 7. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse," she said in Sylvie's ear.

°°°°Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear the elderly economist.

°°°°"Quick," said Bianchon, "let us change his shirt. Hold him upright."

°°°°Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

°°°°"Ah! yes!" cried Bianchon. "It is the little locket and the chain made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on the chimney-piece."

°°°°Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded golden hair--Mme. Goriot's hair, no doubt. He read the name on the little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other. It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes, the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students, that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a shrill cry of delight.

°°°°"Nasie! Fifine!"

°°°°"There is life in him yet," said Bianchon.

°°°°"What does he go on living for?" said Sylvie.

°°°°"To suffer," answered Rastignac.

°°°°Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the students' heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair, they heard a faint whisper:

°°°°"Ah! my angels!"

°°°°Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which fled forth with them as they left his lips.

°°°°"Poor dear!" cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most ghastly and involuntary of lies.

°°°°The father's last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

°°°°"He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last, that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the throat. The brain must be completely suffused."

°°°°As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman hastened up, panting for breath.

°°°°"She has come too late," said Rastignac.

°°°°But it was not Delphine; it was Therese, her waiting-woman, who stood in the doorway.

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene," she said, "monsieur and madame have had a terrible scene about some money that Madame (poor thing!) wanted for her father. She fainted, and the doctor came, and she had to be bled, calling out all the while, 'My father is dying; I want to see papa!' It was heartbreaking to hear her----"

°°°°"That will do, Therese. If she came now, it would be trouble thrown away. M. Goriot cannot recognize any one now."

°°°°"Poor, dear gentleman, is he as bad at that?" said Therese.

°°°°"You don't want me now, I must go and look after my dinner; it is half-past four," remarked Sylvie. The next instant she all but collided with Mme. de Restaud on the landing outside.

°°°°There was something awful and appalling in the sudden apparition of the Countess. She saw the bed of death by the dim light of the single candle, and her tears flowed at the sight of her father's passive features, from which the life had almost ebbed. Bianchon with thoughtful tact left the room.

°°°°"I could not escape soon enough," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°The student bowed sadly in reply. Mme. de Restaud took her father's hand and kissed it.

°°°°"Forgive me, father! You used to say that my voice would call you back from the grave; ah! come back for one moment to bless your penitent daughter. Do you hear me? Oh! this is fearful! No one on earth will ever bless me henceforth; every one hates me; no one loves me but you in all the world. My own children will hate me. Take me with you, father; I will love you, I will take care of you. He does not hear me . . . I am mad . . ."

°°°°She fell on her knees, and gazed wildly at the human wreck before her.

°°°°"My cup of misery is full," she said, turning her eyes upon Eugene. "M. de Trailles has fled, leaving enormous debts behind him, and I have found out that he was deceiving me. My husband will never forgive me, and I have left my fortune in his hands. I have lost all my illusions. Alas! I have forsaken the one heart that loved me (she pointed to her father as she spoke), and for whom? I have held his kindness cheap, and slighted his affection; many and many a time I have given him pain, ungrateful wretch that I am!"

°°°°"He knew it," said Rastignac.

°°°°Just then Goriot's eyelids unclosed; it was only a muscular contraction, but the Countess' sudden start of reviving hope was no less dreadful than the dying eyes.

°°°°"Is it possible that he can hear me?" cried the Countess. "No," she answered herself, and sat down beside the bed. As Mme. de Restaud seemed to wish to sit by her father, Eugene went down to take a little food. The boarders were already assembled.

°°°°"Well," remarked the painter, as he joined them, "it seems that there is to be a death-orama upstairs."

°°°°"Charles, I think you might find something less painful to joke about," said Eugene.

°°°°"So we may not laugh here?" returned the painter. "What harm does it do? Bianchon said that the old man was quite insensible."

°°°°"Well, then," said the employe from the Museum, "he will die as he has lived."

°°°°"My father is dead!" shrieked the Countess.

°°°°The terrible cry brought Sylvie, Rastignac, and Bianchon; Mme. de Restaud had fainted away. When she recovered they carried her downstairs, and put her into the cab that stood waiting at the door. Eugene sent Therese with her, and bade the maid take the Countess to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Bianchon came down to them.

°°°°"Yes, he is dead," he said.

°°°°"Come, sit down to dinner, gentlemen," said Mme. Vauquer, "or the soup will be cold."

°°°°The two students sat down together.

°°°°"What is the next thing to be done?" Eugene asked of Bianchon.

°°°°"I have closed his eyes and composed his limbs," said Bianchon. "When the certificate has been officially registered at the Mayor's office, we will sew him in his winding sheet and bury him somewhere. What do you think we ought to do?"

°°°°"He will not smell at his bread like this any more," said the painter, mimicking the old man's little trick.

°°°°"Oh, hang it all!" cried the tutor, "let Father Goriot drop, and let us have something else for a change. He is a standing dish, and we have had him with every sauce this hour or more. It is one of the privileges of the good city of Paris that anybody may be born, or live, or die there without attracting any attention whatsoever. Let us profit by the advantages of civilization. There are fifty or sixty deaths every day; if you have a mind to do it, you can sit down at any time and wail over whole hecatombs of dead in Paris. Father Goriot has gone off the hooks, has he? So much the better for him. If you venerate his memory, keep it to yourselves, and let the rest of us feed in peace."

°°°°"Oh, to be sure," said the widow, "it is all the better for him that he is dead. It looks as though he had had trouble enough, poor soul, while he was alive."

°°°°And this was all the funeral oration delivered over him who had been for Eugene the type and embodiment of Fatherhood.

°°°°The fifteen lodgers began to talk as usual. When Bianchon and Eugene had satisfied their hunger, the rattle of spoons and forks, the boisterous conversation, the expressions on the faces that bespoke various degrees of want of feeling, gluttony, or indifference, everything about them made them shiver with loathing. They went out to find a priest to watch that night with the dead. It was necessary to measure their last pious cares by the scanty sum of money that remained. Before nine o'clock that evening the body was laid out on the bare sacking of the bedstead in the desolate room; a lighted candle stood on either side, and the priest watched at the foot. Rastignac made inquiries of this latter as to the expenses of the funeral, and wrote to the Baron de Nucingen and the Comte de Restaud, entreating both gentlemen to authorize their man of business to defray the charges of laying their father-in-law in the grave. He sent Christophe with the letters; then he went to bed, tired out, and slept.

°°°°Next day Bianchon and Rastignac were obliged to take the certificate to the registrar themselves, and by twelve o'clock the formalities were completed. Two hours went by, no word came from the Count nor from the Baron; nobody appeared to act for them, and Rastignac had already been obliged to pay the priest. Sylvie asked ten francs for sewing the old man in his winding- sheet and making him ready for the grave, and Eugene and Bianchon calculated that they had scarcely sufficient to pay for the funeral, if nothing was forthcoming from the dead man's family. So it was the medical student who laid him in a pauper's coffin, despatched from Bianchon's hospital, whence he obtained it at a cheaper rate.

°°°°"Let us play those wretches a trick," said he. "Go to the cemetery, buy a grave for five years at Pere-Lachaise, and arrange with the Church and the undertaker to have a third-class funeral. If the daughters and their husbands decline to repay you, you can carve this on the headstone--'HERE LIES M. GORIOT, FATHER OF THE COMTESSE DE RESTAUD AND THE BARONNE DE NUCINGEN, INTERRED AT THE EXPENSE OF TWO STUDENTS.' "

°°°°Eugene took part of his friend's advice, but only after he had gone in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

°°°°"Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their father, and are in deep grief over their loss."

°°°°Eugene's Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was impossible to reach Delphine.

°°°°"Sell some of your ornaments," he wrote hastily in the porter's room, "so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place."

°°°°He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the lodging-house about three o'clock. In spite of himself, the tears came into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth, was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs. A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

°°°°Bianchon's duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he had made for the burial service. The house student's note told Rastignac that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading Bianchon's scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot's two daughters in Mme. Vauquer's hands.

°°°°"How dared you take it?" he asked.

°°°°"Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?" retorted Sylvie. "It is gold."

°°°°"Of course it shall!" Eugene answered indignantly; "he shall at any rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with him."

°°°°When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man's breast the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were innocent little maidens, before they began "to think for themselves," as he had moaned out in his agony.

°°°°Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker's men were the only followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. When the coffin had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked round in vain for Goriot's two daughters or their husbands. Christophe was his only fellow- mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe's hand. He could not utter a word just then.

°°°°"Yes, Monsieur Eugene," said Christophe, "he was a good and worthy man, who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any harm, and gave nobody any trouble."

°°°°The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

°°°°The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the Libera nos and the De profundis. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with Eugene and Christophe.

°°°°"There is no one else to follow us," remarked the priest, "so we may as well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five."

°°°°But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen, arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o'clock Goriot's coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters' servants standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that fell on Father Goriot's grave, Eugene Rastignac's youth ended. He folded his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

°°°°He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste of its honey, and said magniloquently:

°°°°"Henceforth there is war between us."

°°°°And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine with Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°ADDENDUM

°°°°The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

°°°°Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d'   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Secrets of a Princess   Beatrix

°°°°Beauseant, Marquis   An Episode under the Terror

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomte de   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomtesse de   The Deserted Woman   Albert Savarus

°°°°Bianchon, Horace   The Atheist's Mass   Cesar Birotteau   The Commission in Lunacy   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   A Bachelor's Establishment   The Secrets of a Princess   The Government Clerks   Pierrette   A Study of Woman   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Honorine   The Seamy Side of History   The Magic Skin   A Second Home   A Prince of Bohemia   Letters of Two Brides   The Muse of the Department   The Imaginary Mistress   The Middle Classes   Cousin Betty   The Country Parson In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:   Another Study of Woman   La Grande Breteche

°°°°Bibi-Lupin (chief of secret police, called himself Gondureau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de   Sarrasine

°°°°Collin, Jacques   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Derville   Gobseck   A Start in Life   The Gondreville Mystery   Colonel Chabert   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Franchessini, Colonel   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Galathionne, Princess   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van   Gobseck   Cesar Birotteau   The Government Clerks   The Unconscious Humoriists

°°°°Jacques (M. de Beauseant's butler)   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Langeais, Duchesse Antoinette de   The Thirteen

°°°°Marsay, Henri de   The Thirteen   The Unconscious Humorists   Another Study of Woman   The Lily of the Valley   Jealousies of a Country Town   Ursule Mirouet   A Marriage Settlement   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Letters of Two Brides   The Ball at Sceaux   Modest Mignon   The Secrets of a Princess   The Gondreville Mystery   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Maurice (de Restaud's valet)   Gobseck

°°°°Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de   The Thirteen   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Another Study of Woman   Pierrette   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Nucingen, Baron Frederic de   The Firm of Nucingen   Pierrette   Cesar Birotteau   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Another Study of Woman   The Secrets of a Princess   A Man of Business   Cousin Betty   The Muse of the Department   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de   The Thirteen   Eugenie Grandet   Cesar Birotteau   Melmoth Reconciled   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   The Commission in Lunacy   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Modeste Mignon   The Firm of Nucingen   Another Study of Woman   A Daughter of Eve   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Poiret   The Government Clerks   A Start in Life   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Poiret, Madame (nee Christine-Michelle Michonneau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de (Eugene's parents)   Lost Illusions

°°°°Rastignac, Eugene de   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Ball at Sceaux   The Interdiction   A Study of Woman   Another Study of Woman   The Magic Skin   The Secrets of a Princess   A Daughter of Eve   The Gondreville Mystery   The Firm of Nucingen   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Rastignac, Laure-Rose and Agathe de   Lost Illusions   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Rastignac, Monseigneur Gabriel de   The Country Parson   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Restaud, Comte de   Gobseck

°°°°Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de   Gobseck

°°°°Selerier   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Taillefer, Jean-Frederic   The Firm of Nucingen   The Magic Skin   The Red Inn

°°°°Taillefer, Victorine   The Red Inn

°°°°Therese   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Tissot, Pierre-Francois   A Prince of Bohemia

°°°°Trailles, Comte Maxime de   Cesar Birotteau   Gobseck   Ursule Mirouet   A Man of Business   The Member for Arcis   The Secrets of a Princess   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   Beatrix   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°End

°°°°Eugenie Grandet

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Maria.

°°°°May your name, that of one whose portrait is the noblest ornament

°°°°of this work, lie on its opening pages like a branch of sacred

°°°°box, taken from an unknown tree, but sanctified by religion, and

°°°°kept ever fresh and green by pious hands to bless the house.De Balzac.

°°°°EUGENIE GRANDET

°°°°I

°°°°There are houses in certain provincial towns whose aspect inspiresmelancholy, akin to that called forth by sombre cloisters, drearymoorlands, or the desolation of ruins. Within these houses there is,perhaps, the silence of the cloister, the barrenness of moors, theskeleton of ruins; life and movement are so stagnant there that astranger might think them uninhabited, were it not that he encounterssuddenly the pale, cold glance of a motionless person, whose half-monastic face peers beyond the window-casing at the sound of anunaccustomed step.

°°°°Such elements of sadness formed the physiognomy, as it were, of adwelling-house in Saumur which stands at the end of the steep streetleading to the chateau in the upper part of the town. This street--nowlittle frequented, hot in summer, cold in winter, dark in certainsections--is remarkable for the resonance of its little pebblypavement, always clean and dry, for the narrowness of its tortuousroad-way, for the peaceful stillness of its houses, which belong tothe Old town and are over-topped by the ramparts. Houses threecenturies old are still solid, though built of wood, and their diversaspects add to the originality which commends this portion of Saumurto the attention of artists and antiquaries.

°°°°It is difficult to pass these houses without admiring the enormousoaken beams, their ends carved into fantastic figures, which crownwith a black bas-relief the lower floor of most of them. In one placethese transverse timbers are covered with slate and mark a bluish linealong the frail wall of a dwelling covered by a roof /en colombage/which bends beneath the weight of years, and whose rotting shinglesare twisted by the alternate action of sun and rain. In another placeblackened, worn-out window-sills, with delicate sculptures nowscarcely discernible, seem too weak to bear the brown clay pots fromwhich springs the heart's-ease or the rose-bush of some poor working-woman. Farther on are doors studded with enormous nails, where thegenius of our forefathers has traced domestic hieroglyphics, of whichthe meaning is now lost forever. Here a Protestant attested hisbelief; there a Leaguer cursed Henry IV.; elsewhere some bourgeois hascarved the insignia of his /noblesse de cloches/, symbols of his long-forgotten magisterial glory. The whole history of France is there.Next to a tottering house with roughly plastered walls, where anartisan enshrines his tools, rises the mansion of a country gentleman,on the stone arch of which above the door vestiges of armorialbearings may still be seen, battered by the many revolutions that haveshaken France since 1789. In this hilly street the ground-floors ofthe merchants are neither shops nor warehouses; lovers of the MiddleAges will here find the /ouvrouere/ of our forefathers in all itsnaive simplicity. These low rooms, which have no shop-frontage, noshow-windows, in fact no glass at all, are deep and dark and withoutinterior or exterior decoration. Their doors open in two parts, eachroughly iron-bound; the upper half is fastened back within the room,the lower half, fitted with a spring-bell, swings continually to andfro. Air and light reach the damp den within, either through the upperhalf of the door, or through an open space between the ceiling and alow front wall, breast-high, which is closed by solid shutters thatare taken down every morning, put up every evening, and held in placeby heavy iron bars.

°°°°This wall serves as a counter for the merchandise. No delusive displayis there; only samples of the business, whatever it may chance to be,--such, for instance, as three or four tubs full of codfish and salt,a few bundles of sail-cloth, cordage, copper wire hanging from thejoists above, iron hoops for casks ranged along the wall, or a fewpieces of cloth upon the shelves. Enter. A neat girl, glowing withyouth, wearing a white kerchief, her arms red and bare, drops herknitting and calls her father or her mother, one of whom comes forwardand sells you what you want, phlegmatically, civilly, or arrogantly,according to his or her individual character, whether it be a matterof two sous' or twenty thousand francs' worth of merchandise. You maysee a cooper, for instance, sitting in his doorway and twirling histhumbs as he talks with a neighbor. To all appearance he owns nothingmore than a few miserable boat-ribs and two or three bundles of laths;but below in the port his teeming wood-yard supplies all the cooperagetrade of Anjou. He knows to a plank how many casks are needed if thevintage is good. A hot season makes him rich, a rainy season ruinshim; in a single morning puncheons worth eleven francs have been knownto drop to six. In this country, as in Touraine, atmosphericvicissitudes control commercial life. Wine-growers, proprietors, wood-merchants, coopers, inn-keepers, mariners, all keep watch of the sun.They tremble when they go to bed lest they should hear in the morningof a frost in the night; they dread rain, wind, drought, and wantwater, heat, and clouds to suit their fancy. A perpetual duel goes onbetween the heavens and their terrestrial interests. The barometersmooths, saddens, or makes merry their countenances, turn and turnabout. From end to end of this street, formerly the Grand'Rue deSaumur, the words: "Here's golden weather," are passed from door todoor; or each man calls to his neighbor: "It rains louis," knowingwell what a sunbeam or the opportune rainfall is bringing him.On Saturdays after midday, in the fine season, not one sou's worth ofmerchandise can be bought from these worthy traders. Each has hisvineyard, his enclosure of fields, and all spend two days in thecountry. This being foreseen, and purchases, sales, and profitsprovided for, the merchants have ten or twelve hours to spend inparties of pleasure, in making observations, in criticisms, and incontinual spying. A housewife cannot buy a partridge without theneighbors asking the husband if it were cooked to a turn. A young girlnever puts her head near a window that she is not seen by idlinggroups in the street. Consciences are held in the light; and thehouses, dark, silent, impenetrable as they seem, hide no mysteries.Life is almost wholly in the open air; every household sits at its ownthreshold, breakfasts, dines, and quarrels there. No one can passalong the street without being examined; in fact formerly, when astranger entered a provincial town he was bantered and made game offrom door to door. From this came many good stories, and the nickname/copieux/, which was applied to the inhabitants of Angers, whoexcelled in such urban sarcasms.

°°°°The ancient mansions of the old town of Saumur are at the top of thishilly street, and were formerly occupied by the nobility of theneighborhood. The melancholy dwelling where the events of thefollowing history took place is one of these mansions,--venerablerelics of a century in which men and things bore the characteristicsof simplicity which French manners and customs are losing day by day.Follow the windings of the picturesque thoroughfare, whoseirregularities awaken recollections that plunge the mind mechanicallyinto reverie, and you will see a somewhat dark recess, in the centreof which is hidden the door of the house of Monsieur Grandet. It isimpossible to understand the force of this provincial expression--thehouse of Monsieur Grandet--without giving the biography of MonsieurGrandet himself.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet enjoyed a reputation in Saumur whose causes andeffects can never be fully understood by those who have not, at onetime or another, lived in the provinces. In 1789 Monsieur Grandet--still called by certain persons le Pere Grandet, though the number ofsuch old persons has perceptibly diminished--was a master-cooper, ableto read, write, and cipher. At the period when the French Republicoffered for sale the church property in the arrondissement of Saumur,the cooper, then forty years of age, had just married the daughter ofa rich wood-merchant. Supplied with the ready money of his own fortuneand his wife's /dot/, in all about two thousand louis-d'or, Grandetwent to the newly established "district," where, with the help of twohundred double louis given by his father-in-law to the surlyrepublican who presided over the sales of the national domain, heobtained for a song, legally if not legitimately, one of the finestvineyards in the arrondissement, an old abbey, and several farms. Theinhabitants of Saumur were so little revolutionary that they thoughtPere Grandet a bold man, a republican, and a patriot with a mind opento all the new ideas; though in point of fact it was open only tovineyards. He was appointed a member of the administration of Saumur,and his pacific influence made itself felt politically andcommercially. Politically, he protected the ci-devant nobles, andprevented, to the extent of his power, the sale of the lands andproperty of the /emigres/; commercially, he furnished the Republicanarmies with two or three thousand puncheons of white wine, and tookhis pay in splendid fields belonging to a community of women whoselands had been reserved for the last lot.

°°°°Under the Consulate Grandet became mayor, governed wisely, andharvested still better pickings. Under the Empire he was calledMonsieur Grandet. Napoleon, however, did not like republicans, andsuperseded Monsieur Grandet (who was supposed to have worn thePhrygian cap) by a man of his own surroundings, a future baron of theEmpire. Monsieur Grandet quitted office without regret. He hadconstructed in the interests of the town certain fine roads which ledto his own property; his house and lands, very advantageouslyassessed, paid moderate taxes; and since the registration of hisvarious estates, the vineyards, thanks to his constant care, hadbecome the "head of the country,"--a local term used to denote thosethat produced the finest quality of wine. He might have asked for thecross of the Legion of honor.

°°°°This event occurred in 1806. Monsieur Grandet was then fifty-sevenyears of age, his wife thirty-six, and an only daughter, the fruit oftheir legitimate love, was ten years old. Monsieur Grandet, whomProvidence no doubt desired to compensate for the loss of hismunicipal honors, inherited three fortunes in the course of this year,--that of Madame de la Gaudiniere, born de la Bertelliere, the motherof Madame Grandet; that of old Monsieur de la Bertelliere, hergrandfather; and, lastly, that of Madame Gentillet, her grandmother onthe mother's side: three inheritances, whose amount was not known toany one. The avarice of the deceased persons was so keen that for along time they had hoarded their money for the pleasure of secretlylooking at it. Old Monsieur de la Bertelliere called an investment anextravagance, and thought he got better interest from the sight of hisgold than from the profits of usury. The inhabitants of Saumurconsequently estimated his savings according to "the revenues of thesun's wealth," as they said.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet thus obtained that modern title of nobility which ourmania for equality can never rub out. He became the most imposingpersonage in the arrondissement. He worked a hundred acres ofvineyard, which in fruitful years yielded seven or eight hundredhogsheads of wine. He owned thirteen farms, an old abbey, whosewindows and arches he had walled up for the sake of economy,--ameasure which preserved them,--also a hundred and twenty-seven acresof meadow-land, where three thousand poplars, planted in 1793, grewand flourished; and finally, the house in which he lived. Such was hisvisible estate; as to his other property, only two persons could giveeven a vague guess at its value: one was Monsieur Cruchot, a notaryemployed in the usurious investments of Monsieur Grandet; the otherwas Monsieur des Grassins, the richest banker in Saumur, in whoseprofits Grandet had a certain covenanted and secret share.Although old Cruchot and Monsieur des Grassins were both gifted withthe deep discretion which wealth and trust beget in the provinces,they publicly testified so much respect to Monsieur Grandet thatobservers estimated the amount of his property by the obsequiousattention which they bestowed upon him. In all Saumur there was no onenot persuaded that Monsieur Grandet had a private treasure, somehiding-place full of louis, where he nightly took ineffable delight ingazing upon great masses of gold. Avaricious people gathered proof ofthis when they looked at the eyes of the good man, to which the yellowmetal seemed to have conveyed its tints. The glance of a manaccustomed to draw enormous interest from his capital acquires, likethat of the libertine, the gambler, or the sycophant, certainindefinable habits,--furtive, eager, mysterious movements, which neverescape the notice of his co-religionists. This secret language is in acertain way the freemasonry of the passions. Monsieur Grandet inspiredthe respectful esteem due to one who owed no man anything, who,skilful cooper and experienced wine-grower that he was, guessed withthe precision of an astronomer whether he ought to manufacture athousand puncheons for his vintage, or only five hundred, who neverfailed in any speculation, and always had casks for sale when caskswere worth more than the commodity that filled them, who could storehis whole vintage in his cellars and bide his time to put thepuncheons on the market at two hundred francs, when the littleproprietors had been forced to sell theirs for five louis. His famousvintage of 1811, judiciously stored and slowly disposed of, broughthim in more than two hundred and forty thousand francs.

°°°°Financially speaking, Monsieur Grandet was something between a tigerand a boa-constrictor. He could crouch and lie low, watch his prey along while, spring upon it, open his jaws, swallow a mass of louis,and then rest tranquilly like a snake in process of digestion,impassible, methodical, and cold. No one saw him pass without afeeling of admiration mingled with respect and fear; had not every manin Saumur felt the rending of those polished steel claws? For thisone, Maitre Cruchot had procured the money required for the purchaseof a domain, but at eleven per cent. For that one, Monsieur desGrassins discounted bills of exchange, but at a frightful deduction ofinterest. Few days ever passed that Monsieur Grandet's name was notmentioned either in the markets or in social conversations at theevening gatherings. To some the fortune of the old wine-grower was anobject of patriotic pride. More than one merchant, more than oneinnkeeper, said to strangers with a certain complacency: "Monsieur, wehave two or three millionaire establishments; but as for MonsieurGrandet, he does not himself know how much he is worth."

°°°°In 1816 the best reckoners in Saumur estimated the landed property ofthe worthy man at nearly four millions; but as, on an average, he hadmade yearly, from 1793 to 1817, a hundred thousand francs out of thatproperty, it was fair to presume that he possessed in actual money asum nearly equal to the value of his estate. So that when, after agame of boston or an evening discussion on the matter of vines, thetalk fell upon Monsieur Grandet, knowing people said: "Le PereGrandet? le Pere Grandet must have at least five or six millions.""You are cleverer than I am; I have never been able to find out theamount," answered Monsieur Cruchot or Monsieur des Grassins, wheneither chanced to overhear the remark.

°°°°If some Parisian mentioned Rothschild or Monsieur Lafitte, the peopleof Saumur asked if he were as rich as Monsieur Grandet. When theParisian, with a smile, tossed them a disdainful affirmative, theylooked at each other and shook their heads with an incredulous air. Solarge a fortune covered with a golden mantle all the actions of thisman. If in early days some peculiarities of his life gave occasion forlaughter or ridicule, laughter and ridicule had long since died away.His least important actions had the authority of results repeatedlyshown. His speech, his clothing, his gestures, the blinking of hiseyes, were law to the country-side, where every one, after studyinghim as a naturalist studies the result of instinct in the loweranimals, had come to understand the deep mute wisdom of his slightestactions.

°°°°"It will be a hard winter," said one; "Pere Grandet has put on his furgloves."

°°°°"Pere Grandet is buying quantities of staves; there will be plenty ofwine this year."

°°°°Monsieur Grandet never bought either bread or meat. His farmerssupplied him weekly with a sufficiency of capons, chickens, eggs,butter, and his tithe of wheat. He owned a mill; and the tenant wasbound, over and above his rent, to take a certain quantity of grainand return him the flour and bran. La Grande Nanon, his only servant,though she was no longer young, baked the bread of the householdherself every Saturday. Monsieur Grandet arranged with kitchen-gardeners who were his tenants to supply him with vegetables. As tofruits, he gathered such quantities that he sold the greater part inthe market. His fire-wood was cut from his own hedgerows or taken fromthe half-rotten old sheds which he built at the corners of his fields,and whose planks the farmers carted into town for him, all cut up, andobligingly stacked in his wood-house, receiving in return his thanks.His only known expenditures were for the consecrated bread, theclothing of his wife and daughter, the hire of their chairs in church,the wages of la Grand Nanon, the tinning of the saucepans, lights,taxes, repairs on his buildings, and the costs of his variousindustries. He had six hundred acres of woodland, lately purchased,which he induced a neighbor's keeper to watch, under the promise of anindemnity. After the acquisition of this property he ate game for thefirst time.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet's manners were very simple. He spoke little. Heusually expressed his meaning by short sententious phrases uttered ina soft voice. After the Revolution, the epoch at which he first cameinto notice, the good man stuttered in a wearisome way as soon as hewas required to speak at length or to maintain an argument. Thisstammering, the incoherence of his language, the flux of words inwhich he drowned his thought, his apparent lack of logic, attributedto defects of education, were in reality assumed, and will besufficiently explained by certain events in the following history.Four sentences, precise as algebraic formulas, sufficed him usually tograsp and solve all difficulties of life and commerce: "I don't know;I cannot; I will not; I will see about it." He never said yes, or no,and never committed himself to writing. If people talked to him helistened coldly, holding his chin in his right hand and resting hisright elbow in the back of his left hand, forming in his own mindopinions on all matters, from which he never receded. He reflectedlong before making any business agreement. When his opponent, aftercareful conversation, avowed the secret of his own purposes, confidentthat he had secured his listener's assent, Grandet answered: "I candecide nothing without consulting my wife." His wife, whom he hadreduced to a state of helpless slavery, was a useful screen to him inbusiness. He went nowhere among friends; he neither gave nor accepteddinners; he made no stir or noise, seeming to economize in everything,even movement. He never disturbed or disarranged the things of otherpeople, out of respect for the rights of property. Nevertheless, inspite of his soft voice, in spite of his circumspect bearing, thelanguage and habits of a coarse nature came to the surface, especiallyin his own home, where he controlled himself less than elsewhere.Physically, Grandet was a man five feet high, thick-set, square-built,with calves twelve inches in circumference, knotted knee-joints, andbroad shoulders; his face was round, tanned, and pitted by the small-pox; his chin was straight, his lips had no curves, his teeth werewhite; his eyes had that calm, devouring expression which peopleattribute to the basilisk; his forehead, full of transverse wrinkles,was not without certain significant protuberances; his yellow-grayishhair was said to be silver and gold by certain young people who didnot realize the impropriety of making a jest about Monsieur Grandet.His nose, thick at the end, bore a veined wen, which the common peoplesaid, not without reason, was full of malice. The whole countenanceshowed a dangerous cunning, an integrity without warmth, the egotismof a man long used to concentrate every feeling upon the enjoyments ofavarice and upon the only human being who was anything whatever tohim,--his daughter and sole heiress, Eugenie. Attitude, manners,bearing, everything about him, in short, testified to that belief inhimself which the habit of succeeding in all enterprises never failsto give to a man.

°°°°Thus, though his manners were unctuous and soft outwardly, MonsieurGrandet's nature was of iron. His dress never varied; and those whosaw him to-day saw him such as he had been since 1791. His stout shoeswere tied with leathern thongs; he wore, in all weathers, thickwoollen stockings, short breeches of coarse maroon cloth with silverbuckles, a velvet waistcoat, in alternate stripes of yellow and puce,buttoned squarely, a large maroon coat with wide flaps, a blackcravat, and a quaker's hat. His gloves, thick as those of a gendarme,lasted him twenty months; to preserve them, he always laid themmethodically on the brim of his hat in one particular spot. Saumurknew nothing further about this personage.

°°°°Only six individuals had a right of entrance to Monsieur Grandet'shouse. The most important of the first three was a nephew of MonsieurCruchot. Since his appointment as president of the Civil courts ofSaumur this young man had added the name of Bonfons to that ofCruchot. He now signed himself C. de Bonfons. Any litigant so ill-advised as to call him Monsieur Cruchot would soon be made to feel hisfolly in court. The magistrate protected those who called him Monsieurle president, but he favored with gracious smiles those who addressedhim as Monsieur de Bonfons. Monsieur le president was thirty-threeyears old, and possessed the estate of Bonfons (Boni Fontis), worthseven thousand francs a year; he expected to inherit the property ofhis uncle the notary and that of another uncle, the Abbe Cruchot, adignitary of the chapter of Saint-Martin de Tours, both of whom werethought to be very rich. These three Cruchots, backed by a goodlynumber of cousins, and allied to twenty families in the town, formed aparty, like the Medici in Florence; like the Medici, the Cruchots hadtheir Pazzi.

°°°°Madame des Grassins, mother of a son twenty-three years of age, cameassiduously to play cards with Madame Grandet, hoping to marry herdear Adolphe to Mademoiselle Eugenie. Monsieur des Grassins, thebanker, vigorously promoted the schemes of his wife by means of secretservices constantly rendered to the old miser, and always arrived intime upon the field of battle. The three des Grassins likewise hadtheir adherents, their cousins, their faithful allies. On the Cruchotside the abbe, the Talleyrand of the family, well backed-up by hisbrother the notary, sharply contested every inch of ground with hisfemale adversary, and tried to obtain the rich heiress for his nephewthe president.

°°°°This secret warfare between the Cruchots and des Grassins, the prizethereof being the hand in marriage of Eugenie Grandet, kept thevarious social circles of Saumur in violent agitation. WouldMademoiselle Grandet marry Monsieur le president or Monsieur Adolphedes Grassins? To this problem some replied that Monsieur Grandet wouldnever give his daughter to the one or to the other. The old cooper,eaten up with ambition, was looking, they said, for a peer of France,to whom an income of three hundred thousand francs would make all thepast, present, and future casks of the Grandets acceptable. Othersreplied that Monsieur and Madame des Grassins were nobles, andexceedingly rich; that Adolphe was a personable young fellow; and thatunless the old man had a nephew of the pope at his beck and call, sucha suitable alliance ought to satisfy a man who came from nothing,--aman whom Saumur remembered with an adze in his hand, and who had,moreover, worn the /bonnet rouge/. Certain wise heads called attentionto the fact that Monsieur Cruchot de Bonfons had the right of entry tothe house at all times, whereas his rival was received only onSundays. Others, however, maintained that Madame des Grassins was moreintimate with the women of the house of Grandet than the Cruchotswere, and could put into their minds certain ideas which would lead,sooner or later, to success. To this the former retorted that the AbbeCruchot was the most insinuating man in the world: pit a woman againsta monk, and the struggle was even. "It is diamond cut diamond," said aSaumur wit.

°°°°The oldest inhabitants, wiser than their fellows, declared that theGrandets knew better than to let the property go out of the family,and that Mademoiselle Eugenie Grandet of Saumur would be married tothe son of Monsieur Grandet of Paris, a wealthy wholesale wine-merchant. To this the Cruchotines and the Grassinists replied: "In thefirst place, the two brothers have seen each other only twice inthirty years; and next, Monsieur Grandet of Paris has ambitiousdesigns for his son. He is mayor of an arrondissement, a deputy,colonel of the National Guard, judge in the commercial courts; hedisowns the Grandets of Saumur, and means to ally himself with someducal family,--ducal under favor of Napoleon." In short, was thereanything not said of an heiress who was talked of through acircumference of fifty miles, and even in the public conveyances fromAngers to Blois, inclusively!

°°°°At the beginning of 1811, the Cruchotines won a signal advantage overthe Grassinists. The estate of Froidfond, remarkable for its park, itsmansion, its farms, streams, ponds, forests, and worth about threemillions, was put up for sale by the young Marquis de Froidfond, whowas obliged to liquidate his possessions. Maitre Cruchot, thepresident, and the abbe, aided by their adherents, were able toprevent the sale of the estate in little lots. The notary concluded abargain with the young man for the whole property, payable in gold,persuading him that suits without number would have to be broughtagainst the purchasers of small lots before he could get the money forthem; it was better, therefore, to sell the whole to Monsieur Grandet,who was solvent and able to pay for the estate in ready money. Thefine marquisate of Froidfond was accordingly conveyed down the gulletof Monsieur Grandet, who, to the great astonishment of Saumur, paidfor it, under proper discount, with the usual formalities.This affair echoed from Nantes to Orleans. Monsieur Grandet tookadvantage of a cart returning by way of Froidfond to go and see hischateau. Having cast a master's eye over the whole property, hereturned to Saumur, satisfied that he had invested his money at fiveper cent, and seized by the stupendous thought of extending andincreasing the marquisate of Froidfond by concentrating all hisproperty there. Then, to fill up his coffers, now nearly empty, heresolved to thin out his woods and his forests, and to sell off thepoplars in the meadows.

°°°°II

°°°°It is now easy to understand the full meaning of the term, "the houseof Monsieur Grandet,"--that cold, silent, pallid dwelling, standingabove the town and sheltered by the ruins of the ramparts. The twopillars and the arch, which made the porte-cochere on which the dooropened, were built, like the house itself, of tufa,--a white stonepeculiar to the shores of the Loire, and so soft that it lasts hardlymore than two centuries. Numberless irregular holes, capriciouslybored or eaten out by the inclemency of the weather, gave anappearance of the vermiculated stonework of French architecture to thearch and the side walls of this entrance, which bore some resemblanceto the gateway of a jail. Above the arch was a long bas-relief, inhard stone, representing the four seasons, the faces already crumblingaway and blackened. This bas-relief was surmounted by a projectingplinth, upon which a variety of chance growths had sprung up,--yellowpellitory, bindweed, convolvuli, nettles, plantain, and even a littlecherry-tree, already grown to some height.

°°°°The door of the archway was made of solid oak, brown, shrunken, andsplit in many places; though frail in appearance, it was firmly heldin place by a system of iron bolts arranged in symmetrical patterns. Asmall square grating, with close bars red with rust, filled up themiddle panel and made, as it were, a motive for the knocker, fastenedto it by a ring, which struck upon the grinning head of a huge nail.This knocker, of the oblong shape and kind which our ancestors called/jaquemart/, looked like a huge note of exclamation; an antiquary whoexamined it attentively might have found indications of the figure,essentially burlesque, which it once represented, and which long usagehad now effaced. Through this little grating--intended in olden timesfor the recognition of friends in times of civil war--inquisitivepersons could perceive, at the farther end of the dark and slimyvault, a few broken steps which led to a garden, picturesquely shut inby walls that were thick and damp, and through which oozed a moisturethat nourished tufts of sickly herbage. These walls were the ruins ofthe ramparts, under which ranged the gardens of several neighboringhouses.

°°°°The most important room on the ground-floor of the house was a largehall, entered directly from beneath the vault of the porte-cochere.Few people know the importance of a hall in the little towns of Anjou,Touraine, and Berry. The hall is at one and the same time antechamber,salon, office, boudoir, and dining-room; it is the theatre of domesticlife, the common living-room. There the barber of the neighborhoodcame, twice a year, to cut Monsieur Grandet's hair; there the farmers,the cure, the under-prefect, and the miller's boy came on business.This room, with two windows looking on the street, was entirely ofwood. Gray panels with ancient mouldings covered the walls from top tobottom; the ceiling showed all its beams, which were likewise paintedgray, while the space between them had been washed over in white, nowyellow with age. An old brass clock, inlaid with arabesques, adornedthe mantel of the ill-cut white stone chimney-piece, above which was agreenish mirror, whose edges, bevelled to show the thickness of theglass, reflected a thread of light the whole length of a gothic framein damascened steel-work. The two copper-gilt candelabra whichdecorated the corners of the chimney-piece served a double purpose: bytaking off the side-branches, each of which held a socket, the mainstem--which was fastened to a pedestal of bluish marble tipped withcopper--made a candlestick for one candle, which was sufficient forordinary occasions. The chairs, antique in shape, were covered withtapestry representing the fables of La Fontaine; it was necessary,however, to know that writer well to guess at the subjects, for thefaded colors and the figures, blurred by much darning, were difficultto distinguish.

°°°°At the four corners of the hall were closets, or rather buffets,surmounted by dirty shelves. An old card-table in marquetry, of whichthe upper part was a chess-board, stood in the space between the twowindows. Above this table was an oval barometer with a black borderenlivened with gilt bands, on which the flies had so licentiouslydisported themselves that the gilding had become problematical. On thepanel opposite to the chimney-piece were two portraits in pastel,supposed to represent the grandfather of Madame Grandet, old Monsieurde la Bertelliere, as a lieutenant in the French guard, and thedeceased Madame Gentillet in the guise of a shepherdess. The windowswere draped with curtains of red /gros de Tours/ held back by silkencords with ecclesiastical tassels. This luxurious decoration, littlein keeping with the habits of Monsieur Grandet, had been, togetherwith the steel pier-glass, the tapestries, and the buffets, which wereof rose-wood, included in the purchase of the house.

°°°°By the window nearest to the door stood a straw chair, whose legs wereraised on castors to lift its occupant, Madame Grandet, to a heightfrom which she could see the passers-by. A work-table of stainedcherry-wood filled up the embrasure, and the little armchair ofEugenie Grandet stood beside it. In this spot the lives had flowedpeacefully onward for fifteen years, in a round of constant work fromthe month of April to the month of November. On the first day of thelatter month they took their winter station by the chimney. Not untilthat day did Grandet permit a fire to be lighted; and on the thirty-first of March it was extinguished, without regard either to thechills of the early spring or to those of a wintry autumn. A foot-warmer, filled with embers from the kitchen fire, which la GrandeNanon contrived to save for them, enabled Madame and MademoiselleGrandet to bear the chilly mornings and evenings of April and October.Mother and daughter took charge of the family linen, and spent theirdays so conscientiously upon a labor properly that of working-women,that if Eugenie wished to embroider a collar for her mother she wasforced to take the time from sleep, and deceive her father to obtainthe necessary light. For a long time the miser had given out thetallow candle to his daughter and la Grande Nanon just as he gave outevery morning the bread and other necessaries for the dailyconsumption.

°°°°La Grande Nanon was perhaps the only human being capable of acceptingwillingly the despotism of her master. The whole town envied Monsieurand Madame Grandet the possession of her. La Grande Nanon, so calledon account of her height, which was five feet eight inches, had livedwith Monsieur Grandet for thirty-five years. Though she received onlysixty francs a year in wages, she was supposed to be one of therichest serving-women in Saumur. Those sixty francs, accumulatingthrough thirty-five years, had recently enabled her to invest fourthousand francs in an annuity with Maitre Cruchot. This result of herlong and persistent economy seemed gigantic. Every servant in thetown, seeing that the poor sexagenarian was sure of bread for her oldage, was jealous of her, and never thought of the hard slavery throughwhich it had been won.

°°°°At twenty-two years of age the poor girl had been unable to find asituation, so repulsive was her face to almost every one. Yet thefeeling was certainly unjust: the face would have been much admired onthe shoulders of a grenadier of the guard; but all things, so theysay, should be in keeping. Forced to leave a farm where she kept thecows, because the dwelling-house was burned down, she came to Saumurto find a place, full of the robust courage that shrinks from nolabor. Le Pere Grandet was at that time thinking of marriage and aboutto set up his household. He espied the girl, rejected as she was fromdoor to door. A good judge of corporeal strength in his trade as acooper, he guessed the work that might be got out of a female creatureshaped like a Hercules, as firm on her feet as an oak sixty years oldon its roots, strong in the hips, square in the back, with the handsof a cartman and an honesty as sound as her unblemished virtue.Neither the warts which adorned her martial visage, nor the red-bricktints of her skin, nor the sinewy arms, nor the ragged garments of laGrande Nanon, dismayed the cooper, who was at that time still of anage when the heart shudders. He fed, shod, and clothed the poor girl,gave her wages, and put her to work without treating her too roughly.Seeing herself thus welcomed, la Grande Nanon wept secretly tears ofjoy, and attached herself in all sincerity to her master, who fromthat day ruled her and worked her with feudal authority. Nanon dideverything. She cooked, she made the lye, she washed the linen in theLoire and brought it home on her shoulders; she got up early, she wentto bed late; she prepared the food of the vine-dressers during theharvest, kept watch upon the market-people, protected the property ofher master like a faithful dog, and even, full of blind confidence,obeyed without a murmur his most absurd exactions.

°°°°In the famous year of 1811, when the grapes were gathered withunheard-of difficulty, Grandet resolved to give Nanon his old watch,--the first present he had made her during twenty years of service.Though he turned over to her his old shoes (which fitted her), it isimpossible to consider that quarterly benefit as a gift, for the shoeswere always thoroughly worn-out. Necessity had made the poor girl soniggardly that Grandet had grown to love her as we love a dog, andNanon had let him fasten a spiked collar round her throat, whosespikes no longer pricked her. If Grandet cut the bread with rather toomuch parsimony, she made no complaint; she gaily shared the hygienicbenefits derived from the severe regime of the household, in which noone was ever ill. Nanon was, in fact, one of the family; she laughedwhen Grandet laughed, felt gloomy or chilly, warmed herself, andtoiled as he did. What pleasant compensations there were in suchequality! Never did the master have occasion to find fault with theservant for pilfering the grapes, nor for the plums and nectarineseaten under the trees. "Come, fall-to, Nanon!" he would say in yearswhen the branches bent under the fruit and the farmers were obliged togive it to the pigs.

°°°°To the poor peasant who in her youth had earned nothing but harshtreatment, to the pauper girl picked up by charity, Grandet'sambiguous laugh was like a sunbeam. Moreover, Nanon's simple heart andnarrow head could hold only one feeling and one idea. For thirty-fiveyears she had never ceased to see herself standing before the wood-yard of Monsieur Grandet, ragged and barefooted, and to hear him say:"What do you want, young one?" Her gratitude was ever new. SometimesGrandet, reflecting that the poor creature had never heard aflattering word, that she was ignorant of all the tender sentimentsinspired by women, that she might some day appear before the throne ofGod even more chaste than the Virgin Mary herself,--Grandet, struckwith pity, would say as he looked at her, "Poor Nanon!" Theexclamation was always followed by an undefinable look cast upon himin return by the old servant. The words, uttered from time to time,formed a chain of friendship that nothing ever parted, and to whicheach exclamation added a link. Such compassion arising in the heart ofthe miser, and accepted gratefully by the old spinster, had somethinginconceivably horrible about it. This cruel pity, recalling, as itdid, a thousand pleasures to the heart of the old cooper, was forNanon the sum total of happiness. Who does not likewise say, "PoorNanon!" God will recognize his angels by the inflexions of theirvoices and by their secret sighs.

°°°°There were very many households in Saumur where the servants werebetter treated, but where the masters received far less satisfactionin return. Thus it was often said: "What have the Grandets ever doneto make their Grande Nanon so attached to them? She would go throughfire and water for their sake!" Her kitchen, whose barred windowslooked into the court, was always clean, neat, cold,--a true miser'skitchen, where nothing went to waste. When Nanon had washed herdishes, locked up the remains of the dinner, and put out her fire, sheleft the kitchen, which was separated by a passage from the living-room, and went to spin hemp beside her masters. One tallow candlesufficed the family for the evening. The servant slept at the end ofthe passage in a species of closet lighted only by a fan-light. Herrobust health enabled her to live in this hole with impunity; thereshe could hear the slightest noise through the deep silence whichreigned night and day in that dreary house. Like a watch-dog, sheslept with one ear open, and took her rest with a mind alert.A description of the other parts of the dwelling will be foundconnected with the events of this history, though the foregoing sketchof the hall, where the whole luxury of the household appears, mayenable the reader to surmise the nakedness of the upper floors.In 1819, at the beginning of an evening in the middle of November, laGrande Nanon lighted the fire for the first time. The autumn had beenvery fine. This particular day was a fete-day well known to theCruchotines and the Grassinists. The six antagonists, armed at allpoints, were making ready to meet at the Grandets and surpass eachother in testimonials of friendship. That morning all Saumur had seenMadame and Mademoiselle Grandet, accompanied by Nanon, on their way tohear Mass at the parish church, and every one remembered that the daywas the anniversary of Mademoiselle Eugenie's birth. Calculating thehour at which the family dinner would be over, Maitre Cruchot, theAbbe Cruchot, and Monsieur C. de Bonfons hastened to arrive before thedes Grassins, and be the first to pay their compliments toMademoiselle Eugenie. All three brought enormous bouquets, gathered intheir little green-houses. The stalks of the flowers which thepresident intended to present were ingeniously wound round with awhite satin ribbon adorned with gold fringe. In the morning MonsieurGrandet, following his usual custom on the days that commemorated thebirth and the fete of Eugenie, went to her bedside and solemnlypresented her with his paternal gift,--which for the last thirteenyears had consisted regularly of a curious gold-piece. Madame Grandetgave her daughter a winter dress or a summer dress, as the case mightbe. These two dresses and the gold-pieces, of which she received twoothers on New Year's day and on her father's fete-day, gave Eugenie alittle revenue of a hundred crowns or thereabouts, which Grandet lovedto see her amass. Was it not putting his money from one strong-box toanother, and, as it were, training the parsimony of his heiress? fromwhom he sometimes demanded an account of her treasure (formerlyincreased by the gifts of the Bertellieres), saying: "It is to be yourmarriage dozen."

°°°°The "marriage dozen" is an old custom sacredly preserved and still inforce in many parts of central France. In Berry and in Anjou, when ayoung girl marries, her family, or that of the husband, must give hera purse, in which they place, according to their means, twelve pieces,or twelve dozen pieces, or twelve hundred pieces of gold. The poorestshepherd-girl never marries without her dozen, be it only a dozencoppers. They still tell in Issoudun of a certain "dozen" presented toa rich heiress, which contained a hundred and forty-four /portugaisesd'or/. Pope Clement VII., uncle of Catherine de' Medici, gave her whenhe married her to Henri II. a dozen antique gold medals of pricelessvalue.

°°°°During dinner the father, delighted to see his Eugenie looking well ina new gown, exclaimed: "As it is Eugenie's birthday let us have afire; it will be a good omen."

°°°°"Mademoiselle will be married this year, that's certain," said laGrande Nanon, carrying away the remains of the goose,--the pheasant oftradesmen.

°°°°"I don't see any one suitable for her in Saumur," said Madame Grandet,glancing at her husband with a timid look which, considering heryears, revealed the conjugal slavery under which the poor womanlanguished.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter and exclaimed gaily,--

°°°°"She is twenty-three years old to-day, the child; we must soon beginto think of it."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother silently exchanged a glance of intelligence.Madame Grandet was a dry, thin woman, as yellow as a quince, awkward,slow, one of those women who are born to be down-trodden. She had bigbones, a big nose, a big forehead, big eyes, and presented at firstsight a vague resemblance to those mealy fruits that have neithersavor nor succulence. Her teeth were black and few in number, hermouth was wrinkled, her chin long and pointed. She was an excellentwoman, a true la Bertelliere. L'abbe Cruchot found occasionalopportunity to tell her that she had not done ill; and she believedhim. Angelic sweetness, the resignation of an insect tortured bychildren, a rare piety, a good heart, an unalterable equanimity ofsoul, made her universally pitied and respected. Her husband nevergave her more than six francs at a time for her personal expenses.Ridiculous as it may seem, this woman, who by her own fortune and hervarious inheritances brought Pere Grandet more than three hundredthousand francs, had always felt so profoundly humiliated by herdependence and the slavery in which she lived, against which thegentleness of her spirit prevented her from revolting, that she hadnever asked for one penny or made a single remark on the deeds whichMaitre Cruchot brought for her signature. This foolish secret pride,this nobility of soul perpetually misunderstood and wounded byGrandet, ruled the whole conduct of the wife.

°°°°Madame Grandet was attired habitually in a gown of greenish levantinesilk, endeavoring to make it last nearly a year; with it she wore alarge kerchief of white cotton cloth, a bonnet made of plaited strawssewn together, and almost always a black-silk apron. As she seldomleft the house she wore out very few shoes. She never asked anythingfor herself. Grandet, seized with occasional remorse when heremembered how long a time had elapsed since he gave her the last sixfrancs, always stipulated for the "wife's pin-money" when he sold hisyearly vintage. The four or five louis presented by the Belgian or theDutchman who purchased the wine were the chief visible signs of MadameGrandet's annual revenues. But after she had received the five louis,her husband would often say to her, as though their purse were held incommon: "Can you lend me a few sous?" and the poor woman, glad to beable to do something for a man whom her confessor held up to her asher lord and master, returned him in the course of the winter severalcrowns out of the "pin-money." When Grandet drew from his pocket thefive-franc piece which he allowed monthly for the minor expenses,--thread, needles, and toilet,--of his daughter, he never failed to sayas he buttoned his breeches' pocket: "And you, mother, do you wantanything?"

°°°°"My friend," Madame Grandet would answer, moved by a sense of maternaldignity, "we will see about that later."

°°°°Wasted dignity! Grandet thought himself very generous to his wife.Philosophers who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, ofEugenie, have surely a right to say that irony is at the bottom of theways of Providence.

°°°°After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made toEugenie's marriage, Nanon went to fetch a bottle of black-currantratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly fell as shecame down the stairs.

°°°°"You great stupid!" said her master; "are you going to tumble aboutlike other people, hey?"

°°°°"Monsieur, it was that step on your staircase which has given way.""She is right," said Madame Grandet; "it ought to have been mendedlong ago. Yesterday Eugenie nearly twisted her ankle."

°°°°"Here," said Grandet to Nanon, seeing that she looked quite pale, "asit is Eugenie's birthday, and you came near falling, take a littleglass of ratafia to set you right."

°°°°"Faith! I've earned it," said Nanon; "most people would have brokenthe bottle; but I'd sooner have broken my elbow holding it up high.""Poor Nanon!" said Grandet, filling a glass.

°°°°"Did you hurt yourself?" asked Eugenie, looking kindly at her."No, I didn't fall; I threw myself back on my haunches."

°°°°"Well! as it is Eugenie's birthday," said Grandet, "I'll have the stepmended. You people don't know how to set your foot in the corner wherethe wood is still firm."

°°°°Grandet took the candle, leaving his wife, daughter, and servantwithout any other light than that from the hearth, where the flameswere lively, and went into the bakehouse to fetch planks, nails, andtools.

°°°°"Can I help you?" cried Nanon, hearing him hammer on the stairs."No, no! I'm an old hand at it," answered the former cooper.At the moment when Grandet was mending his worm-eaten staircase andwhistling with all his might, in remembrance of the days of his youth,the three Cruchots knocked at the door.

°°°°"Is it you, Monsieur Cruchot?" asked Nanon, peeping through the littlegrating.

°°°°"Yes," answered the president.

°°°°Nanon opened the door, and the light from the hearth, reflected on theceiling, enabled the three Cruchots to find their way into the room."Ha! you've come a-greeting," said Nanon, smelling the flowers."Excuse me, messieurs," cried Grandet, recognizing their voices; "I'llbe with you in a moment. I'm not proud; I am patching up a step on mystaircase."

°°°°"Go on, go on, Monsieur Grandet; a man's house is his castle," saidthe president sententiously.

°°°°Madame and Mademoiselle Grandet rose. The president, profiting by thedarkness, said to Eugenie:

°°°°"Will you permit me, mademoiselle, to wish you, on this the day ofyour birth, a series of happy years and the continuance of the healthwhich you now enjoy?"

°°°°He offered her a huge bouquet of choice flowers which were rare inSaumur; then, taking the heiress by the elbows, he kissed her on eachside of her neck with a complacency that made her blush. Thepresident, who looked like a rusty iron nail, felt that his courtshipwas progressing.

°°°°"Don't stand on ceremony," said Grandet, entering. "How well you dothings on fete-days, Monsieur le president!"

°°°°"When it concerns mademoiselle," said the abbe, armed with his ownbouquet, "every day is a fete-day for my nephew."

°°°°The abbe kissed Eugenie's hand. As for Maitre Cruchot, he boldlykissed her on both cheeks, remarking: "How we sprout up, to be sure!Every year is twelve months."

°°°°As he replaced the candlestick beside the clock, Grandet, who neverforgot his own jokes, and repeated them to satiety when he thoughtthem funny, said,--

°°°°"As this is Eugenie's birthday let us illuminate."

°°°°He carefully took off the branches of the candelabra, put a socket oneach pedestal, took from Nanon a new tallow candle with paper twistedround the end of it, put it into the hollow, made it firm, lit it, andthen sat down beside his wife, looking alternately at his friends, hisdaughter, and the two candles. The Abbe Cruchot, a plump, puffy littleman, with a red wig plastered down and a face like an old femalegambler, said as he stretched out his feet, well shod in stout shoeswith silver buckles: "The des Grassins have not come?"

°°°°"Not yet," said Grandet.

°°°°"But are they coming?" asked the old notary, twisting his face, whichhad as many holes as a collander, into a queer grimace.

°°°°"I think so," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Are your vintages all finished?" said Monsieur de Bonfons to Grandet."Yes, all of them," said the old man, rising to walk up and down theroom, his chest swelling with pride as he said the words, "all ofthem." Through the door of the passage which led to the kitchen he sawla Grande Nanon sitting beside her fire with a candle and preparing tospin there, so as not to intrude among the guests.

°°°°"Nanon," he said, going into the passage, "put out that fire and thatcandle, and come and sit with us. Pardieu! the hall is big enough forall."

°°°°"But monsieur, you are to have the great people."

°°°°"Are not you as good as they? They are descended from Adam, and so areyou."

°°°°Grandet came back to the president and said,--

°°°°"Have you sold your vintage?"

°°°°"No, not I; I shall keep it. If the wine is good this year, it will bebetter two years hence. The proprietors, you know, have made anagreement to keep up the price; and this year the Belgians won't getthe better of us. Suppose they are sent off empty-handed for once,faith! they'll come back."

°°°°"Yes, but let us mind what we are about," said Grandet in a tone whichmade the president tremble.

°°°°"Is he driving some bargain?" thought Cruchot.

°°°°At this moment the knocker announced the des Grassins family, andtheir arrival interrupted a conversation which had begun betweenMadame Grandet and the abbe.

°°°°Madame des Grassins was one of those lively, plump little women, withpink-and-white skins, who, thanks to the claustral calm of theprovinces and the habits of a virtuous life, keep their youth untilthey are past forty. She was like the last rose of autumn,--pleasantto the eye, though the petals have a certain frostiness, and theirperfume is slight. She dressed well, got her fashions from Paris, setthe tone to Saumur, and gave parties. Her husband, formerly aquartermaster in the Imperial guard, who had been desperately woundedat Austerlitz, and had since retired, still retained, in spite of hisrespect for Grandet, the seeming frankness of an old soldier."Good evening, Grandet," he said, holding out his hand and affecting asort of superiority, with which he always crushed the Cruchots."Mademoiselle," he added, turning to Eugenie, after bowing to MadameGrandet, "you are always beautiful and good, and truly I do not knowwhat to wish you." So saying, he offered her a little box which hisservant had brought and which contained a Cape heather,--a flowerlately imported into Europe and very rare.

°°°°Madame des Grassins kissed Eugenie very affectionately, pressed herhand, and said: "Adolphe wishes to make you my little offering."A tall, blond young man, pale and slight, with tolerable manners andseemingly rather shy, although he had just spent eight or ten thousandfrancs over his allowance in Paris, where he had been sent to studylaw, now came forward and kissed Eugenie on both cheeks, offering hera workbox with utensils in silver-gilt,--mere show-case trumpery, inspite of the monogram E.G. in gothic letters rather well engraved,which belonged properly to something in better taste. As she openedit, Eugenie experienced one of those unexpected and perfect delightswhich make a young girl blush and quiver and tremble with pleasure.She turned her eyes to her father as if to ask permission to acceptit, and Monsieur Grandet replied: "Take it, my daughter," in a tonewhich would have made an actor illustrious.

°°°°The three Cruchots felt crushed as they saw the joyous, animated lookcast upon Adolphe des Grassins by the heiress, to whom such richeswere unheard-of. Monsieur des Grassins offered Grandet a pinch ofsnuff, took one himself, shook off the grains as they fell on theribbon of the Legion of honor which was attached to the button-hole ofhis blue surtout; then he looked at the Cruchots with an air thatseemed to say, "Parry that thrust if you can!" Madame des Grassinscast her eyes on the blue vases which held the Cruchot bouquets,looking at the enemy's gifts with the pretended interest of asatirical woman. At this delicate juncture the Abbe Cruchot left thecompany seated in a circle round the fire and joined Grandet at thelower end of the hall. As the two men reached the embrasure of thefarthest window the priest said in the miser's ear: "Those peoplethrow money out of the windows."

°°°°"What does that matter if it gets into my cellar?" retorted the oldwine-grower.

°°°°"If you want to give gilt scissors to your daughter, you have themeans," said the abbe.

°°°°"I give her something better than scissors," answered Grandet."My nephew is a blockhead," thought the abbe as he looked at thepresident, whose rumpled hair added to the ill grace of his browncountenance. "Couldn't he have found some little trifle which costmoney?"

°°°°"We will join you at cards, Madame Grandet," said Madame des Grassins."We might have two tables, as we are all here."

°°°°"As it is Eugenie's birthday you had better play loto all together,"said Pere Grandet: "the two young ones can join"; and the old cooper,who never played any game, motioned to his daughter and Adolphe."Come, Nanon, set the tables."

°°°°"We will help you, Mademoiselle Nanon," said Madame des Grassinsgaily, quite joyous at the joy she had given Eugenie.

°°°°"I have never in my life been so pleased," the heiress said to her; "Ihave never seen anything so pretty."

°°°°"Adolphe brought it from Paris, and he chose it," Madame des Grassinswhispered in her ear.

°°°°"Go on! go on! damned intriguing thing!" thought the president. "Ifyou ever have a suit in court, you or your husband, it shall go hardwith you."

°°°°The notary, sitting in his corner, looked calmly at the abbe, sayingto himself: "The des Grassins may do what they like; my property andmy brother's and that of my nephew amount in all to eleven hundredthousand francs. The des Grassins, at the most, have not half that;besides, they have a daughter. They may give what presents they like;heiress and presents too will be ours one of these days."At half-past eight in the evening the two card-tables were set out.Madame des Grassins succeeded in putting her son beside Eugenie. Theactors in this scene, so full of interest, commonplace as it seems,were provided with bits of pasteboard striped in many colors andnumbered, and with counters of blue glass, and they appeared to belistening to the jokes of the notary, who never drew a number withoutmaking a remark, while in fact they were all thinking of MonsieurGrandet's millions. The old cooper, with inward self-conceit, wascontemplating the pink feathers and the fresh toilet of Madame desGrassins, the martial head of the banker, the faces of Adolphe, thepresident, the abbe, and the notary, saying to himself:--"They are all after my money. Hey! neither the one nor the other shallhave my daughter; but they are useful--useful as harpoons to fishwith."

°°°°This family gaiety in the old gray room dimly lighted by two tallowcandles; this laughter, accompanied by the whirr of Nanon's spinning-wheel, sincere only upon the lips of Eugenie or her mother; thistriviality mingled with important interests; this young girl, who,like certain birds made victims of the price put upon them, was nowlured and trapped by proofs of friendship of which she was the dupe,--all these things contributed to make the scene a melancholy comedy. Isit not, moreover, a drama of all times and all places, though herebrought down to its simplest expression? The figure of Grandet,playing his own game with the false friendship of the two families andgetting enormous profits from it, dominates the scene and throws lightupon it. The modern god,--the only god in whom faith is preserved,--money, is here, in all its power, manifested in a single countenance.The tender sentiments of life hold here but a secondary place; onlythe three pure, simple hearts of Nanon, of Eugenie, and of her motherwere inspired by them. And how much of ignorance there was in thesimplicity of these poor women! Eugenie and her mother knew nothing ofGrandet's wealth; they could only estimate the things of life by theglimmer of their pale ideas, and they neither valued nor despisedmoney, because they were accustomed to do without it. Their feelings,bruised, though they did not know it, but ever-living, were the secretspring of their existence, and made them curious exceptions in themidst of these other people whose lives were purely material.Frightful condition of the human race! there is no one of its joysthat does not come from some species of ignorance.

°°°°At the moment when Madame Grandet had won a loto of sixteen sous,--thelargest ever pooled in that house,--and while la Grande Nanon waslaughing with delight as she watched madame pocketing her riches, theknocker resounded on the house-door with such a noise that the womenall jumped in their chairs.

°°°°"There is no man in Saumur who would knock like that," said thenotary.

°°°°"How can they bang in that way!" exclaimed Nanon; "do they want tobreak in the door?"

°°°°"Who the devil is it?" cried Grandet.

°°°°III

°°°°Nanon took one of the candles and went to open the door, followed byher master.

°°°°"Grandet! Grandet!" cried his wife, moved by a sudden impulse of fear,and running to the door of the room.

°°°°All the players looked at each other.

°°°°"Suppose we all go?" said Monsieur des Grassins; "that knock strikesme as evil-intentioned."

°°°°Hardly was Monsieur des Grassins allowed to see the figure of a youngman, accompanied by a porter from the coach-office carrying two largetrunks and dragging a carpet-bag after him, than Monsieur Grandetturned roughly on his wife and said,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, go back to your loto; leave me to speak withmonsieur."

°°°°Then he pulled the door quickly to, and the excited players returnedto their seats, but did not continue the game.

°°°°"Is it any one belonging to Saumur, Monsieur des Grassins?" asked hiswife.

°°°°"No, it is a traveller."

°°°°"He must have come from Paris."

°°°°"Just so," said the notary, pulling out his watch, which was twoinches thick and looked like a Dutch man-of-war; "it's nine o'clock;the diligence of the Grand Bureau is never late."

°°°°"Is the gentleman young?" inquired the Abbe Cruchot.

°°°°"Yes," answered Monsieur des Grassins, "and he has brought luggagewhich must weigh nearly three tons."

°°°°"Nanon does not come back," said Eugenie.

°°°°"It must be one of your relations," remarked the president."Let us go on with our game," said Madame Grandet gently. "I know fromMonsieur Grandet's tone of voice that he is annoyed; perhaps he wouldnot like to find us talking of his affairs."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said Adolphe to his neighbor, "it is no doubt yourcousin Grandet,--a very good-looking young man; I met him at the ballof Monsieur de Nucingen." Adolphe did not go on, for his mother trodon his toes; and then, asking him aloud for two sous to put on herstake, she whispered: "Will you hold your tongue, you great goose!"At this moment Grandet returned, without la Grande Nanon, whose steps,together with those of the porter, echoed up the staircase; and he wasfollowed by the traveller who had excited such curiosity and so filledthe lively imaginations of those present that his arrival at thisdwelling, and his sudden fall into the midst of this assembly, canonly be likened to that of a snail into a beehive, or the introductionof a peacock into some village poultry-yard.

°°°°"Sit down near the fire," said Grandet.

°°°°Before seating himself, the young stranger saluted the assembledcompany very gracefully. The men rose to answer by a courteousinclination, and the women made a ceremonious bow.

°°°°"You are cold, no doubt, monsieur," said Madame Grandet; "you have,perhaps, travelled from--"

°°°°"Just like all women!" said the old wine-grower, looking up from aletter he was reading. "Do let monsieur rest himself!"

°°°°"But, father, perhaps monsieur would like to take something," saidEugenie.

°°°°"He has got a tongue," said the old man sternly.

°°°°The stranger was the only person surprised by this scene; all theothers were well-used to the despotic ways of the master. However,after the two questions and the two replies had been exchanged, thenewcomer rose, turned his back towards the fire, lifted one foot so asto warm the sole of its boot, and said to Eugenie,--

°°°°"Thank you, my cousin, but I dined at Tours. And," he added, lookingat Grandet, "I need nothing; I am not even tired."

°°°°"Monsieur has come from the capital?" asked Madame des Grassins.Monsieur Charles,--such was the name of the son of Monsieur Grandet ofParis,--hearing himself addressed, took a little eye-glass, suspendedby a chain from his neck, applied it to his right eye to examine whatwas on the table, and also the persons sitting round it. He ogledMadame des Grassins with much impertinence, and said to her, after hehad observed all he wished,--

°°°°"Yes, madame. You are playing at loto, aunt," he added. "Do not let meinterrupt you, I beg; go on with your game: it is too amusing toleave."

°°°°"I was certain it was the cousin," thought Madame des Grassins,casting repeated glances at him.

°°°°"Forty-seven!" cried the old abbe. "Mark it down, Madame des Grassins.Isn't that your number?"

°°°°Monsieur des Grassins put a counter on his wife's card, who satwatching first the cousin from Paris and then Eugenie, withoutthinking of her loto, a prey to mournful presentiments. From time totime the young the heiress glanced furtively at her cousin, and thebanker's wife easily detected a /crescendo/ of surprise and curiosityin her mind.

°°°°Monsieur Charles Grandet, a handsome young man of twenty-two,presented at this moment a singular contrast to the worthyprovincials, who, considerably disgusted by his aristocratic manners,were all studying him with sarcastic intent. This needs anexplanation. At twenty-two, young people are still so near childhoodthat they often conduct themselves childishly. In all probability, outof every hundred of them fully ninety-nine would have behavedprecisely as Monsieur Charles Grandet was now behaving.

°°°°Some days earlier than this his father had told him to go and spendseveral months with his uncle at Saumur. Perhaps Monsieur Grandet wasthinking of Eugenie. Charles, sent for the first time in his life intothe provinces, took a fancy to make his appearance with thesuperiority of a man of fashion, to reduce the whole arrondissement todespair by his luxury, and to make his visit an epoch, importing intothose country regions all the refinements of Parisian life. In short,to explain it in one word, he mean to pass more time at Saumur inbrushing his nails than he ever thought of doing in Paris, and toassume the extra nicety and elegance of dress which a young man offashion often lays aside for a certain negligence which in itself isnot devoid of grace. Charles therefore brought with him a completehunting-costume, the finest gun, the best hunting-knife in theprettiest sheath to be found in all Paris. He brought his wholecollection of waistcoats. They were of all kinds,--gray, black, white,scarabaeus-colored: some were shot with gold, some spangled, some/chined/; some were double-breasted and crossed like a shawl, otherswere straight in the collar; some had turned-over collars, somebuttoned up to the top with gilt buttons. He brought every variety ofcollar and cravat in fashion at that epoch. He brought two ofBuisson's coats and all his finest linen He brought his pretty goldtoilet-set,--a present from his mother. He brought all his dandyknick-knacks, not forgetting a ravishing little desk presented to himby the most amiable of women,--amiable for him, at least,--a fine ladywhom he called Annette and who at this moment was travelling,matrimonially and wearily, in Scotland, a victim to certain suspicionswhich required a passing sacrifice of happiness; in the desk was muchpretty note-paper on which to write to her once a fortnight.In short, it was as complete a cargo of Parisian frivolities as it waspossible for him to get together,--a collection of all the implementsof husbandry with which the youth of leisure tills his life, from thelittle whip which helps to begin a duel, to the handsomely chasedpistols which end it. His father having told him to travel alone andmodestly, he had taken the coupe of the diligence all to himself,rather pleased at not having to damage a delightful travelling-carriage ordered for a journey on which he was to meet his Annette,the great lady who, etc.,--whom he intended to rejoin at Baden in thefollowing June. Charles expected to meet scores of people at hisuncle's house, to hunt in his uncle's forests,--to live, in short, theusual chateau life; he did not know that his uncle was in Saumur, andhad only inquired about him incidentally when asking the way toFroidfond. Hearing that he was in town, he supposed that he shouldfind him in a suitable mansion.

°°°°In order that he might make a becoming first appearance before hisuncle either at Saumur or at Froidfond, he had put on his most eleganttravelling attire, simple yet exquisite,--"adorable," to use the wordwhich in those days summed up the special perfections of a man or athing. At Tours a hairdresser had re-curled his beautiful chestnutlocks; there he changed his linen and put on a black satin cravat,which, combined with a round shirt-collar, framed his fair and smilingcountenance agreeably. A travelling great-coat, only half buttoned up,nipped in his waist and disclosed a cashmere waistcoat crossed infront, beneath which was another waistcoat of white material. Hiswatch, negligently slipped into a pocket, was fastened by a short goldchain to a buttonhole. His gray trousers, buttoned up at the sides,were set off at the seams with patterns of black silk embroidery. Hegracefully twirled a cane, whose chased gold knob did not mar thefreshness of his gray gloves. And to complete all, his cap was inexcellent taste. None but a Parisian, and a Parisian of the upperspheres, could thus array himself without appearing ridiculous; noneother could give the harmony of self-conceit to all these fopperies,which were carried off, however, with a dashing air,--the air of ayoung man who has fine pistols, a sure aim, and Annette.

°°°°Now if you wish to understand the mutual amazement of the provincialparty and the young Parisian; if you would clearly see the brilliancewhich the traveller's elegance cast among the gray shadows of the roomand upon the faces of this family group,--endeavor to picture to yourminds the Cruchots. All three took snuff, and had long ceased torepress the habit of snivelling or to remove the brown blotches whichstrewed the frills of their dingy shirts and the yellowing creases oftheir crumpled collars. Their flabby cravats were twisted into ropesas soon as they wound them about their throats. The enormous quantityof linen which allowed these people to have their clothing washed onlyonce in six months, and to keep it during that time in the depths oftheir closets, also enabled time to lay its grimy and decaying stainsupon it. There was perfect unison of ill-grace and senility aboutthem; their faces, as faded as their threadbare coats, as creased astheir trousers, were worn-out, shrivelled-up, and puckered. As for theothers, the general negligence of their dress, which was incompleteand wanting in freshness,--like the toilet of all country places,where insensibly people cease to dress for others and come to thinkseriously of the price of a pair of gloves,--was in keeping with thenegligence of the Cruchots. A horror of fashion was the only point onwhich the Grassinists and the Cruchotines agreed.

°°°°When the Parisian took up his eye-glass to examine the strangeaccessories of this dwelling,--the joists of the ceiling, the color ofthe woodwork, and the specks which the flies had left there insufficient number to punctuate the "Moniteur" and the "Encyclopaediaof Sciences,"--the loto-players lifted their noses and looked at himwith as much curiosity as they might have felt about a giraffe.Monsieur des Grassins and his son, to whom the appearance of a man offashion was not wholly unknown, were nevertheless as much astonishedas their neighbors, whether it was that they fell under theindefinable influence of the general feeling, or that they reallyshared it as with satirical glances they seemed to say to theircompatriots,--

°°°°"That is what you see in Paris!"

°°°°They were able to examine Charles at their leisure without fearing todisplease the master of the house. Grandet was absorbed in the longletter which he held in his hand; and to read it he had taken the onlycandle upon the card-table, paying no heed to his guests or theirpleasure. Eugenie, to whom such a type of perfection, whether of dressor of person, was absolutely unknown, thought she beheld in her cousina being descended from seraphic spheres. She inhaled with delight thefragrance wafted from the graceful curls of that brilliant head. Shewould have liked to touch the soft kid of the delicate gloves. Sheenvied Charles his small hands, his complexion, the freshness andrefinement of his features. In short,--if it is possible to sum up theeffect this elegant being produced upon an ignorant young girlperpetually employed in darning stockings or in mending her father'sclothes, and whose life flowed on beneath these unclean rafters,seeing none but occasional passers along the silent street,--thisvision of her cousin roused in her soul an emotion of delicate desirelike that inspired in a young man by the fanciful pictures of womendrawn by Westall for the English "Keepsakes," and that engraved by theFindens with so clever a tool that we fear, as we breathe upon thepaper, that the celestial apparitions may be wafted away. Charles drewfrom his pocket a handkerchief embroidered by the great lady nowtravelling in Scotland. As Eugenie saw this pretty piece of work, donein the vacant hours which were lost to love, she looked at her cousinto see if it were possible that he meant to make use of it. Themanners of the young man, his gestures, the way in which he took uphis eye-glass, his affected superciliousness, his contemptuous glanceat the coffer which had just given so much pleasure to the richheiress, and which he evidently regarded as without value, or even asridiculous,--all these things, which shocked the Cruchots and the desGrassins, pleased Eugenie so deeply that before she slept she dreamedlong dreams of her phoenix cousin.

°°°°The loto-numbers were drawn very slowly, and presently the game camesuddenly to an end. La Grand Nanon entered and said aloud: "Madame, Iwant the sheets for monsieur's bed."

°°°°Madame Grandet followed her out. Madame des Grassins said in a lowvoice: "Let us keep our sous and stop playing." Each took his or hertwo sous from the chipped saucer in which they had been put; then theparty moved in a body toward the fire.

°°°°"Have you finished your game?" said Grandet, without looking up fromhis letter.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" replied Madame des Grassins, taking a seat near Charles.Eugenie, prompted by a thought often born in the heart of a young girlwhen sentiment enters it for the first time, left the room to go andhelp her mother and Nanon. Had an able confessor then questioned hershe would, no doubt, have avowed to him that she thought neither ofher mother nor of Nanon, but was pricked by a poignant desire to lookafter her cousin's room and concern herself with her cousin; to supplywhat might be needed, to remedy any forgetfulness, to see that all wasdone to make it, as far as possible, suitable and elegant; and, infact, she arrived in time to prove to her mother and Nanon thateverything still remained to be done. She put into Nanon's head thenotion of passing a warming-pan between the sheets. She herselfcovered the old table with a cloth and requested Nanon to change itevery morning; she convinced her mother that it was necessary to lighta good fire, and persuaded Nanon to bring up a great pile of wood intothe corridor without saying anything to her father. She ran to get,from one of the corner-shelves of the hall, a tray of old lacquerwhich was part of the inheritance of the late Monsieur de laBertelliere, catching up at the same time a six-sided crystal goblet,a little tarnished gilt spoon, an antique flask engraved with cupids,all of which she put triumphantly on the corner of her cousin'schimney-piece. More ideas surged through her head in one quarter of anhour than she had ever had since she came into the world."Mamma," she said, "my cousin will never bear the smell of a tallowcandle; suppose we buy a wax one?" And she darted, swift as a bird, toget the five-franc piece which she had just received for her monthlyexpenses. "Here, Nanon," she cried, "quick!"

°°°°"What will your father say?" This terrible remonstrance was uttered byMadame Grandet as she beheld her daughter armed with an old Sevressugar-basin which Grandet had brought home from the chateau ofFroidfond. "And where will you get the sugar? Are you crazy?""Mamma, Nanon can buy some sugar as well as the candle."

°°°°"But your father?"

°°°°"Surely his nephew ought not to go without a glass of /eau sucree/?Besides, he will not notice it."

°°°°"Your father sees everything," said Madame Grandet, shaking her head.Nanon hesitated; she knew her master.

°°°°"Come, Nanon, go,--because it is my birthday."

°°°°Nanon gave a loud laugh as she heard the first little jest her youngmistress had ever made, and then obeyed her.

°°°°While Eugenie and her mother were trying to embellish the bedroomassigned by Monsieur Grandet for his nephew, Charles himself was theobject of Madame des Grassins' attentions; to all appearances she wassetting her cap at him.

°°°°"You are very courageous, monsieur," she said to the young dandy, "toleave the pleasures of the capital at this season and take up yourabode in Saumur. But if we do not frighten you away, you will findthere are some amusements even here."

°°°°She threw him the ogling glance of the provinces, where women put somuch prudence and reserve into their eyes that they impart to them theprudish concupiscence peculiar to certain ecclesiastics to whom allpleasure is either a theft or an error. Charles was so completely outof his element in this abode, and so far from the vast chateau and thesumptuous life with which his fancy had endowed his uncle, that as helooked at Madame des Grassins he perceived a dim likeness to Parisianfaces. He gracefully responded to the species of invitation addressedto him, and began very naturally a conversation, in which Madame desGrassins gradually lowered her voice so as to bring it into harmonywith the nature of the confidences she was making. With her, as withCharles, there was the need of conference; so after a few momentsspent in coquettish phrases and a little serious jesting, the cleverprovincial said, thinking herself unheard by the others, who werediscussing the sale of wines which at that season filled the heads ofevery one in Saumur,--

°°°°"Monsieur if you will do us the honor to come and see us, you willgive as much pleasure to my husband as to myself. Our salon is theonly one in Saumur where you will find the higher business circlesmingling with the nobility. We belong to both societies, who meet atour house simply because they find it amusing. My husband--I say itwith pride--is as much valued by the one class as by the other. Wewill try to relieve the monotony of your visit here. If you stay allthe time with Monsieur Grandet, good heavens! what will become of you?Your uncle is a sordid miser who thinks of nothing but his vines; youraunt is a pious soul who can't put two ideas together; and your cousinis a little fool, without education, perfectly common, no fortune, whowill spend her life in darning towels."

°°°°"She is really very nice, this woman," thought Charles Grandet as heduly responded to Madame des Grassins' coquetries.

°°°°"It seems to me, wife, that you are taking possession of monsieur,"said the stout banker, laughing.

°°°°On this remark the notary and the president said a few words that weremore or less significant; but the abbe, looking at them slyly, broughttheir thoughts to a focus by taking a pinch of snuff and saying as hehanded round his snuff-box: "Who can do the honors of Saumur formonsieur so well as madame?"

°°°°"Ah! what do you mean by that, monsieur l'abbe?" demanded Monsieur desGrassins.

°°°°"I mean it in the best possible sense for you, for madame, for thetown of Saumur, and for monsieur," said the wily old man, turning toCharles.

°°°°The Abbe Cruchot had guessed the conversation between Charles andMadame des Grassins without seeming to pay attention to it."Monsieur," said Adolphe to Charles with an air which he tried to makefree and easy, "I don't know whether you remember me, but I had thehonor of dancing as your /vis-a-vis/ at a ball given by the Baron deNucingen, and--"

°°°°"Perfectly; I remember perfectly, monsieur," answered Charles, pleasedto find himself the object of general attention.

°°°°"Monsieur is your son?" he said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°The abbe looked at her maliciously.

°°°°"Yes, monsieur," she answered.

°°°°"Then you were very young when you were in Paris?" said Charles,addressing Adolphe.

°°°°"You must know, monsieur," said the abbe, "that we send them toBabylon as soon as they are weaned."

°°°°Madame des Grassins examined the abbe with a glance of extremepenetration.

°°°°"It is only in the provinces," he continued, "that you will find womenof thirty and more years as fresh as madame, here, with a son about totake his degree. I almost fancy myself back in the days when the youngmen stood on chairs in the ball-room to see you dance, madame," saidthe abbe, turning to his female adversary. "To me, your triumphs arebut of yesterday--"

°°°°"The old rogue!" thought Madame Grassins; "can he have guessed myintentions?"

°°°°"It seems that I shall have a good deal of success in Saumur," thoughtCharles as he unbuttoned his great-coat, put a hand into hiswaistcoat, and cast a glance into the far distance, to imitate theattitude which Chantrey has given to Lord Byron.

°°°°The inattention of Pere Grandet, or, to speak more truly, thepreoccupation of mind into which the reading of the letter had plungedhim, did not escape the vigilance of the notary and the president, whotried to guess the contents of the letter by the almost imperceptiblemotions of the miser's face, which was then under the full light ofthe candle. He maintained the habitual calm of his features withevident difficulty; we may, in fact, picture to ourselves thecountenance such a man endeavored to preserve as he read the fatalletter which here follows:--

°°°°My Brother,--It is almost twenty-three years since we have seen

°°°°each other. My marriage was the occasion of our last interview,

°°°°after which we parted, and both of us were happy. Assuredly I

°°°°could not then foresee that you would one day be the prop of the

°°°°family whose prosperity you then predicted.

°°°°When you hold this letter within your hands I shall be no longer

°°°°living. In the position I now hold I cannot survive the disgrace

°°°°of bankruptcy. I have waited on the edge of the gulf until the

°°°°last moment, hoping to save myself. The end has come, I must sink

°°°°into it. The double bankruptcies of my broker and of Roguin, my

°°°°notary, have carried off my last resources and left me nothing. I

°°°°have the bitterness of owing nearly four millions, with assets not

°°°°more than twenty-five per cent in value to pay them. The wines in

°°°°my warehouses suffer from the fall in prices caused by the

°°°°abundance and quality of your vintage. In three days Paris will

°°°°cry out: "Monsieur Grandet was a knave!" and I, an honest man,

°°°°shall be lying in my winding-sheet of infamy. I deprive my son of

°°°°a good name, which I have stained, and the fortune of his mother,

°°°°which I have lost. He knows nothing of all this,--my unfortunate

°°°°child whom I idolize! We parted tenderly. He was ignorant,

°°°°happily, that the last beatings of my heart were spent in that

°°°°farewell. Will he not some day curse me? My brother, my brother!

°°°°the curses of our children are horrible; they can appeal against

°°°°ours, but theirs are irrevocable. Grandet, you are my elder

°°°°brother, you owe me your protection; act for me so that Charles

°°°°may cast no bitter words upon my grave! My brother, if I were

°°°°writing with my blood, with my tears, no greater anguish could I

°°°°put into this letter,--nor as great, for then I should weep, I

°°°°should bleed, I should die, I should suffer no more, but now I

°°°°suffer and look at death with dry eyes.

°°°°From henceforth you are my son's father; he has no relations, as

°°°°you well know, on his mother's side. Why did I not consider social

°°°°prejudices? Why did I yield to love? Why did I marry the natural

°°°°daughter of a great lord? Charles has no family. Oh, my unhappy

°°°°son! my son! Listen, Grandet! I implore nothing for myself,--

°°°°besides, your property may not be large enough to carry a mortgage

°°°°of three millions,--but for my son! Brother, my suppliant hands

°°°°are clasped as I think of you; behold them! Grandet, I confide my

°°°°son to you in dying, and I look at the means of death with less

°°°°pain as I think that you will be to him a father. He loved me

°°°°well, my Charles; I was good to him, I never thwarted him; he will

°°°°not curse me. Ah, you see! he is gentle, he is like his mother, he

°°°°will cause you no grief. Poor boy! accustomed to all the

°°°°enjoyments of luxury, he knows nothing of the privations to which

°°°°you and I were condemned by the poverty of our youth. And I leave

°°°°him ruined! alone! Yes, all my friends will avoid him, and it is I

°°°°who have brought this humiliation upon him! Would that I had the

°°°°force to send him with one thrust into the heavens to his mother's

°°°°side! Madness! I come back to my disaster--to his. I send him to

°°°°you that you may tell him in some fitting way of my death, of his

°°°°future fate. Be a father to him, but a good father. Do not tear

°°°°him all at once from his idle life, it would kill him. I beg him

°°°°on my knees to renounce all rights that, as his mother's heir, he

°°°°may have on my estate. But the prayer is superfluous; he is

°°°°honorable, and he will feel that he must not appear among my

°°°°creditors. Bring him to see this at the right time; reveal to him

°°°°the hard conditions of the life I have made for him: and if he

°°°°still has tender thoughts of me, tell him in my name that all is

°°°°not lost for him. Yes, work, labor, which saved us both, may give

°°°°him back the fortune of which I have deprived him; and if he

°°°°listens to his father's voice as it reaches him from the grave, he

°°°°will go the Indies. My brother, Charles is an upright and

°°°°courageous young man; give him the wherewithal to make his

°°°°venture; he will die sooner than not repay you the funds which you

°°°°may lend him. Grandet! if you will not do this, you will lay up

°°°°for yourself remorse. Ah, should my child find neither tenderness

°°°°nor succor in you, I would call down the vengeance of God upon

°°°°your cruelty!

°°°°If I had been able to save something from the wreck, I might have

°°°°had the right to leave him at least a portion of his mother's

°°°°property; but my last monthly payments have absorbed everything. I

°°°°did not wish to die uncertain of my child's fate; I hoped to feel

°°°°a sacred promise in a clasp of your hand which might have warmed

°°°°my heart: but time fails me. While Charles is journeying to you I

°°°°shall be preparing my assignment. I shall endeavor to show by the

°°°°order and good faith of my accounts that my disaster comes neither

°°°°from a faulty life nor from dishonesty. It is for my son's sake

°°°°that I strive to do this.

°°°°Farewell, my brother! May the blessing of God be yours for the

°°°°generous guardianship I lay upon you, and which, I doubt not, you

°°°°will accept. A voice will henceforth and forever pray for you in

°°°°that world where we must all go, and where I am now as you read

°°°°these lines.

°°°°Victor-Ange-Guillaume Grandet.

°°°°"So you are talking?" said Pere Grandet as he carefully folded theletter in its original creases and put it into his waistcoat-pocket.He looked at his nephew with a humble, timid air, beneath which he hidhis feelings and his calculations. "Have you warmed yourself?" he saidto him.

°°°°"Thoroughly, my dear uncle."

°°°°"Well, where are the women?" said his uncle, already forgetting thathis nephew was to sleep at the house. At this moment Eugenie andMadame Grandet returned.

°°°°"Is the room all ready?" said Grandet, recovering his composure."Yes, father."

°°°°"Well then, my nephew, if you are tired, Nanon shall show you yourroom. It isn't a dandy's room; but you will excuse a poor wine-growerwho never has a penny to spare. Taxes swallow up everything.""We do not wish to intrude, Grandet," said the banker; "you may wantto talk to your nephew, and therefore we will bid you good-night."At these words the assembly rose, and each made a parting bow inkeeping with his or her own character. The old notary went to the doorto fetch his lantern and came back to light it, offering to accompanythe des Grassins on their way. Madame des Grassins had not foreseenthe incident which brought the evening prematurely to an end, herservant therefore had not arrived.

°°°°"Will you do me the honor to take my arm, madame?" said the abbe."Thank you, monsieur l'abbe, but I have my son," she answered dryly."Ladies cannot compromise themselves with me," said the abbe."Take Monsieur Cruchot's arm," said her husband.

°°°°The abbe walked off with the pretty lady so quickly that they weresoon some distance in advance of the caravan.

°°°°"That is a good-looking young man, madame," he said, pressing her arm."Good-by to the grapes, the vintage is done. It is all over with us.We may as well say adieu to Mademoiselle Grandet. Eugenie will belongto the dandy. Unless this cousin is enamoured of some Parisian woman,your son Adolphe will find another rival in--"

°°°°"Not at all, monsieur l'abbe. This young man cannot fail to see thatEugenie is a little fool,--a girl without the least freshness. Did younotice her to-night? She was as yellow as a quince."

°°°°"Perhaps you made the cousin notice it?"

°°°°"I did not take the trouble--"

°°°°"Place yourself always beside Eugenie, madame, and you need never takethe trouble to say anything to the young man against his cousin; hewill make his own comparisons, which--"

°°°°"Well, he has promised to dine with me the day after to-morrow.""Ah! if you only /would/, madame--" said the abbe.

°°°°"What is it that you wish me to do, monsieur l'abbe? Do you mean tooffer me bad advice? I have not reached the age of thirty-nine,without a stain upon my reputation, thank God! to compromise myselfnow, even for the empire of the Great Mogul. You and I are of an agewhen we both know the meaning of words. For an ecclesiastic, youcertainly have ideas that are very incongruous. Fie! it is worthy ofFaublas!"

°°°°"You have read Faublas?"

°°°°"No, monsieur l'abbe; I meant to say the /Liaisons dangereuses/.""Ah! that book is infinitely more moral," said the abbe, laughing."But you make me out as wicked as a young man of the present day; Ionly meant--"

°°°°"Do you dare to tell me you were not thinking of putting wicked thingsinto my head? Isn't it perfectly clear? If this young man--who I admitis very good-looking--were to make love to me, he would not think ofhis cousin. In Paris, I know, good mothers do devote themselves inthis way to the happiness and welfare of their children; but we livein the provinces, monsieur l'abbe."

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"And," she continued, "I do not want, and Adolphe himself would notwant, a hundred millions brought at such a price."

°°°°"Madame, I said nothing about a hundred millions; that temptationmight be too great for either of us to withstand. Only, I do thinkthat an honest woman may permit herself, in all honor, certainharmless little coquetries, which are, in fact, part of her socialduty and which--"

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"Are we not bound, madame, to make ourselves agreeable to each other?--Permit me to blow my nose.--I assure you, madame," he resumed, "thatthe young gentleman ogled you through his glass in a more flatteringmanner than he put on when he looked at me; but I forgive him fordoing homage to beauty in preference to old age--"

°°°°"It is quite apparent," said the president in his loud voice, "thatMonsieur Grandet of Paris has sent his son to Saumur with extremelymatrimonial intentions."

°°°°"But in that case the cousin wouldn't have fallen among us like acannon-ball," answered the notary.

°°°°"That doesn't prove anything," said Monsieur des Grassins; "the oldmiser is always making mysteries."

°°°°"Des Grassins, my friend, I have invited the young man to dinner. Youmust go and ask Monsieur and Madame de Larsonniere and the du Hautoys,with the beautiful demoiselle du Hautoy, of course. I hope she will beproperly dressed; that jealous mother of hers does make such a frightof her! Gentlemen, I trust that you will all do us the honor to come,"she added, stopping the procession to address the two Cruchots."Here you are at home, madame," said the notary.

°°°°After bowing to the three des Grassins, the three Cruchots returnedhome, applying their provincial genius for analysis to studying, underall its aspects, the great event of the evening, which undoubtedlychanged the respective positions of Grassinists and Cruchotines. Theadmirable common-sense which guided all the actions of these greatmachinators made each side feel the necessity of a momentary allianceagainst a common enemy. Must they not mutually hinder Eugenie fromloving her cousin, and the cousin from thinking of Eugenie? Could theParisian resist the influence of treacherous insinuations, soft-spokencalumnies, slanders full of faint praise and artless denials, whichshould be made to circle incessantly about him and deceive him?IV

°°°°When the four relations were left alone, Monsieur Grandet said to hisnephew,--

°°°°"We must go to bed. It is too late to talk about the matters whichhave brought you here; to-morrow we will take a suitable moment. Webreakfast at eight o'clock; at midday we eat a little fruit or a bitof bread, and drink a glass of white wine; and we dine, like theParisians, at five o'clock. That's the order of the day. If you liketo go and see the town and the environs you are free to do so. Youwill excuse me if my occupations do not permit me to accompany you.You may perhaps hear people say that I am rich,--Monsieur Grandetthis, Monsieur Grandet that. I let them talk; their gossip does nothurt my credit. But I have not a penny; I work in my old age like anapprentice whose worldly goods are a bad plane and two good arms.Perhaps you'll soon know yourself what a franc costs when you have gotto sweat for it. Nanon, where are the candles?"

°°°°"I trust, my nephew, that you will find all you want," said MadameGrandet; "but if you should need anything else, you can call Nanon.""My dear aunt, I shall need nothing; I have, I believe, broughteverything with me. Permit me to bid you good-night, and my youngcousin also."

°°°°Charles took a lighted wax candle from Nanon's hand,--an Anjou candle,very yellow in color, and so shopworn that it looked like tallow anddeceived Monsieur Grandet, who, incapable of suspecting its presenceunder his roof, did not perceive this magnificence.

°°°°"I will show you the way," he said.

°°°°Instead of leaving the hall by the door which opened under thearchway, Grandet ceremoniously went through the passage which dividedthe hall from the kitchen. A swing-door, furnished with a large ovalpane of glass, shut this passage from the staircase, so as to fend offthe cold air which rushed through it. But the north wind whistled nonethe less keenly in winter, and, in spite of the sand-bags at thebottom of the doors of the living-room, the temperature within couldscarcely be kept at a proper height. Nanon went to bolt the outerdoor; then she closed the hall and let loose a wolf-dog, whose barkwas so strangled that he seemed to have laryngitis. This animal, notedfor his ferocity, recognized no one but Nanon; the two untutoredchildren of the fields understood each other.

°°°°When Charles saw the yellow, smoke-stained walls of the well of thestaircase, where each worm-eaten step shook under the heavy foot-fallof his uncle, his expectations began to sober more and more. Hefancied himself in a hen-roost. His aunt and cousin, to whom he turnedan inquiring look, were so used to the staircase that they did notguess the cause of his amazement, and took the glance for anexpression of friendliness, which they answered by a smile that madehim desperate.

°°°°"Why the devil did my father send me to such a place?" he said tohimself.

°°°°When they reached the first landing he saw three doors painted inEtruscan red and without casings,--doors sunk in the dusty walls andprovided with iron bars, which in fact were bolts, each ending withthe pattern of a flame, as did both ends of the long sheath of thelock. The first door at the top of the staircase, which opened into aroom directly above the kitchen, was evidently walled up. In fact, theonly entrance to that room was through Grandet's bedchamber; the roomitself was his office. The single window which lighted it, on the sideof the court, was protected by a lattice of strong iron bars. No one,not even Madame Grandet, had permission to enter it. The old man choseto be alone, like an alchemist in his laboratory. There, no doubt,some hiding-place had been ingeniously constructed; there the title-deeds of property were stored; there hung the scales on which to weighthe louis; there were devised, by night and secretly, the estimates,the profits, the receipts, so that business men, finding Grandetprepared at all points, imagined that he got his cue from fairies ordemons; there, no doubt, while Nanon's loud snoring shook the rafters,while the wolf-dog watched and yawned in the courtyard, while Madameand Mademoiselle Grandet were quietly sleeping, came the old cooper tocuddle, to con over, to caress and clutch and clasp his gold. Thewalls were thick, the screens sure. He alone had the key of thislaboratory, where--so people declared--he studied the maps on whichhis fruit-trees were marked, and calculated his profits to a vine, andalmost to a twig.

°°°°The door of Eugenie's chamber was opposite to the walled-up entranceto this room. At the other end of the landing were the appartements ofthe married pair, which occupied the whole front of the house. MadameGrandet had a room next to that of Eugenie, which was entered througha glass door. The master's chamber was separated from that of his wifeby a partition, and from the mysterious strong-room by a thick wall.Pere Grandet lodged his nephew on the second floor, in the highmansarde attic which was above his own bedroom, so that he might hearhim if the young man took it into his head to go and come. WhenEugenie and her mother reached the middle of the landing they kissedeach other for good-night; then with a few words of adieu to Charles,cold upon the lips, but certainly very warm in the heart of the younggirl, they withdrew into their own chambers.

°°°°"Here you are in your room, my nephew," said Pere Grandet as he openedthe door. "If you need to go out, call Nanon; without her, beware! thedog would eat you up without a word. Sleep well. Good-night. Ha! why,they have made you a fire!" he cried.

°°°°At this moment Nanon appeared with the warming pan.

°°°°"Here's something more!" said Monsieur Grandet. "Do you take my nephewfor a lying-in woman? Carry off your brazier, Nanon!"

°°°°"But, monsieur, the sheets are damp, and this gentleman is as delicateas a woman."

°°°°"Well, go on, as you've taken it into your head," said Grandet,pushing her by the shoulders; "but don't set things on fire." Sosaying, the miser went down-stairs, grumbling indistinct sentences.Charles stood aghast in the midst of his trunks. After casting hiseyes on the attic-walls covered with that yellow paper sprinkled withbouquets so well known in dance-houses, on the fireplace of ribbedstone whose very look was chilling, on the chairs of yellow wood withvarnished cane seats that seemed to have more than the usual fourangles, on the open night-table capacious enough to hold a smallsergeant-at-arms, on the meagre bit of rag-carpet beside the bed, onthe tester whose cloth valance shook as if, devoured by moths, it wasabout to fall, he turned gravely to la Grande Nanon and said,--"Look here! my dear woman, just tell me, am I in the house of MonsieurGrandet, formerly mayor of Saumur, and brother to Monsieur Grandet ofParis?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur; and a very good, a very kind, a very perfectgentleman. Shall I help you to unpack your trunks?"

°°°°"Faith! yes, if you will, my old trooper. Didn't you serve in themarines of the Imperial Guard?"

°°°°"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Nanon. "What's that,--the marines of the guard?Is it salt? Does it go in the water?"

°°°°"Here, get me my dressing-gown out of that valise; there's the key."Nanon was wonder-struck by the sight of a dressing-gown made of greensilk, brocaded with gold flowers of an antique design.

°°°°"Are you going to put that on to go to bed with?" she asked."Yes."

°°°°"Holy Virgin! what a beautiful altar-cloth it would make for theparish church! My dear darling monsieur, give it to the church, andyou'll save your soul; if you don't, you'll lose it. Oh, how nice youlook in it! I must call mademoiselle to see you."

°°°°"Come, Nanon, if Nanon you are, hold your tongue; let me go to bed.I'll arrange my things to-morrow. If my dressing-gown pleases you somuch, you shall save your soul. I'm too good a Christian not to giveit to you when I go away, and you can do what you like with it."Nanon stood rooted to the ground, gazing at Charles and unable to putfaith into his words.

°°°°"Good night, Nanon."

°°°°"What in the world have I come here for?" thought Charles as he wentto sleep. "My father is not a fool; my journey must have some object.Pshaw! put off serious thought till the morrow, as some Greek idiotsaid."

°°°°"Blessed Virgin! how charming he is, my cousin!" Eugenie was saying,interrupting her prayers, which that night at least were neverfinished.

°°°°Madame Grandet had no thoughts at all as she went to bed. She heardthe miser walking up and down his room through the door ofcommunication which was in the middle of the partition. Like all timidwomen, she had studied the character of her lord. Just as the petrelforesees the storm, she knew by imperceptible signs when an inwardtempest shook her husband; and at such times, to use an expression ofher own, she "feigned dead."

°°°°Grandet gazed at the door lined with sheet-iron which he lately put tohis sanctum, and said to himself,--

°°°°"What a crazy idea of my brother to bequeath his son to me! A finelegacy! I have not fifty francs to give him. What are fifty francs toa dandy who looked at my barometer as if he meant to make firewood ofit!"

°°°°In thinking over the consequences of that legacy of anguish Grandetwas perhaps more agitated than his brother had been at the moment ofwriting it.

°°°°"I shall have that golden robe," thought Nanon, who went to sleeptricked out in her altar-cloth, dreaming for the first time in herlife of flowers, embroidery, and damask, just as Eugenie was dreamingof love.

°°°°*****

°°°°In the pure and monotonous life of young girls there comes a delicioushour when the sun sheds its rays into their soul, when the flowersexpress their thoughts, when the throbbings of the heart send upwardto the brain their fertilizing warmth and melt all thoughts into avague desire,--day of innocent melancholy and of dulcet joys! Whenbabes begin to see, they smile; when a young girl first perceives thesentiment of nature, she smiles as she smiled when an infant. If lightis the first love of life, is not love a light to the heart? Themoment to see within the veil of earthly things had come for Eugenie.An early riser, like all provincial girls, she was up betimes and saidher prayers, and then began the business of dressing,--a businesswhich henceforth was to have a meaning. First she brushed and smoothedher chestnut hair and twisted its heavy masses to the top of her headwith the utmost care, preventing the loose tresses from straying, andgiving to her head a symmetry which heightened the timid candor of herface; for the simplicity of these accessories accorded well with theinnocent sincerity of its lines. As she washed her hands again andagain in the cold water which hardened and reddened the skin, shelooked at her handsome round arms and asked herself what her cousindid to make his hands so softly white, his nails so delicately curved.She put on new stockings and her prettiest shoes. She laced her corsetstraight, without skipping a single eyelet. And then, wishing for thefirst time in her life to appear to advantage, she felt the joy ofhaving a new gown, well made, which rendered her attractive.As she finished her toilet the clock of the parish church struck thehour; to her astonishment, it was only seven. The desire of havingplenty of time for dressing carefully had led her to get up too early.Ignorant of the art of retouching every curl and studying everyeffect, Eugenie simply crossed her arms, sat down by the window, andlooked at the court-yard, the narrow garden, and the high terracedwalls that over-topped it: a dismal, hedged-in prospect, yet notwholly devoid of those mysterious beauties which belong to solitary oruncultivated nature. Near the kitchen was a well surrounded by a curb,with a pulley fastened to a bent iron rod clasped by a vine whoseleaves were withered, reddened, and shrivelled by the season. Fromthence the tortuous shoots straggled to the wall, clutched it, and ranthe whole length of the house, ending near the wood-pile, where thelogs were ranged with as much precision as the books in a library. Thepavement of the court-yard showed the black stains produced in time bylichens, herbage, and the absence of all movement or friction. Thethick walls wore a coating of green moss streaked with waving brownlines, and the eight stone steps at the bottom of the court-yard whichled up to the gate of the garden were disjointed and hidden beneathtall plants, like the tomb of a knight buried by his widow in the daysof the Crusades. Above a foundation of moss-grown, crumbling stoneswas a trellis of rotten wood, half fallen from decay; over themclambered and intertwined at will a mass of clustering creepers. Oneach side of the latticed gate stretched the crooked arms of twostunted apple-trees. Three parallel walks, gravelled and separatedfrom each other by square beds, where the earth was held in by box-borders, made the garden, which terminated, beneath a terrace of theold walls, in a group of lindens. At the farther end were raspberry-bushes; at the other, near the house, an immense walnut-tree droopedits branches almost into the window of the miser's sanctum.A clear day and the beautiful autumnal sun common to the banks of theLoire was beginning to melt the hoar-frost which the night had laid onthese picturesque objects, on the walls, and on the plants whichswathed the court-yard. Eugenie found a novel charm in the aspect ofthings lately so insignificant to her. A thousand confused thoughtscame to birth in her mind and grew there, as the sunbeams grew withoutalong the wall. She felt that impulse of delight, vague, inexplicable,which wraps the moral being as a cloud wraps the physical body. Herthoughts were all in keeping with the details of this strangelandscape, and the harmonies of her heart blended with the harmoniesof nature. When the sun reached an angle of the wall where the "Venus-hair" of southern climes drooped its thick leaves, lit with thechanging colors of a pigeon's breast, celestial rays of hope illuminedthe future to her eyes, and thenceforth she loved to gaze upon thatpiece of wall, on its pale flowers, its blue harebells, its wiltingherbage, with which she mingled memories as tender as those ofchildhood. The noise made by each leaf as it fell from its twig in thevoid of that echoing court gave answer to the secret questionings ofthe young girl, who could have stayed there the livelong day withoutperceiving the flight of time. Then came tumultuous heavings of thesoul. She rose often, went to her glass, and looked at herself, as anauthor in good faith looks at his work to criticise it and blame it inhis own mind.

°°°°"I am not beautiful enough for him!" Such was Eugenie's thought,--ahumble thought, fertile in suffering. The poor girl did not do herselfjustice; but modesty, or rather fear, is among the first of love'svirtues. Eugenie belonged to the type of children with sturdyconstitutions, such as we see among the lesser bourgeoisie, whosebeauties always seem a little vulgar; and yet, though she resembledthe Venus of Milo, the lines of her figure were ennobled by the softerChristian sentiment which purifies womanhood and gives it adistinction unknown to the sculptors of antiquity. She had an enormoushead, with the masculine yet delicate forehead of the Jupiter ofPhidias, and gray eyes, to which her chaste life, penetrating fullyinto them, carried a flood of light. The features of her round face,formerly fresh and rosy, were at one time swollen by the small-pox,which destroyed the velvet texture of the skin, though it kindly leftno other traces, and her cheek was still so soft and delicate that hermother's kiss made a momentary red mark upon it. Her nose was somewhattoo thick, but it harmonized well with the vermilion mouth, whoselips, creased in many lines, were full of love and kindness. Thethroat was exquisitely round. The bust, well curved and carefullycovered, attracted the eye and inspired reverie. It lacked, no doubt,the grace which a fitting dress can bestow; but to a connoisseur thenon-flexibility of her figure had its own charm. Eugenie, tall andstrongly made, had none of the prettiness which pleases the masses;but she was beautiful with a beauty which the spirit recognizes, andnone but artists truly love. A painter seeking here below for a typeof Mary's celestial purity, searching womankind for those proud modesteyes which Raphael divined, for those virgin lines, often due tochances of conception, which the modesty of Christian life alone canbestow or keep unchanged,--such a painter, in love with his ideal,would have found in the face of Eugenie the innate nobleness that isignorant of itself; he would have seen beneath the calmness of thatbrow a world of love; he would have felt, in the shape of the eyes, inthe fall of the eyelids, the presence of the nameless something thatwe call divine. Her features, the contour of her head, which noexpression of pleasure had ever altered or wearied, were like thelines of the horizon softly traced in the far distance across thetranquil lakes. That calm and rosy countenance, margined with lightlike a lovely full-blown flower, rested the mind, held the eye, andimparted the charm of the conscience that was there reflected. Eugeniewas standing on the shore of life where young illusions flower, wheredaisies are gathered with delights ere long to be unknown; and thusshe said, looking at her image in the glass, unconscious as yet oflove: "I am too ugly; he will not notice me."

°°°°Then she opened the door of her chamber which led to the staircase,and stretched out her neck to listen for the household noises. "He isnot up," she thought, hearing Nanon's morning cough as the good soulwent and came, sweeping out the halls, lighting her fire, chaining thedog, and speaking to the beasts in the stable. Eugenie at once wentdown and ran to Nanon, who was milking the cow.

°°°°"Nanon, my good Nanon, make a little cream for my cousin's breakfast.""Why, mademoiselle, you should have thought of that yesterday," saidNanon, bursting into a loud peal of laughter. "I can't make cream.Your cousin is a darling, a darling! oh, that he is! You should haveseen him in his dressing-gown, all silk and gold! I saw him, I did! Hewears linen as fine as the surplice of monsieur le cure.""Nanon, please make us a /galette/."

°°°°"And who'll give me wood for the oven, and flour and butter for thecakes?" said Nanon, who in her function of prime-minister to Grandetassumed at times enormous importance in the eyes of Eugenie and hermother. "Mustn't rob the master to feast the cousin. You ask him forbutter and flour and wood: he's your father, perhaps he'll give yousome. See! there he is now, coming to give out the provisions."Eugenie escaped into the garden, quite frightened as she heard thestaircase shaking under her father's step. Already she felt theeffects of that virgin modesty and that special consciousness ofhappiness which lead us to fancy, not perhaps without reason, that ourthoughts are graven on our foreheads and are open to the eyes of all.Perceiving for the first time the cold nakedness of her father'shouse, the poor girl felt a sort of rage that she could not put it inharmony with her cousin's elegance. She felt the need of doingsomething for him,--what, she did not know. Ingenuous and truthful,she followed her angelic nature without mistrusting her impressions orher feelings. The mere sight of her cousin had wakened within her thenatural yearnings of a woman,--yearnings that were the more likely todevelop ardently because, having reached her twenty-third year, shewas in the plenitude of her intelligence and her desires. For thefirst time in her life her heart was full of terror at the sight ofher father; in him she saw the master of the fate, and she fanciedherself guilty of wrong-doing in hiding from his knowledge certainthoughts. She walked with hasty steps, surprised to breathe a purerair, to feel the sun's rays quickening her pulses, to absorb fromtheir heat a moral warmth and a new life. As she turned over in hermind some stratagem by which to get the cake, a quarrel--an event asrare as the sight of swallows in winter--broke out between la GrandeNanon and Grandet. Armed with his keys, the master had come to doleout provisions for the day's consumption.

°°°°"Is there any bread left from yesterday?" he said to Nanon."Not a crumb, monsieur."

°°°°Grandet took a large round loaf, well floured and moulded in one ofthe flat baskets which they use for baking in Anjou, and was about tocut it, when Nanon said to him,--

°°°°"We are five, to-day, monsieur."

°°°°"That's true," said Grandet, "but your loaves weigh six pounds;there'll be some left. Besides, these young fellows from Paris don'teat bread, you'll see."

°°°°"Then they must eat /frippe/?" said Nanon.

°°°°/Frippe/ is a word of the local lexicon of Anjou, and means anyaccompaniment of bread, from butter which is spread upon it, thecommonest kind of /frippe/, to peach preserve, the most distinguishedof all the /frippes/; those who in their childhood have licked the/frippe/ and left the bread, will comprehend the meaning of Nanon'sspeech.

°°°°"No," answered Grandet, "they eat neither bread nor /frippe/; they aresomething like marriageable girls."

°°°°After ordering the meals for the day with his usual parsimony, thegoodman, having locked the closets containing the supplies, was aboutto go towards the fruit-garden, when Nanon stopped him to say,--"Monsieur, give me a little flour and some butter, and I'll make a/galette/ for the young ones."

°°°°"Are you going to pillage the house on account of my nephew?""I wasn't thinking any more of your nephew than I was of your dog,--not more than you think yourself; for, look here, you've only forkedout six bits of sugar. I want eight."

°°°°"What's all this, Nanon? I have never seen you like this before. Whathave you got in your head? Are you the mistress here? You sha'n't havemore than six pieces of sugar."

°°°°"Well, then, how is your nephew to sweeten his coffee?"

°°°°"With two pieces; I'll go without myself."

°°°°"Go without sugar at your age! I'd rather buy you some out of my ownpocket."

°°°°"Mind your own business."

°°°°In spite of the recent fall in prices, sugar was still in Grandet'seyes the most valuable of all the colonial products; to him it wasalways six francs a pound. The necessity of economizing it, acquiredunder the Empire, had grown to be the most inveterate of his habits.All women, even the greatest ninnies, know how to dodge and dodge toget their ends; Nanon abandoned the sugar for the sake of getting the/galette/.

°°°°"Mademoiselle!" she called through the window, "do you want some/galette/?"

°°°°"No, no," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Come, Nanon," said Grandet, hearing his daughter's voice. "See here."He opened the cupboard where the flour was kept, gave her a cupful,and added a few ounces of butter to the piece he had already cut off."I shall want wood for the oven," said the implacable Nanon."Well, take what you want," he answered sadly; "but in that case youmust make us a fruit-tart, and you'll cook the whole dinner in theoven. In that way you won't need two fires."

°°°°"Goodness!" cried Nanon, "you needn't tell me that."

°°°°Grandet cast a look that was well-nigh paternal upon his faithfuldeputy.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she cried, when his back was turned, "we shall havethe /galette/."

°°°°Pere Grandet returned from the garden with the fruit and arranged aplateful on the kitchen-table.

°°°°"Just see, monsieur," said Nanon, "what pretty boots your nephew has.What leather! why it smells good! What does he clean it with, Iwonder? Am I to put your egg-polish on it?"

°°°°"Nanon, I think eggs would injure that kind of leather. Tell him youdon't know how to black morocco; yes, that's morocco. He will get yousomething himself in Saumur to polish those boots with. I have heardthat they put sugar into the blacking to make it shine."

°°°°"They look good to eat," said the cook, putting the boots to her nose."Bless me! if they don't smell like madame's eau-de-cologne. Ah! howfunny!"

°°°°"Funny!" said her master. "Do you call it funny to put more money intoboots than the man who stands in them is worth?"

°°°°"Monsieur," she said, when Grandet returned the second time, afterlocking the fruit-garden, "won't you have the /pot-au-feu/ put on onceor twice a week on account of your nephew?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Am I to go to the butcher's?"

°°°°"Certainly not. We will make the broth of fowls; the farmers willbring them. I shall tell Cornoiller to shoot some crows; they make thebest soup in the world."

°°°°"Isn't it true, monsieur, that crows eat the dead?"

°°°°"You are a fool, Nanon. They eat what they can get, like the rest ofthe world. Don't we all live on the dead? What are legacies?"Monsieur Grandet, having no further orders to give, drew out hiswatch, and seeing that he had half an hour to dispose of beforebreakfast, he took his hat, went and kissed his daughter, and said toher:

°°°°"Do you want to come for a walk in the fields, down by the Loire? Ihave something to do there."

°°°°Eugenie fetched her straw bonnet, lined with pink taffeta; then thefather and daughter went down the winding street to the shore."Where are you going at this early hour?" said Cruchot, the notary,meeting them.

°°°°"To see something," answered Grandet, not duped by the matutinalappearance of his friend.

°°°°When Pere Grandet went to "see something," the notary knew byexperience there was something to be got by going with him; so hewent.

°°°°"Come, Cruchot," said Grandet, "you are one of my friends. I'll showyou what folly it is to plant poplar-trees on good ground.""Do you call the sixty thousand francs that you pocketed for thosethat were in your fields down by the Loire, folly?" said MaitreCruchot, opening his eyes with amazement. "What luck you have had! Tocut down your trees at the very time they ran short of white-wood atNantes, and to sell them at thirty francs!"

°°°°Eugenie listened, without knowing that she approached the most solemnmoment of her whole life, and that the notary was about to bring downupon her head a paternal and supreme sentence. Grandet had now reachedthe magnificent fields which he owned on the banks of the Loire, wherethirty workmen were employed in clearing away, filling up, andlevelling the spots formerly occupied by the poplars.

°°°°"Maitre Cruchot, see how much ground this tree once took up! Jean," hecried to a laborer, "m-m-measure with your r-r-rule, b-both ways.""Four times eight feet," said the man.

°°°°"Thirty-two feet lost," said Grandet to Cruchot. "I had three hundredpoplars in this one line, isn't that so? Well, then, three h-h-hundredtimes thir-thirty-two lost m-m-me five hundred in h-h-hay; add twiceas much for the side rows,--fifteen hundred; the middle rows as muchmore. So we may c-c-call it a th-thousand b-b-bales of h-h-hay--""Very good," said Cruchot, to help out his friend; "a thousand balesare worth about six hundred francs."

°°°°"Say t-t-twelve hundred, be-c-cause there's three or four hundredfrancs on the second crop. Well, then, c-c-calculate that t-twelvethousand francs a year for f-f-forty years with interest c-c-comesto--"

°°°°"Say sixty thousand francs," said the notary.

°°°°"I am willing; c-c-comes t-t-to sixty th-th-thousand. Very good,"continued Grandet, without stuttering: "two thousand poplars fortyyears old will only yield me fifty thousand francs. There's a loss. Ihave found that myself," said Grandet, getting on his high horse."Jean, fill up all the holes except those at the bank of the river;there you are to plant the poplars I have bought. Plant 'em there, andthey'll get nourishment from the government," he said, turning toCruchot, and giving a slight motion to the wen on his nose, whichexpressed more than the most ironical of smiles.

°°°°"True enough; poplars should only be planted on poor soil," saidCruchot, amazed at Grandet's calculations.

°°°°"Y-y-yes, monsieur," answered the old man satirically.

°°°°Eugenie, who was gazing at the sublime scenery of the Loire, andpaying no attention to her father's reckonings, presently turned anear to the remarks of Cruchot when she heard him say,--

°°°°"So you have brought a son-in-law from Paris. All Saumur is talkingabout your nephew. I shall soon have the marriage-contract to draw up,hey! Pere Grandet?"

°°°°"You g-g-got up very early to t-t-tell me that," said Grandet,accompanying the remark with a motion of his wen. "Well, oldc-c-comrade, I'll be frank, and t-t-tell you what you want t-t-toknow. I would rather, do you see, f-f-fling my daughter into the Loirethan g-g-give her to her c-c-cousin. You may t-t-tell that everywhere,--no, never mind; let the world t-t-talk."

°°°°This answer dazzled and blinded the young girl with sudden light. Thedistant hopes upspringing in her heart bloomed suddenly, became real,tangible, like a cluster of flowers, and she saw them cut down andwilting on the earth. Since the previous evening she had attachedherself to Charles by those links of happiness which bind soul tosoul; from henceforth suffering was to rivet them. Is it not the nobledestiny of women to be more moved by the dark solemnities of griefthan by the splendors of fortune? How was it that fatherly feeling haddied out of her father's heart? Of what crime had Charles been guilty?Mysterious questions! Already her dawning love, a mystery so profound,was wrapping itself in mystery. She walked back trembling in all herlimbs; and when she reached the gloomy street, lately so joyous toher, she felt its sadness, she breathed the melancholy which time andevents had printed there. None of love's lessons lacked. A few stepsfrom their own door she went on before her father and waited at thethreshold. But Grandet, who saw a newspaper in the notary's hand,stopped short and asked,--

°°°°"How are the Funds?"

°°°°"You never listen to my advice, Grandet," answered Cruchot. "Buy soon;you will still make twenty per cent in two years, besides getting anexcellent rate of interest,--five thousand a year for eighty thousandfrancs fifty centimes."

°°°°"We'll see about that," answered Grandet, rubbing his chin."Good God!" exclaimed the notary.

°°°°"Well, what?" cried Grandet; and at the same moment Cruchot put thenewspaper under his eyes and said:

°°°°"Read that!"

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, one of the most respected merchants in Paris,

°°°°blew his brains out yesterday, after making his usual appearance

°°°°at the Bourse. He had sent his resignation to the president of the

°°°°Chamber of Deputies, and had also resigned his functions as a

°°°°judge of the commercial courts. The failures of Monsieur Roguin

°°°°and Monsieur Souchet, his broker and his notary, had ruined him.

°°°°The esteem felt for Monsieur Grandet and the credit he enjoyed

°°°°were nevertheless such that he might have obtained the necessary

°°°°assistance from other business houses. It is much to be regretted

°°°°that so honorable a man should have yielded to momentary despair,"

°°°°etc.

°°°°"I knew it," said the old wine-grower to the notary.

°°°°The words sent a chill of horror through Maitre Cruchot, who,notwithstanding his impassibility as a notary, felt the cold runningdown his spine as he thought that Grandet of Paris had possiblyimplored in vain the millions of Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"And his son, so joyous yesterday--"

°°°°"He knows nothing as yet," answered Grandet, with the same composure."Adieu! Monsieur Grandet," said Cruchot, who now understood the stateof the case, and went off to reassure Monsieur de Bonfons.On entering, Grandet found breakfast ready. Madame Grandet, roundwhose neck Eugenie had flung her arms, kissing her with the quickeffusion of feeling often caused by secret grief, was already seatedin her chair on castors, knitting sleeves for the coming winter."You can begin to eat," said Nanon, coming downstairs four steps at atime; "the young one is sleeping like a cherub. Isn't he a darlingwith his eyes shut? I went in and I called him: no answer.""Let him sleep," said Grandet; "he'll wake soon enough to hear ill-tidings."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Eugenie, putting into her coffee the two littlebits of sugar weighing less than half an ounce which the old miseramused himself by cutting up in his leisure hours. Madame Grandet, whodid not dare to put the question, gazed at her husband.

°°°°"His father has blown his brains out."

°°°°"My uncle?" said Eugenie.

°°°°"Poor young man!" exclaimed Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Poor indeed!" said Grandet; "he isn't worth a sou!"

°°°°"Eh! poor boy, and he's sleeping like the king of the world!" saidNanon in a gentle voice.

°°°°Eugenie stopped eating. Her heart was wrung, as the young heart iswrung when pity for the suffering of one she loves overflows, for thefirst time, the whole being of a woman. The poor girl wept."What are you crying about? You didn't know your uncle," said herfather, giving her one of those hungry tigerish looks he doubtlessthrew upon his piles of gold.

°°°°"But, monsieur," said Nanon, "who wouldn't feel pity for the pooryoung man, sleeping there like a wooden shoe, without knowing what'scoming?"

°°°°"I didn't speak to you, Nanon. Hold your tongue!"

°°°°Eugenie learned at that moment that the woman who loves must be ableto hide her feelings. She did not answer.

°°°°"You will say nothing to him about it, Ma'ame Grandet, till I return,"said the old man. "I have to go and straighten the line of my hedgealong the high-road. I shall be back at noon, in time for the secondbreakfast, and then I will talk with my nephew about his affairs. Asfor you, Mademoiselle Eugenie, if it is for that dandy you are crying,that's enough, child. He's going off like a shot to the Indies. Youwill never see him again."

°°°°The father took his gloves from the brim of his hat, put them on withhis usual composure, pushed them in place by shoving the fingers ofboth hands together, and went out.

°°°°"Mamma, I am suffocating!" cried Eugenie when she was alone with hermother; "I have never suffered like this."

°°°°Madame Grandet, seeing that she turned pale, opened the window and lether breathe fresh air.

°°°°"I feel better!" said Eugenie after a moment.

°°°°This nervous excitement in a nature hitherto, to all appearance, calmand cold, reacted on Madame Grandet; she looked at her daughter withthe sympathetic intuition with which mothers are gifted for theobjects of their tenderness, and guessed all. In truth the life of theHungarian sisters, bound together by a freak of nature, could scarcelyhave been more intimate than that of Eugenie and her mother,--alwaystogether in the embrasure of that window, and sleeping together in thesame atmosphere.

°°°°"My poor child!" said Madame Grandet, taking Eugenie's head and layingit upon her bosom.

°°°°At these words the young girl raised her head, questioned her motherby a look, and seemed to search out her inmost thought.

°°°°"Why send him to the Indies?" she said. "If he is unhappy, ought henot to stay with us? Is he not our nearest relation?"

°°°°"Yes, my child, it seems natural; but your father has his reasons: wemust respect them."

°°°°The mother and daughter sat down in silence, the former upon herraised seat, the latter in her little armchair, and both took up theirwork. Swelling with gratitude for the full heart-understanding hermother had given her, Eugenie kissed the dear hand, saying,--"How good you are, my kind mamma!"

°°°°The words sent a glow of light into the motherly face, worn andblighted as it was by many sorrows.

°°°°"You like him?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°Madame Grandet only smiled in reply. Then, after a moment's silence,she said in a low voice: "Do you love him already? That is wrong.""Wrong?" said Eugenie. "Why is it wrong? You are pleased with him,Nanon is pleased with him; why should he not please me? Come, mamma,let us set the table for his breakfast."

°°°°She threw down her work, and her mother did the same, saying, "Foolishchild!" But she sanctioned the child's folly by sharing it. Eugeniecalled Nanon.

°°°°"What do you want now, mademoiselle?"

°°°°"Nanon, can we have cream by midday?"

°°°°"Ah! midday, to be sure you can," answered the old servant."Well, let him have his coffee very strong; I heard Monsieur desGrassins say that they make the coffee very strong in Paris. Put in agreat deal."

°°°°"Where am I to get it?"

°°°°"Buy some."

°°°°"Suppose monsieur meets me?"

°°°°"He has gone to his fields."

°°°°"I'll run, then. But Monsieur Fessard asked me yesterday if the Magihad come to stay with us when I bought the wax candle. All the townwill know our goings-on."

°°°°"If your father finds it out," said Madame Grandet, "he is capable ofbeating us."

°°°°"Well, let him beat us; we will take his blows on our knees."Madame Grandet for all answer raised her eyes to heaven. Nanon put onher hood and went off. Eugenie got out some clean table-linen, andwent to fetch a few bunches of grapes which she had amused herself byhanging on a string across the attic; she walked softly along thecorridor, so as not to waken her cousin, and she could not helplistening at the door to his quiet breathing.

°°°°"Sorrow is watching while he sleeps," she thought.

°°°°She took the freshest vine-leaves and arranged her dish of grapes ascoquettishly as a practised house-keeper might have done, and placedit triumphantly on the table. She laid hands on the pears counted outby her father, and piled them in a pyramid mixed with leaves. She wentand came, and skipped and ran. She would have liked to lay undercontribution everything in her father's house; but the keys were inhis pocket. Nanon came back with two fresh eggs. At sight of themEugenie almost hugged her round the neck.

°°°°"The farmer from Lande had them in his basket. I asked him for them,and he gave them to me, the darling, for nothing, as an attention!"VAfter two hours' thought and care, during which Eugenie jumped uptwenty times from her work to see if the coffee were boiling, or to goand listen to the noise her cousin made in dressing, she succeeded inpreparing a simple little breakfast, very inexpensive, but which,nevertheless, departed alarmingly from the inveterate customs of thehouse. The midday breakfast was always taken standing. Each took aslice of bread, a little fruit or some butter, and a glass of wine. AsEugenie looked at the table drawn up near the fire with an arm-chairplaced before her cousin's plate, at the two dishes of fruit, the egg-cup, the bottle of white wine, the bread, and the sugar heaped up in asaucer, she trembled in all her limbs at the mere thought of the lookher father would give her if he should come in at that moment. Sheglanced often at the clock to see if her cousin could breakfast beforethe master's return.

°°°°"Don't be troubled, Eugenie; if your father comes in, I will take itall upon myself," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Eugenie could not repress a tear.

°°°°"Oh, my good mother!" she cried, "I have never loved you enough."Charles, who had been tramping about his room for some time, singingto himself, now came down. Happily, it was only eleven o'clock. Thetrue Parisian! he had put as much dandyism into his dress as if hewere in the chateau of the noble lady then travelling in Scotland. Hecame into the room with the smiling, courteous manner so becoming toyouth, which made Eugenie's heart beat with mournful joy. He had takenthe destruction of his castles in Anjou as a joke, and came up to hisaunt gaily.

°°°°"Have you slept well, dear aunt? and you, too, my cousin?""Very well, monsieur; did you?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"I? perfectly."

°°°°"You must be hungry, cousin," said Eugenie; "will you take your seat?""I never breakfast before midday; I never get up till then. However, Ifared so badly on the journey that I am glad to eat something at once.Besides--" here he pulled out the prettiest watch Breguet ever made."Dear me! I am early, it is only eleven o'clock!"

°°°°"Early?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Yes; but I wanted to put my things in order. Well, I shall be glad tohave anything to eat,--anything, it doesn't matter what, a chicken, apartridge."

°°°°"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Nanon, overhearing the words.

°°°°"A partridge!" whispered Eugenie to herself; she would gladly havegiven the whole of her little hoard for a partridge.

°°°°"Come and sit down," said his aunt.

°°°°The young dandy let himself drop into an easy-chair, just as a prettywoman falls gracefully upon a sofa. Eugenie and her mother tookordinary chairs and sat beside him, near the fire.

°°°°"Do you always live here?" said Charles, thinking the room uglier bydaylight than it had seemed the night before.

°°°°"Always," answered Eugenie, looking at him, "except during thevintage. Then we go and help Nanon, and live at the Abbaye desNoyers."

°°°°"Don't you ever take walks?"

°°°°"Sometimes on Sunday after vespers, when the weather is fine," saidMadame Grandet, "we walk on the bridge, or we go and watch thehaymakers."

°°°°"Have you a theatre?"

°°°°"Go to the theatre!" exclaimed Madame Grandet, "see a play! Why,monsieur, don't you know it is a mortal sin?"

°°°°"See here, monsieur," said Nanon, bringing in the eggs, "here are yourchickens,--in the shell."

°°°°"Oh! fresh eggs," said Charles, who, like all people accustomed toluxury, had already forgotten about his partridge, "that is delicious:now, if you will give me the butter, my good girl."

°°°°"Butter! then you can't have the /galette/."

°°°°"Nanon, bring the butter," cried Eugenie.

°°°°The young girl watched her cousin as he cut his sippets, with as muchpleasure as a grisette takes in a melodrama where innocence and virtuetriumph. Charles, brought up by a charming mother, improved, andtrained by a woman of fashion, had the elegant, dainty, foppishmovements of a coxcomb. The compassionate sympathy and tenderness of ayoung girl possess a power that is actually magnetic; so that Charles,finding himself the object of the attentions of his aunt and cousin,could not escape the influence of feelings which flowed towards him,as it were, and inundated him. He gave Eugenie a bright, caressinglook full of kindness,--a look which seemed itself a smile. Heperceived, as his eyes lingered upon her, the exquisite harmony offeatures in the pure face, the grace of her innocent attitude, themagic clearness of the eyes, where young love sparkled and desireshone unconsciously.

°°°°"Ah! my dear cousin, if you were in full dress at the Opera, I assureyou my aunt's words would come true,--you would make the men committhe mortal sin of envy, and the women the sin of jealousy."The compliment went to Eugenie's heart and set it beating, though shedid not understand its meaning.

°°°°"Oh! cousin," she said, "you are laughing at a poor little countrygirl."

°°°°"If you knew me, my cousin, you would know that I abhor ridicule; itwithers the heart and jars upon all my feelings." Here he swallowedhis buttered sippet very gracefully. "No, I really have not enoughmind to make fun of others; and doubtless it is a great defect. InParis, when they want to disparage a man, they say: 'He has a goodheart.' The phrase means: 'The poor fellow is as stupid as arhinoceros.' But as I am rich, and known to hit the bull's-eye atthirty paces with any kind of pistol, and even in the open fields,ridicule respects me."

°°°°"My dear nephew, that bespeaks a good heart."

°°°°"You have a very pretty ring," said Eugenie; "is there any harm inasking to see it?"

°°°°Charles held out his hand after loosening the ring, and Eugenieblushed as she touched the pink nails of her cousin with the tips ofher fingers.

°°°°"See, mamma, what beautiful workmanship."

°°°°"My! there's a lot of gold!" said Nanon, bringing in the coffee."What is that?" exclaimed Charles, laughing, as he pointed to anoblong pot of brown earthenware, glazed on the inside, and edged witha fringe of ashes, from the bottom of which the coffee-grounds werebubbling up and falling in the boiling liquid.

°°°°"It is boiled coffee," said Nanon.

°°°°"Ah! my dear aunt, I shall at least leave one beneficent trace of myvisit here. You are indeed behind the age! I must teach you to makegood coffee in a Chaptal coffee-pot."

°°°°He tried to explain the process of a Chaptal coffee-pot.

°°°°"Gracious! if there are so many things as all that to do," said Nanon,"we may as well give up our lives to it. I shall never make coffeethat way; I know that! Pray, who is to get the fodder for the cowwhile I make the coffee?"

°°°°"I will make it," said Eugenie.

°°°°"Child!" said Madame Grandet, looking at her daughter.

°°°°The word recalled to their minds the sorrow that was about to fallupon the unfortunate young man; the three women were silent, andlooked at him with an air of commiseration that caught his attention."Is anything the matter, my cousin?" he said.

°°°°"Hush!" said Madame Grandet to Eugenie, who was about to answer; "youknow, my daughter, that your father charged us not to speak tomonsieur--"

°°°°"Say Charles," said young Grandet.

°°°°"Ah! you are called Charles? What a beautiful name!" cried Eugenie.Presentiments of evil are almost always justified. At this momentNanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie, who had all three been thinkingwith a shudder of the old man's return, heard the knock whose echoesthey knew but too well.

°°°°"There's papa!" said Eugenie.

°°°°She removed the saucer filled with sugar, leaving a few pieces on thetable-cloth; Nanon carried off the egg-cup; Madame Grandet sat up likea frightened hare. It was evidently a panic, which amazed Charles, whowas wholly unable to understand it.

°°°°"Why! what is the matter?" he asked.

°°°°"My father has come," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, what of that?"

°°°°Monsieur Grandet entered the room, threw his keen eye upon the table,upon Charles, and saw the whole thing.

°°°°"Ha! ha! so you have been making a feast for your nephew; very good,very good, very good indeed!" he said, without stuttering. "When thecat's away, the mice will play."

°°°°"Feast!" thought Charles, incapable of suspecting or imagining therules and customs of the household.

°°°°"Give me my glass, Nanon," said the master

°°°°Eugenie brought the glass. Grandet drew a horn-handled knife with abig blade from his breeches' pocket, cut a slice of bread, took asmall bit of butter, spread it carefully on the bread, and ate itstanding. At this moment Charlie was sweetening his coffee. PereGrandet saw the bits of sugar, looked at his wife, who turned pale,and made three steps forward; he leaned down to the poor woman's earand said,--

°°°°"Where did you get all that sugar?"

°°°°"Nanon fetched it from Fessard's; there was none."

°°°°It is impossible to picture the profound interest the three women tookin this mute scene. Nanon had left her kitchen and stood looking intothe room to see what would happen. Charles, having tasted his coffee,found it bitter and glanced about for the sugar, which Grandet hadalready put away.

°°°°"What do you want?" said his uncle.

°°°°"The sugar."

°°°°"Put in more milk," answered the master of the house; "your coffeewill taste sweeter."

°°°°Eugenie took the saucer which Grandet had put away and placed it onthe table, looking calmly at her father as she did so. Most assuredly,the Parisian woman who held a silken ladder with her feeble arms tofacilitate the flight of her lover, showed no greater courage thanEugenie displayed when she replaced the sugar upon the table. Thelover rewarded his mistress when she proudly showed him her beautifulbruised arm, and bathed every swollen vein with tears and kisses tillit was cured with happiness. Charles, on the other hand, never so muchas knew the secret of the cruel agitation that shook and bruised theheart of his cousin, crushed as it was by the look of the old miser."You are not eating your breakfast, wife."

°°°°The poor helot came forward with a piteous look, cut herself a pieceof bread, and took a pear. Eugenie boldly offered her father somegrapes, saying,--

°°°°"Taste my preserves, papa. My cousin, you will eat some, will you not?I went to get these pretty grapes expressly for you."

°°°°"If no one stops them, they will pillage Saumur for you, nephew. Whenyou have finished, we will go into the garden; I have something totell you which can't be sweetened."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother cast a look on Charles whose meaning the youngman could not mistake.

°°°°"What is it you mean, uncle? Since the death of my poor mother"--atthese words his voice softened--"no other sorrow can touch me.""My nephew, who knows by what afflictions God is pleased to try us?"said his aunt.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta," said Grandet, "there's your nonsense beginning. I amsorry to see those white hands of yours, nephew"; and he showed theshoulder-of-mutton fists which Nature had put at the end of his ownarms. "There's a pair of hands made to pick up silver pieces. You'vebeen brought up to put your feet in the kid out of which we make thepurses we keep our money in. A bad look-out! Very bad!"

°°°°"What do you mean, uncle? I'll be hanged if I understand a single wordof what you are saying."

°°°°"Come!" said Grandet.

°°°°The miser closed the blade of his knife with a snap, drank the last ofhis wine, and opened the door.

°°°°"My cousin, take courage!"

°°°°The tone of the young girl struck terror to Charles's heart, and hefollowed his terrible uncle, a prey to disquieting thoughts. Eugenie,her mother, and Nanon went into the kitchen, moved by irresistiblecuriosity to watch the two actors in the scene which was about to takeplace in the garden, where at first the uncle walked silently ahead ofthe nephew. Grandet was not at all troubled at having to tell Charlesof the death of his father; but he did feel a sort of compassion inknowing him to be without a penny, and he sought for some phrase orformula by which to soften the communication of that cruel truth. "Youhave lost your father," seemed to him a mere nothing to say; fathersdie before their children. But "you are absolutely without means,"--all the misfortunes of life were summed up in those words! Grandetwalked round the garden three times, the gravel crunching under hisheavy step.

°°°°In the crucial moments of life our minds fasten upon the localitywhere joys or sorrows overwhelm us. Charles noticed with minuteattention the box-borders of the little garden, the yellow leaves asthey fluttered down, the dilapidated walls, the gnarled fruit-trees,--picturesque details which were destined to remain forever in hismemory, blending eternally, by the mnemonics that belong exclusivelyto the passions, with the recollections of this solemn hour."It is very fine weather, very warm," said Grandet, drawing a longbreath.

°°°°"Yes, uncle; but why--"

°°°°"Well, my lad," answered his uncle, "I have some bad news to give you.Your father is ill--"

°°°°"Then why am I here?" said Charles. "Nanon," he cried, "order post-horses! I can get a carriage somewhere?" he added, turning to hisuncle, who stood motionless.

°°°°"Horses and carriages are useless," answered Grandet, looking atCharles, who remained silent, his eyes growing fixed. "Yes, my poorboy, you guess the truth,--he is dead. But that's nothing; there issomething worse: he blew out his brains."

°°°°"My father!"

°°°°"Yes, but that's not the worst; the newspapers are all talking aboutit. Here, read that."

°°°°Grandet, who had borrowed the fatal article from Cruchot, thrust thepaper under his nephew's eyes. The poor young man, still a child,still at an age when feelings wear no mask, burst into tears."That's good!" thought Grandet; "his eyes frightened me. He'll be allright if he weeps,--That is not the worst, my poor nephew," he saidaloud, not noticing whether Charles heard him, "that is nothing; youwill get over it: but--"

°°°°"Never, never! My father! Oh, my father!"

°°°°"He has ruined you, you haven't a penny."

°°°°"What does that matter? My father! Where is my father?"

°°°°His sobs resounded horribly against those dreary walls andreverberated in the echoes. The three women, filled with pity, weptalso; for tears are often as contagious as laughter. Charles, withoutlistening further to his uncle, ran through the court and up thestaircase to his chamber, where he threw himself across the bed andhid his face in the sheets, to weep in peace for his lost parents."The first burst must have its way," said Grandet, entering theliving-room, where Eugenie and her mother had hastily resumed theirseats and were sewing with trembling hands, after wiping their eyes."But that young man is good for nothing; his head is more taken upwith the dead than with his money."

°°°°Eugenie shuddered as she heard her father's comment on the most sacredof all griefs. From that moment she began to judge him. Charles'ssobs, though muffled, still sounded through the sepulchral house; andhis deep groans, which seemed to come from the earth beneath, onlyceased towards evening, after growing gradually feebler.

°°°°"Poor young man!" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Fatal exclamation! Pere Grandet looked at his wife, at Eugenie, and atthe sugar-bowl. He recollected the extraordinary breakfast preparedfor the unfortunate youth, and he took a position in the middle of theroom.

°°°°"Listen to me," he said, with his usual composure. "I hope that youwill not continue this extravagance, Madame Grandet. I don't give youMY money to stuff that young fellow with sugar."

°°°°"My mother had nothing to do with it," said Eugenie; "it was I who--""Is it because you are of age," said Grandet, interrupting hisdaughter, "that you choose to contradict me? Remember, Eugenie--""Father, the son of your brother ought to receive from us--""Ta, ta, ta, ta!" exclaimed the cooper on four chromatic tones; "theson of my brother this, my nephew that! Charles is nothing at all tous; he hasn't a farthing, his father has failed; and when this dandyhas cried his fill, off he goes from here. I won't have himrevolutionize my household."

°°°°"What is 'failing,' father?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°"To fail," answered her father, "is to commit the most dishonorableaction that can disgrace a man."

°°°°"It must be a great sin," said Madame Grandet, "and our brother may bedamned."

°°°°"There, there, don't begin with your litanies!" said Grandet,shrugging his shoulders. "To fail, Eugenie," he resumed, "is to commita theft which the law, unfortunately, takes under its protection.People have given their property to Guillaume Grandet trusting to hisreputation for honor and integrity; he has made away with it all, andleft them nothing but their eyes to weep with. A highway robber isbetter than a bankrupt: the one attacks you and you can defendyourself, he risks his own life; but the other--in short, Charles isdishonored."

°°°°The words rang in the poor girl's heart and weighed it down with theirheavy meaning. Upright and delicate as a flower born in the depths ofa forest, she knew nothing of the world's maxims, of its deceitfularguments and specious sophisms; she therefore believed the atrociousexplanation which her father gave her designedly, concealing thedistinction which exists between an involuntary failure and anintentional one.

°°°°"Father, could you not have prevented such a misfortune?""My brother did not consult me. Besides, he owes four millions.""What is a 'million,' father?" she asked, with the simplicity of achild which thinks it can find out at once all that it wants to know."A million?" said Grandet, "why, it is a million pieces of twenty souseach, and it takes five twenty sous pieces to make five francs.""Dear me!" cried Eugenie, "how could my uncle possibly have had fourmillions? Is there any one else in France who ever had so manymillions?" Pere Grandet stroked his chin, smiled, and his wen seemedto dilate. "But what will become of my cousin Charles?"

°°°°"He is going off to the West Indies by his father's request, and hewill try to make his fortune there."

°°°°"Has he got the money to go with?"

°°°°"I shall pay for his journey as far as--yes, as far as Nantes."Eugenie sprang into his arms.

°°°°"Oh, father, how good you are!"

°°°°She kissed him with a warmth that almost made Grandet ashamed ofhimself, for his conscience galled him a little.

°°°°"Will it take much time to amass a million?" she asked.

°°°°"Look here!" said the old miser, "you know what a napoleon is? Well,it takes fifty thousand napoleons to make a million."

°°°°"Mamma, we must say a great many /neuvaines/ for him."

°°°°"I was thinking so," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"That's the way, always spending my money!" cried the father. "Do youthink there are francs on every bush?"

°°°°At this moment a muffled cry, more distressing than all the others,echoed through the garrets and struck a chill to the hearts of Eugenieand her mother.

°°°°"Nanon, go upstairs and see that he does not kill himself," saidGrandet. "Now, then," he added, looking at his wife and daughter, whohad turned pale at his words, "no nonsense, you two! I must leave you;I have got to see about the Dutchmen who are going away to-day. Andthen I must find Cruchot, and talk with him about all this."He departed. As soon as he had shut the door Eugenie and her motherbreathed more freely. Until this morning the young girl had never feltconstrained in the presence of her father; but for the last few hoursevery moment wrought a change in her feelings and ideas.

°°°°"Mamma, how many louis are there in a cask of wine?"

°°°°"Your father sells his from a hundred to a hundred and fifty francs,sometimes two hundred,--at least, so I've heard say."

°°°°"Then papa must be rich?"

°°°°"Perhaps he is. But Monsieur Cruchot told me he bought Froidfond twoyears ago; that may have pinched him."

°°°°Eugenie, not being able to understand the question of her father'sfortune, stopped short in her calculations.

°°°°"He didn't even see me, the darling!" said Nanon, coming back from hererrand. "He's stretched out like a calf on his bed and crying like theMadeleine, and that's a blessing! What's the matter with the poor dearyoung man!"

°°°°"Let us go and console him, mamma; if any one knocks, we can comedown."

°°°°Madame Grandet was helpless against the sweet persuasive tones of herdaughter's voice. Eugenie was sublime: she had become a woman. Thetwo, with beating hearts, went up to Charles's room. The door wasopen. The young man heard and saw nothing; plunged in grief, he onlyuttered inarticulate cries.

°°°°"How he loves his father!" said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°In the utterance of those words it was impossible to mistake the hopesof a heart that, unknown to itself, had suddenly become passionate.Madame Grandet cast a mother's look upon her daughter, and thenwhispered in her ear,--

°°°°"Take care, you will love him!"

°°°°"Love him!" answered Eugenie. "Ah! if you did but know what my fathersaid to Monsieur Cruchot."

°°°°Charles turned over, and saw his aunt and cousin.

°°°°"I have lost my father, my poor father! If he had told me his secrettroubles we might have worked together to repair them. My God! my poorfather! I was so sure I should see him again that I think I kissed himquite coldly--"

°°°°Sobs cut short the words.

°°°°"We will pray for him," said Madame Grandet. "Resign yourself to thewill of God."

°°°°"Cousin," said Eugenie, "take courage! Your loss is irreparable;therefore think only of saving your honor."

°°°°With the delicate instinct of a woman who intuitively puts her mindinto all things, even at the moment when she offers consolation,Eugenie sought to cheat her cousin's grief by turning his thoughtsinward upon himself.

°°°°"My honor?" exclaimed the young man, tossing aside his hair with animpatient gesture as he sat up on his bed and crossed his arms. "Ah!that is true. My uncle said my father had failed." He uttered a heart-rending cry, and hid his face in his hands. "Leave me, leave me,cousin! My God! my God! forgive my father, for he must have sufferedsorely!"

°°°°There was something terribly attractive in the sight of this youngsorrow, sincere without reasoning or afterthought. It was a virgingrief which the simple hearts of Eugenie and her mother were fitted tocomprehend, and they obeyed the sign Charles made them to leave him tohimself. They went downstairs in silence and took their accustomedplaces by the window and sewed for nearly an hour without exchanging aword. Eugenie had seen in the furtive glance that she cast about theyoung man's room--that girlish glance which sees all in the twinklingof an eye--the pretty trifles of his dressing-case, his scissors, hisrazors embossed with gold. This gleam of luxury across her cousin'sgrief only made him the more interesting to her, possibly by way ofcontrast. Never before had so serious an event, so dramatic a sight,touched the imaginations of these two passive beings, hitherto sunk inthe stillness and calm of solitude.

°°°°"Mamma," said Eugenie, "we must wear mourning for my uncle.""Your father will decide that," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°They relapsed into silence. Eugenie drew her stitches with a uniformmotion which revealed to an observer the teeming thoughts of hermeditation. The first desire of the girl's heart was to share hercousin's mourning.

°°°°VI

°°°°About four o'clock an abrupt knock at the door struck sharply on theheart of Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What can have happened to your father?" she said to her daughter.Grandet entered joyously. After taking off his gloves, he rubbed hishands hard enough to take off their skin as well, if his epidermis hadnot been tanned and cured like Russia leather,--saving, of course, theperfume of larch-trees and incense. Presently his secret escaped him."Wife," he said, without stuttering, "I've trapped them all! Our wineis sold! The Dutch and the Belgians have gone. I walked about themarket-place in front of their inn, pretending to be doing nothing.That Belgian fellow--you know who I mean--came up to me. The owners ofall the good vineyards have kept back their vintages, intending towait; well, I didn't hinder them. The Belgian was in despair; I sawthat. In a minute the bargain was made. He takes my vintage at twohundred francs the puncheon, half down. He paid me in gold; the notesare drawn. Here are six louis for you. In three months wines will havefallen."

°°°°These words, uttered in a quiet tone of voice, were nevertheless sobitterly sarcastic that the inhabitants of Saumur, grouped at thismoment in the market-place and overwhelmed by the news of the saleGrandet had just effected, would have shuddered had they heard them.Their panic would have brought the price of wines down fifty per centat once.

°°°°"Did you have a thousand puncheons this year, father?"

°°°°"Yes, little one."

°°°°That term applied to his daughter was the superlative expression ofthe old miser's joy.

°°°°"Then that makes two hundred thousand pieces of twenty sous each?""Yes, Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"Then, father, you can easily help Charles."

°°°°The amazement, the anger, the stupefaction of Belshazzar when he sawthe /Mene-Tekel-Upharsin/ before his eyes is not to be compared withthe cold rage of Grandet, who, having forgotten his nephew, now foundhim enshrined in the heart and calculations of his daughter."What's this? Ever since that dandy put foot in MY house everythinggoes wrong! You behave as if you had the right to buy sugar-plums andmake feasts and weddings. I won't have that sort of thing. I hope Iknow my duty at my time of life! I certainly sha'n't take lessons frommy daughter, or from anybody else. I shall do for my nephew what it isproper to do, and you have no need to poke your nose into it. As foryou, Eugenie," he added, facing her, "don't speak of this again, orI'll send you to the Abbaye des Noyers with Nanon, see if I don't; andno later than to-morrow either, if you disobey me! Where is thatfellow, has he come down yet?"

°°°°"No, my friend," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What is he doing then?"

°°°°"He is weeping for his father," said Eugenie.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter without finding a word to say; afterall, he was a father. He made a couple of turns up and down the room,and then went hurriedly to his secret den to think over an investmenthe was meditating in the public Funds. The thinning out of his twothousand acres of forest land had yielded him six hundred thousandfrancs: putting this sum to that derived from the sale of his poplarsand to his other gains for the last year and for the current year, hehad amassed a total of nine hundred thousand francs, without countingthe two hundred thousand he had got by the sale just concluded. Thetwenty per cent which Cruchot assured him would gain in a short timefrom the Funds, then quoted at seventy, tempted him. He figured outhis calculation on the margin of the newspaper which gave the accountof his brother's death, all the while hearing the moans of his nephew,but without listening to them. Nanon came and knocked on the wall tosummon him to dinner. On the last step of the staircase he was sayingto himself as he came down,--

°°°°"I'll do it; I shall get eight per cent interest. In two years I shallhave fifteen hundred thousand francs, which I will then draw out ingood gold,--Well, where's my nephew?"

°°°°"He says he doesn't want anything to eat," answered Nanon; "that's notgood for him."

°°°°"So much saved," retorted her master.

°°°°"That's so," she said.

°°°°"Bah! he won't cry long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the woods."The dinner was eaten in silence.

°°°°"My good friend," said Madame Grandet, when the cloth was removed, "wemust put on mourning."

°°°°"Upon my word, Madame Grandet! what will you invent next to spendmoney on? Mourning is in the heart, and not in the clothes.""But mourning for a brother is indispensable; and the Church commandsus to--"

°°°°"Buy your mourning out of your six louis. Give me a hat-band; that'senough for me."

°°°°Eugenie raised her eyes to heaven without uttering a word. Hergenerous instincts, slumbering and long repressed but now suddenly andfor the first time awakened, were galled at every turn. The eveningpassed to all appearance like a thousand other evenings of theirmonotonous life, yet it was certainly the most horrible. Eugenie sewedwithout raising her head, and did not use the workbox which Charleshad despised the night before. Madame Grandet knitted her sleeves.Grandet twirled his thumbs for four hours, absorbed in calculationswhose results were on the morrow to astonish Saumur. No one came tovisit the family that day. The whole town was ringing with the news ofthe business trick just played by Grandet, the failure of his brother,and the arrival of his nephew. Obeying the desire to gossip over theirmutual interests, all the upper and middle-class wine-growers inSaumur met at Monsieur des Grassins, where terrible imprecations werebeing fulminated against the ex-mayor. Nanon was spinning, and thewhirr of her wheel was the only sound heard beneath the gray raftersof that silent hall.

°°°°"We don't waste our tongues," she said, showing her teeth, as largeand white as peeled almonds.

°°°°"Nothing should be wasted," answered Grandet, rousing himself from hisreverie. He saw a perspective of eight millions in three years, and hewas sailing along that sheet of gold. "Let us go to bed. I will bid mynephew good-night for the rest of you, and see if he will takeanything."

°°°°Madame Grandet remained on the landing of the first storey to hear theconversation that was about to take place between the goodman and hisnephew. Eugenie, bolder than her mother, went up two stairs."Well, nephew, you are in trouble. Yes, weep, that's natural. A fatheris a father; but we must bear our troubles patiently. I am a gooduncle to you, remember that. Come, take courage! Will you have alittle glass of wine?" (Wine costs nothing in Saumur, and they offerit as tea is offered in China.) "Why!" added Grandet, "you have got nolight! That's bad, very bad; you ought to see what you are about," andhe walked to the chimney-piece. "What's this?" he cried. "A waxcandle! How the devil did they filch a wax candle? The spendthriftswould tear down the ceilings of my house to boil the fellow's eggs."Hearing these words, mother and daughter slipped back into their roomsand burrowed in their beds, with the celerity of frightened micegetting back to their holes.

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you found a mine?" said the man, coming into thechamber of his wife.

°°°°"My friend, wait; I am saying my prayers," said the poor mother in atrembling voice.

°°°°"The devil take your good God!" growled Grandet in reply.Misers have no belief in a future life; the present is their all inall. This thought casts a terrible light upon our present epoch, inwhich, far more than at any former period, money sways the laws andpolitics and morals.  Institutions, books, men, and dogmas, allconspire to undermine belief in a future life,--a belief upon whichthe social edifice has rested for eighteen hundred years. The grave,as a means of transition, is little feared in our day. The future,which once opened to us beyond the requiems, has now been importedinto the present. To obtain /per fas et nefas/ a terrestrial paradiseof luxury and earthly enjoyment, to harden the heart and macerate thebody for the sake of fleeting possessions, as the martyrs oncesuffered all things to reach eternal joys, this is now the universalthought--a thought written everywhere, even in the very laws which askof the legislator, "What do you pay?" instead of asking him, "What doyou think?" When this doctrine has passed down from the bourgeoisie tothe populace, where will this country be?

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you done?" asked the old man.

°°°°"My friend, I am praying for you."

°°°°"Very good! Good-night; to-morrow morning we will have a talk."The poor woman went to sleep like a schoolboy who, not having learnedhis lessons, knows he will see his master's angry face on the morrow.At the moment when, filled with fear, she was drawing the sheet aboveher head that she might stifle hearing, Eugenie, in her night-gown andwith naked feet, ran to her side and kissed her brow.

°°°°"Oh! my good mother," she said, "to-morrow I will tell him it was I.""No; he would send you to Noyers. Leave me to manage it; he cannot eatme."

°°°°"Do you hear, mamma?"

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"/He/ is weeping still."

°°°°"Go to bed, my daughter; you will take cold in your feet: the floor isdamp."

°°°°*****

°°°°Thus passed the solemn day which was destined to weight upon the wholelife of the rich and poor heiress, whose sleep was never again to beso calm, nor yet so pure, as it had been up to this moment. It oftenhappens that certain actions of human life seem, literally speaking,improbable, though actual. Is not this because we constantly omit toturn the stream of psychological light upon our impulsivedeterminations, and fail to explain the subtile reasons, mysteriouslyconceived in our minds, which impelled them? Perhaps Eugenie's deeppassion should be analyzed in its most delicate fibres; for it became,scoffers might say, a malady which influenced her whole existence.Many people prefer to deny results rather than estimate the force ofties and links and bonds, which secretly join one fact to another inthe moral order. Here, therefore, Eugenie's past life will offer toobservers of human nature an explanation of her naive want ofreflection and the suddenness of the emotions which overflowed hersoul. The more tranquil her life had been, the more vivid was herwomanly pity, the more simple-minded were the sentiments now developedin her soul.

°°°°Made restless by the events of the day, she woke at intervals tolisten to her cousin, thinking she heard the sighs which still echoedin her heart. Sometimes she saw him dying of his trouble, sometimesshe dreamed that he fainted from hunger. Towards morning she wascertain that she heard a startling cry. She dressed at once and ran,in the dawning light, with a swift foot to her cousin's chamber, thedoor of which he had left open. The candle had burned down to thesocket. Charles, overcome by nature, was sleeping, dressed and sittingin an armchair beside the bed, on which his head rested; he dreamed asmen dream on an empty stomach. Eugenie might weep at her ease; shemight admire the young and handsome face blotted with grief, the eyesswollen with weeping, that seemed, sleeping as they were, to wellforth tears. Charles felt sympathetically the young girl's presence;he opened his eyes and saw her pitying him.

°°°°"Pardon me, my cousin," he said, evidently not knowing the hour northe place in which he found himself.

°°°°"There are hearts who hear you, cousin, and /we/ thought you mightneed something. You should go to bed; you tire yourself by sittingthus."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, then, adieu!"

°°°°She escaped, ashamed and happy at having gone there. Innocence alonecan dare to be so bold. Once enlightened, virtue makes hercalculations as well as vice. Eugenie, who had not trembled beside hercousin, could scarcely stand upon her legs when she regained herchamber. Her ignorant life had suddenly come to an end; she reasoned,she rebuked herself with many reproaches.

°°°°"What will he think of me? He will think that I love him!"That was what she most wished him to think. An honest love has its ownprescience, and knows that love begets love. What an event for thispoor solitary girl thus to have entered the chamber of a young man!Are there not thoughts and actions in the life of love which tocertain souls bear the full meaning of the holiest espousals? An hourlater she went to her mother and dressed her as usual. Then they bothcame down and sat in their places before the window waiting forGrandet, with that cruel anxiety which, according to the individualcharacter, freezes the heart or warms it, shrivels or dilates it, whena scene is feared, a punishment expected,--a feeling so natural thateven domestic animals possess it, and whine at the slightest pain ofpunishment, though they make no outcry when they inadvertently hurtthemselves. The goodman came down; but he spoke to his wife with anabsent manner, kissed Eugenie, and sat down to table without appearingto remember his threats of the night before.

°°°°"What has become of my nephew? The lad gives no trouble.""Monsieur, he is asleep," answered Nanon.

°°°°"So much the better; he won't want a wax candle," said Grandet in ajeering tone.

°°°°This unusual clemency, this bitter gaiety, struck Madame Grandet withamazement, and she looked at her husband attentively. The goodman--here it may be well to explain that in Touraine, Anjou, Pitou, andBretagne the word "goodman," already used to designate Grandet, isbestowed as often upon harsh and cruel men as upon those of kindlytemperament, when either have reached a certain age; the title meansnothing on the score of individual gentleness--the goodman took hishat and gloves, saying as he went out,--

°°°°"I am going to loiter about the market-place and find Cruchot.""Eugenie, your father certainly has something on his mind."Grandet, who was a poor sleeper, employed half his nights in thepreliminary calculations which gave such astonishing accuracy to hisviews and observations and schemes, and secured to them the unfailingsuccess at sight of which his townsmen stood amazed. All human poweris a compound of time and patience. Powerful beings will and wait. Thelife of a miser is the constant exercise of human power put to theservice of self. It rests on two sentiments only,--self-love and self-interest; but self-interest being to a certain extent compact andintelligent self-love, the visible sign of real superiority, itfollows that self-love and self-interest are two parts of the samewhole,--egotism. From this arises, perhaps, the excessive curiosityshown in the habits of a miser's life whenever they are put before theworld. Every nature holds by a thread to those beings who challengeall human sentiments by concentrating all in one passion. Where is theman without desire? and what social desire can be satisfied withoutmoney?

°°°°Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

°°°°In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

°°°°"My cousin!"

°°°°"Yes, cousin."

°°°°"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

°°°°"Where you like."

°°°°"How do you feel?"

°°°°"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

°°°°This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

°°°°She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

°°°°That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

°°°°"What troubles you?" she said.

°°°°"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

°°°°Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

°°°°When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

°°°°"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

°°°°"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

°°°°Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

°°°°"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

°°°°"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

°°°°The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

°°°°"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

°°°°Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

°°°°"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

°°°°"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

°°°°*****

°°°°About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

°°°°VII

°°°°At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

°°°°The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

°°°°"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

°°°°"Certainly, nephew."

°°°°As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

°°°°He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

°°°°"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

°°°°"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

°°°°"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

°°°°"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

°°°°"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

°°°°"--is threatened with insolvency--"

°°°°"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

°°°°"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

°°°°"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

°°°°"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

°°°°"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

°°°°"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

°°°°"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

°°°°"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

°°°°"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

°°°°"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

°°°°Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

°°°°"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

°°°°"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

°°°°"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

°°°°"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Exactly so," said the president.

°°°°"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

°°°°"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

°°°°"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

°°°°"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

°°°°"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

°°°°"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

°°°°"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

°°°°"Bentham, an Englishman.'

°°°°"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

°°°°"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

°°°°"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

°°°°"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

°°°°"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

°°°°"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

°°°°"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

°°°°"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

°°°°"That's very true."

°°°°"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

°°°°"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

°°°°"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

°°°°"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

°°°°A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

°°°°"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

°°°°He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

°°°°"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

°°°°"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

°°°°These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

°°°°"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

°°°°"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

°°°°The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

°°°°"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

°°°°She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

°°°°"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

°°°°"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

°°°°"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

°°°°"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

°°°°"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

°°°°"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

°°°°"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

°°°°"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

°°°°"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

°°°°The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

°°°°"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

°°°°"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

°°°°"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

°°°°When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

°°°°"Are not they fuming, hein?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

°°°°"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

°°°°In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

°°°°When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

°°°°"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

°°°°So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

°°°°"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

°°°°Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

°°°°"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

°°°°"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

°°°°The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

°°°°"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

°°°°"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

°°°°"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

°°°°"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

°°°°"I didn't know where."

°°°°"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

°°°°"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

°°°°"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

°°°°"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

°°°°The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

°°°°VIII

°°°°"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

°°°°"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

°°°°"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

°°°°"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

°°°°These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

°°°°She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

°°°°"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

°°°°My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

°°°°great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

°°°°foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

°°°°fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

°°°°when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

°°°°yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

°°°°plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

°°°°If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

°°°°that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

°°°°fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

°°°°my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

°°°°me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

°°°°so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

°°°°the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

°°°°bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

°°°°killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

°°°°there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

°°°°ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

°°°°I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

°°°°last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

°°°°enterprise.

°°°°"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

°°°°She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

°°°°I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

°°°°hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

°°°°not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

°°°°even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

°°°°have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

°°°°to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

°°°°world like other men who have started young without a sou and

°°°°brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

°°°°faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

°°°°another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

°°°°so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

°°°°my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

°°°°life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

°°°°Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

°°°°young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

°°°°caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

°°°°family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

°°°°were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

°°°°Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

°°°°grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

°°°°with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

°°°°your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

°°°°expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

°°°°accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

°°°°Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

°°°°When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

°°°°ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

°°°°hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

°°°°your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

°°°°spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

°°°°cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

°°°°ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

°°°°depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

°°°°of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

°°°°poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

°°°°see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

°°°°life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

°°°°can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

°°°°necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

°°°°have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

°°°°face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

°°°°seems to me--

°°°°"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

°°°°Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

°°°°Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

°°°°"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

°°°°Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

°°°°Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

°°°°My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

°°°°friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

°°°°of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

°°°°settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

°°°°can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

°°°°have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

°°°°have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

°°°°and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

°°°°can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

°°°°horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

°°°°keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

°°°°the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

°°°°will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

°°°°these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

°°°°nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

°°°°give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

°°°°his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

°°°°travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

°°°°them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

°°°°do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

°°°°seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

°°°°British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

°°°°pay him--

°°°°"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

°°°°Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

°°°°"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

°°°°"I have read those letters."

°°°°Charles colored.

°°°°"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

°°°°"And what?" asked Charles.

°°°°"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

°°°°"My dear cousin--"

°°°°"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

°°°°Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

°°°°"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

°°°°Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

°°°°As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

°°°°"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

°°°°Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

°°°°"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

°°°°"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

°°°°"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

°°°°"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

°°°°Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

°°°°"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

°°°°"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

°°°°"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

°°°°"But he owns Froidfond."

°°°°"What is Froidfond worth?"

°°°°"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

°°°°"Nothing but a poor farm!"

°°°°"He has vineyards and fields."

°°°°"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

°°°°"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

°°°°Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

°°°°Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

°°°°It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

°°°°"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

°°°°"Nothing," answered the old man.

°°°°Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

°°°°"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

°°°°"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

°°°°"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

°°°°"Say /was/ worth--"

°°°°"Where the devil have they got any?"

°°°°"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

°°°°"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

°°°°"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

°°°°"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

°°°°"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

°°°°Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

°°°°"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

°°°°The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

°°°°"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

°°°°Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

°°°°"Dans les gardes francaises

°°°°J'avais un bon papa."

°°°°Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

°°°°"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

°°°°He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

°°°°"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

°°°°"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

°°°°"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

°°°°"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

°°°°IX

°°°°The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

°°°°For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

°°°°After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

°°°°Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

°°°°"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

°°°°"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

°°°°"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

°°°°"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

°°°°"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

°°°°"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

°°°°"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

°°°°"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

°°°°"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

°°°°"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

°°°°The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

°°°°"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

°°°°Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

°°°°"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

°°°°He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

°°°°"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

°°°°"I must," he said, bowing his head.

°°°°For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

°°°°"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

°°°°"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

°°°°When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

°°°°"Do you love me?" she said.

°°°°"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

°°°°"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

°°°°She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

°°°°"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

°°°°"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

°°°°The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

°°°°"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

°°°°"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

°°°°"Then my heart will be always there."

°°°°"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

°°°°No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

°°°°"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

°°°°At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

°°°°"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

°°°°"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

°°°°"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

°°°°Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

°°°°Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

°°°°"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

°°°°Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

°°°°In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

°°°°Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

°°°°In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

°°°°"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

°°°°Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

°°°°"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

°°°°"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

°°°°The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

°°°°But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

°°°°As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

°°°°"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

°°°°"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

°°°°"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

°°°°In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

°°°°*****

°°°°In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

°°°°"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

°°°°Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

°°°°"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

°°°°X

°°°°Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

°°°°"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

°°°°The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

°°°°"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

°°°°"Where could we have got the money?"

°°°°"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

°°°°"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

°°°°Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

°°°°"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

°°°°There was a moment's silence.

°°°°"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

°°°°"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

°°°°"I'm always gay,--

°°°°"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

°°°°Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

°°°°he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

°°°°Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

°°°°"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

°°°°The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

°°°°When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

°°°°"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

°°°°"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

°°°°"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

°°°°"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

°°°°"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

°°°°"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur."

°°°°"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

°°°°"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

°°°°Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

°°°°"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

°°°°"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

°°°°"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

°°°°"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

°°°°The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

°°°°"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

°°°°At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

°°°°"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

°°°°"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

°°°°The two women were dumb.

°°°°"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

°°°°Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

°°°°"I have not got /my/ gold."

°°°°"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

°°°°"No, I have not got it."

°°°°"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

°°°°"No."

°°°°"By the shears of my father!"

°°°°Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

°°°°"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

°°°°Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

°°°°"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

°°°°Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

°°°°"Yes, father."

°°°°She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

°°°°"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

°°°°"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

°°°°Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

°°°°"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

°°°°"What use?"

°°°°"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

°°°°"And this is mine."

°°°°"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

°°°°"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

°°°°"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

°°°°She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

°°°°"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

°°°°Eugenie was silent and impassive.

°°°°"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

°°°°"You are a child."

°°°°"Of age."

°°°°Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

°°°°He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

°°°°Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

°°°°"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

°°°°Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

°°°°"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

°°°°"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

°°°°"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

°°°°"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

°°°°Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

°°°°"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

°°°°"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

°°°°"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

°°°°"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

°°°°"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

°°°°"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

°°°°He looked fixedly at his wife.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

°°°°"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

°°°°"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

°°°°"I will ask God to punish only me."

°°°°"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

°°°°"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

°°°°"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

°°°°"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

°°°°*****

°°°°Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

°°°°"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

°°°°"It is grease I'm trying out."

°°°°"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

°°°°The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

°°°°"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

°°°°At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

°°°°"How is Madame Grandet?"

°°°°"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

°°°°"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

°°°°They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

°°°°"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

°°°°When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

°°°°"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

°°°°"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

°°°°XI

°°°°For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

°°°°"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

°°°°"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

°°°°Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

°°°°One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

°°°°"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

°°°°"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

°°°°"All" meant "him."

°°°°"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

°°°°"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

°°°°Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

°°°°"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

°°°°Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

°°°°When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

°°°°"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

°°°°At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

°°°°"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

°°°°"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

°°°°"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

°°°°On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

°°°°"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

°°°°"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

°°°°"What do you mean?"

°°°°"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

°°°°"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

°°°°These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

°°°°"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

°°°°"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

°°°°"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

°°°°"She has given away her gold!"

°°°°"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

°°°°"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

°°°°"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

°°°°"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

°°°°"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

°°°°"How much?"

°°°°"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

°°°°"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

°°°°After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

°°°°"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

°°°°"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

°°°°"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

°°°°"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

°°°°"She has not a month to live."

°°°°Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

°°°°"What can be done?"

°°°°"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

°°°°"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

°°°°"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

°°°°"The scoundrels!"

°°°°"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

°°°°"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

°°°°He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

°°°°"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

°°°°"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

°°°°But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

°°°°"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

°°°°He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

°°°°"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

°°°°"O God, have pity upon us!"

°°°°The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

°°°°"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

°°°°Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

°°°°"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

°°°°"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

°°°°"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

°°°°"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

°°°°"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

°°°°Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

°°°°"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

°°°°"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

°°°°The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

°°°°"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

°°°°"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

°°°°"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

°°°°Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

°°°°"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

°°°°Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

°°°°"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

°°°°"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

°°°°"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

°°°°"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

°°°°XII

°°°°On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

°°°°"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

°°°°"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

°°°°"Oh! father--"

°°°°"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

°°°°"What is it you wish me to do?"

°°°°"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

°°°°"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

°°°°"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

°°°°"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

°°°°"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

°°°°Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

°°°°"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

°°°°"I will do all you wish, father."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

°°°°"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

°°°°He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

°°°°"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

°°°°The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

°°°°"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

°°°°"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

°°°°"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

°°°°Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

°°°°*****

°°°°Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

°°°°At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

°°°°"Yes, my father," she would answer.

°°°°"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

°°°°Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

°°°°"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

°°°°When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

°°°°"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

°°°°"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

°°°°*****

°°°°Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

°°°°"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

°°°°The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

°°°°"Nanon, we are alone--"

°°°°"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

°°°°"The ocean is between us," she said.

°°°°While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

°°°°"Fast colors!" said the draper.

°°°°"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

°°°°"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

°°°°When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

°°°°At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

°°°°It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

°°°°"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

°°°°"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

°°°°"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

°°°°"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

°°°°Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

°°°°Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

°°°°"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

°°°°"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

°°°°XIII

°°°°While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

°°°°With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

°°°°Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

°°°°Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

°°°°"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

°°°°Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

°°°°Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

°°°°"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

°°°°*****

°°°°At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

°°°°"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

°°°°The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

°°°°"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

°°°°Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

°°°°"Read it, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

°°°°Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

°°°°My dear Cousin,--

°°°°"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

°°°°You--

°°°°"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

°°°°"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

°°°°"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

°°°°She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

°°°°My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

°°°°success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

°°°°rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

°°°°together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

°°°°des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

°°°°we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

°°°°Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

°°°°the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

°°°°be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

°°°°life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

°°°°To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

°°°°dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

°°°°realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

°°°°from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

°°°°forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

°°°°long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

°°°°Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

°°°°--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

°°°°forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

°°°°night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

°°°°to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

°°°°heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

°°°°Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

°°°°sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

°°°°deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

°°°°all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

°°°°present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

°°°°all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

°°°°Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

°°°°your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

°°°°will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

°°°°education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

°°°°with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

°°°°myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

°°°°to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

°°°°think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

°°°°be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

°°°°right to understand it and to judge it.

°°°°I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

°°°°francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

°°°°Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

°°°°me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

°°°°Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

°°°°dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

°°°°marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

°°°°advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

°°°°are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

°°°°my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

°°°°have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

°°°°year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

°°°°proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

°°°°You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

°°°°heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

°°°°years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

°°°°but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

°°°°remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

°°°°which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

°°°°and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

°°°°you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

°°°°convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

°°°°putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

°°°°of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

°°°°ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

°°°°simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

°°°°Your devoted cousin,

°°°°Charles.

°°°°"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

°°°°P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

°°°°thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

°°°°capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

°°°°am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

°°°°which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

°°°°gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

°°°°hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

°°°°"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

°°°°Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

°°°°"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

°°°°Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

°°°°This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

°°°°"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

°°°°"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

°°°°"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

°°°°"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

°°°°"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

°°°°At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

°°°°"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

°°°°"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

°°°°"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

°°°°"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

°°°°Eugenie read the following letter:--

°°°°My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

°°°°has been in Paris about a month--

°°°°"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

°°°°I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

°°°°Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

°°°°the banns are published--

°°°°"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

°°°°The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

°°°°will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

°°°°tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

°°°°business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

°°°°keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

°°°°fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

°°°°devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

°°°°/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

°°°°the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

°°°°francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

°°°°there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

°°°°creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

°°°°I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

°°°°Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

°°°°Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

°°°°for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

°°°°have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

°°°°happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

°°°°matter before you have spoken to her about it--

°°°°There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

°°°°"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

°°°°"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

°°°°"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

°°°°"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

°°°°"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

°°°°The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

°°°°"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

°°°°There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

°°°°"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

°°°°"A love game," said the notary.

°°°°Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

°°°°"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

°°°°"I am ready for all things," said the president.

°°°°"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

°°°°The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

°°°°"I will be your slave!" he said.

°°°°"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

°°°°The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

°°°°When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

°°°°The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

°°°°The president gave Charles the following letter:--

°°°°My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

°°°°place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

°°°°also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

°°°°sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

°°°°I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

°°°°Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

°°°°mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

°°°°I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

°°°°not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

°°°°according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

°°°°our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

°°°°your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

°°°°in your cousin

°°°°Eugenie.

°°°°The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

°°°°"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

°°°°"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

°°°°Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

°°°°"Seventeen mil--"

°°°°"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

°°°°"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

°°°°"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

°°°°"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

°°°°"In money?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

°°°°"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

°°°°"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

°°°°The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

°°°°"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

°°°°The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

°°°°"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

°°°°"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

°°°°Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

°°°°God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

°°°°The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

°°°°Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

°°°°End





°°°°Colonel Chabert

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage and Clara Bell

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Madame la Comtesse Ida de Bocarme nee du Chasteler.

°°°°COLONEL CHABERT

°°°°"HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!"

°°°°This exclamation was made by a lawyer's clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper--a messenger in fact--who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread with a hearty appetite. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

°°°°"Come, Simonnin, don't play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!" said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

°°°°The lawyer's messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and /billets-doux/ keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

°°°°"If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?" asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

°°°°And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

°°°°"What trick can we play that cove?" said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

°°°°Then he went on improvising:

°°°°"/But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth/--(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned-- you, as you engross it!)--/when he resumed the reins of Government, understood/--(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)--/the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!/--(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)--/and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents/--('numerous' is flattering, and ought to please the Bench)--/all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in/--Stop," said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, "that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.--Well," he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, "well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!"

°°°°And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating--"/given in/--Are you ready?"

°°°°"Yes," cried the three writers.

°°°°It all went all together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

°°°°"/Given in/--Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our /i/'s and cross our /t/'s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages."

°°°°"By Jingo!" repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

°°°°"What! have you written /by Jingo/?" cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

°°°°"Why, yes," said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor's copy, "he has written, '/We must dot our i's/' and spelt it /by Gingo/!"

°°°°All the clerks shouted with laughter.

°°°°"Why! Monsieur Hure, you take 'By Jingo' for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!" exclaimed Simonnin.

°°°°"Scratch it cleanly out," said the head clerk. "If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the 'Shoulder arms!' of the law."

°°°°"/Given in--in/?" asked Godeschal.--"Tell me when, Boucard."

°°°°"June 1814," replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

°°°°A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, "Come in!"

°°°°Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers--/broutilles/ (odds and ends) in French law jargon--and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

°°°°The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk's cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk's table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

°°°°The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,--all the glory of a lawyer's office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine --neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of /remainders/, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to /Chlet/)--a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

°°°°So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients--something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities--an attorney's office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

°°°°But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man's soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

°°°°"Where is my penknife?"

°°°°"I am eating my breakfast."

°°°°"You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen!"

°°°°These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

°°°°"Monsieur, is your master at home?"

°°°°The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, "I am deaf."

°°°°"What do you want, sir?" asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

°°°°"This is the fifth time I have called," replied the victim. "I wish to speak to M. Derville."

°°°°"On business?"

°°°°"Yes, but I can explain it to no one but--"

°°°°"M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to----"

°°°°The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers' clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the old man, "as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up."

°°°°Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

°°°°"It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning." The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in "parties," went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

°°°°"I will come again to-night," said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

°°°°The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

°°°°"What do you think of that for a cracked pot?" said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

°°°°"He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again," said a clerk.

°°°°"He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay," said the head clerk.

°°°°"No, he is a retired concierge," said Godeschal.

°°°°"I bet you he is a nobleman," cried Boucard.

°°°°"I bet you he has been a porter," retorted Godeschal. "Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body's. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch."

°°°°"He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch," cried Desroches. "It has been known!"

°°°°"No," Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, "I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic."

°°°°"I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Done with you," answered Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur! Monsieur!" shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

°°°°"What are you at now, Simonnin?" asked Boucard.

°°°°"I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know."

°°°°All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

°°°°"What can we say to him?" cried Godeschal.

°°°°"Leave it to me," replied Boucard.

°°°°The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Boucard, "will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know----"

°°°°"Chabert."

°°°°"The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?" asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

°°°°"The same, monsieur," replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

°°°°"Whew!"

°°°°"Done brown!"

°°°°"Poof!"

°°°°"Oh!"

°°°°"Ah!"

°°°°"Boum!"

°°°°"The old rogue!"

°°°°"Ting-a-ring-ting!"

°°°°"Sold again!"

°°°°"Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying," said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

°°°°There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopeia of the language would fail to represent.

°°°°"Which theatre shall we go to?"

°°°°"To the opera," cried the head clerk.

°°°°"In the first place," said Godeschal, "I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui."

°°°°"Madame Saqui is not the play."

°°°°"What is a play?" replied Godeschal. "First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen--"

°°°°"But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!" cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

°°°°"To be seen for money," Godeschal added.

°°°°"But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective," said Desroches.

°°°°"But do listen to me!"

°°°°"You are talking nonsense, my dear boy," said Boucard.

°°°°"Is Curtius' a play?" said Godeschal.

°°°°"No," said the head clerk, "it is a collection of figures--but it is a spectacle."

°°°°"I bet you a hundred francs to a sou," Godeschal resumed, "that Curtius' Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy."

°°°°"And so on, and so forth!" said Simonnin.

°°°°"You mind I don't box your ears!" said Godeschal.

°°°°The clerk shrugged their shoulders.

°°°°"Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us," he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. "On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients."

°°°°"Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow," said Boucard. "To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!"

°°°°"If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?" said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal's.

°°°°"Since nothing is settled," said Boucard, "let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in 'Nero.' Simonnin may go to the pit."

°°°°And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

°°°°"/Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen/ (in words)," said Godeschal. "Ready?"

°°°°"Yes," replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

°°°°"/And we hope that my lords on the Bench/," the extemporizing clerk went on. "Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself."

°°°°"Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines," said Boucard.

°°°°"/We hope/," Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, "/that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth/----"

°°°°"Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn't you like a glass of water?" said the little messenger.

°°°°"That imp of a boy!" said Boucard. "Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides."

°°°°"/Here set forth/," Godeschal went on. "Add /in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse/ (at full length) /de Grandlieu/."

°°°°"What!" cried the chief, "are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor--a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of 'inasmuch,' and go to the Courts myself."

°°°°This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, "Those were good times."

°°°°At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maitre Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

°°°°Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at finding the head clerk busily arranging in a convenient order on his master's dining-room table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take a seat, which the client did.

°°°°"On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you named such an hour for an interview," said the old man, with the forced mirth of a ruined man, who does his best to smile.

°°°°"The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too," replied the man, going on with his work. "M. Derville chooses this hour for studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect is freer at this hour--the only time when he can have the silence and quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case, read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business, then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money."

°°°°As he listened to this explanation, the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an expression so bereft of intelligence, that the clerk, after looking at him, thought no more about him.

°°°°A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers. The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius' collection to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This quiescence would not have been a subject for astonishment if it had not completed the supernatural aspect of the man's whole person. The old soldier was dry and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, if I may use such a vulgar expression, was as the face of the dead. Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

°°°°Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head was due to some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by Rembrandt, without a frame. The brim of the hat which covered the old man's brow cast a black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This grotesque effect, though natural, threw into relief by contrast the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a certain look of melancholy madness, and the deteriorating symptoms characteristic of senility, giving the face an indescribably ill- starred look which no human words could render.

°°°°But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had worn into this face, as drops of water from the sky falling on fine marble at last destroy its beauty. A physician, an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama at the sight of its sublime horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques which artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of the lithographic stone while chatting with a friend.

°°°°On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful reverie in silence and at night. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow to the young man; the leather lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was, "His intelligence must have escaped through that cut."

°°°°"If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!" thought Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Derville, "to whom have I the honor of speaking?"

°°°°"To Colonel Chabert."

°°°°"Which?"

°°°°"He who was killed at Eylau," replied the old man.

°°°°On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each other, as much as to say, "He is mad."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Colonel went on, "I wish to confide to you the secret of my position."

°°°°A thing worthy of note is the natural intrepidity of lawyers. Whether from the habit of receiving a great many persons, or from the deep sense of the protection conferred on them by the law, or from confidence in their missions, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing, like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

°°°°"During the day, sir," said the attorney, "I am not so miserly of my time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise. Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I may consider necessary. Speak."

°°°°Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he turned over the bundles of papers.

°°°°"You know, perhaps," said the dead man, "that I commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat's famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is a historical fact, recorded in /Victoires et Conquetes/, where it is related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor, after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the enemy's cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers, perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse. Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men, fifteen hundred of them--there might have been more! My death was announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution --for he was fond of me, was the master--wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and bring me into Hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, for he was very busy, 'Go and see whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.' These rascally saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse, and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was probably made out in accordance with the rules of military jurisprudence."

°°°°As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and relate a story so probable though so strange, the young lawyer ceased fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

°°°°"Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud," he said, interrupting the speaker, "Colonel Chabert's widow?"

°°°°"My wife--yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the custom in time of the war, and thrown into the common grave by the men ordered to bury the dead?

°°°°"Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded. Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a ball.

°°°°"When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. the little air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room. I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die. This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard--or I thought I heard, I will assert nothing--groans from the world of dead among whom I was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very indistinct, in spite of my impressions of far more acute suffering I was fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

°°°°"But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such as I have never known elsewhere--literally, the silence of the grave. At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would seem that, thanks to the carelessness and the haste with which we had been pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules! A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unhoped-for help, I must have perished. But with a fury you may imagine, I began to work my way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which had no doubt been thrown over us--I say us, as if there had been others living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms. This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw daylight, but through snow!

°°°°"At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse, who knows, had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow. However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole, where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the moment for saying, 'Respect courage in misfortune!' In short, monsieur, after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy, of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them they got me to their poor hovel.

°°°°"It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy--allow me to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which, from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

°°°°"You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave as naked as I came from my mother's; so that six months afterwards, when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert, and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man, named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

°°°°"Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence, nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond, begging my bread, treated as a madman when I have told my story, without ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert. For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample reason for shutting a man up.

°°°°"At the end of two years' detention, which I was compelled to submit to, after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, 'Here is a poor man who thinks he is Colonel Chabert' to people who would reply, 'Poor fellow!' I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh, monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I----"

°°°°Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study, which Derville respected.

°°°°"One fine day," his visitor resumed, "one spring day, they gave me the key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me. If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name, no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field- Marshal in Austria or Russia. Who knows?"

°°°°"Monsieur," said the attorney, "you have upset all my ideas. I feel as if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you."

°°°°"You are the only person," said the Colonel, with a melancholy look, "who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary documents to begin my lawsuit--"

°°°°"What lawsuit?" said the attorney, who had forgotten his client's painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

°°°°"Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a son. When I tell lawyers these things--men of sense; when I propose-- I, a beggar--to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I--a dead man--bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold politeness, which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler or a madman--it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts, under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!"

°°°°"Pray resume your narrative," said Derville.

°°°°" 'Pray resume it!' " cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer's hand. "That is the first polite word I have heard since----"

°°°°The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing and unutterable eloquence that lies in the eyes, in a gesture, even in silence, entirely convinced Derville, and touched him deeply.

°°°°"Listen, monsieur," said he; "I have this evening won three hundred francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his fortune to make. Proceed."

°°°°The Colonel, as he called himself, sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps it was in obedience to the inexplicable feeling, the latent germ in every man's heart, to which we owe the experiments of alchemists, the passion for glory, the discoveries of astronomy and of physics, everything which prompts man to expand his being by multiplying himself through deeds or ideas. In his mind the /Ego/ was now but a secondary object, just as the vanity of success or the pleasures of winning become dearer to the gambler than the object he has at stake. The young lawyer's words were as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer's office the ten gold pieces which had so long been refused him by so many people, and in so many ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured. There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us, it is like a thunderbolt; they burn us. The poor man's gratitude was too great to find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found his voice.

°°°°"Where was I?" said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier, and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in France.

°°°°"At Stuttgart. You were out of prison," said Derville.

°°°°"You know my wife?" asked the Colonel.

°°°°"Yes," said Derville, with a bow.

°°°°"What is she like?"

°°°°"Still quite charming."

°°°°The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation that is characteristic of men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, with a sort of cheerfulness--for he breathed again, the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave; he had just melted a covering of snow less easily thawed than that which had once before frozen his head; and he drew a deep breath, as if he had just escaped from a dungeon--"Monsieur, if I had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a /sans-culotte/. I was more like an Esquimaux than a Frenchman--I, who had formerly been considered one of the smartest of fops in 1799!--I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

°°°°"Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier's name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; but though I recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin's mouth opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known. It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was, then, unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former friends!

°°°°"I had once saved Boutin's life, but it was only the repayment of a debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but, like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I recalled them to his mind his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me, were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered triumphantly.

°°°°"He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon's first abdication. That news was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

°°°°"We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland, Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies. Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert. That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage, whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose only protector is the Almighty.--Nay, I am wrong! I had a father--the Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see /his Chabert/, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my wife's silence!

°°°°"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar. Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me. I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

°°°°"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu. There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me! Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

°°°°"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur, knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury, "when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

°°°°"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness; well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not know what will become of me!"

°°°°With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

°°°°"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg, it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

°°°°"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I fail, I can die--but not alone."

°°°°The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy, lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

°°°°"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

°°°°"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

°°°°"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to recover; you are rich."

°°°°This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

°°°°"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

°°°°The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville, and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

°°°°"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

°°°°The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs, and held a light for him.

°°°°"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the day."

°°°°When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

°°°°"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.

°°°°About three months after this interview, at night, in Derville's room, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville's account to his eccentric client, came to consult the attorney on a serious matter, and began by begging him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

°°°°"Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?" said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought up the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

°°°°"I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair," replied Derville. "My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty- five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism."

°°°°As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers his head clerk had laid out for him. His eye was struck by the appearance of the stamps--long, square, and triangular, in red and blue ink, which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

°°°°"Ah ha!" said he with a laugh, "here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!"

°°°°He took up the letter and opened it; but he could not read it; it was written in German.

°°°°"Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately," said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

°°°°The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, all perfectly regular and duly witnessed, and legally stamped to serve as evidence in law. He also informed him that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

°°°°"This looks like business," cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. "But look here, my boy," he went on, addressing the notary, "I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?"

°°°°"We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin," interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

°°°°"Well, was it not that ill-used man who has just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients' money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert's estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud."

°°°°"Yes," said Crottat. "It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollections, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at the time of his decease, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury."

°°°°"So that Comte Chabert's personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?"

°°°°"Consequently so it was, old fellow!" said Crottat. "You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other."

°°°°Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint- Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were rather too deep for cab wheels. Looking about him on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, "Vergniaud, dairyman." To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, all painted in white. The gate was open, and no doubt remained open all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels built in the neighborhood of Paris, which are like nothing else, not even the most wretched dwellings in the country, of which they have all the poverty without their poetry.

°°°°Indeed, in the midst of the fields, even a hovel may have a certain grace derived from the pure air, the verdure, the open country--a hill, a serpentine road, vineyards, quickset hedges, moss-grown thatch and rural implements; but poverty in Paris gains dignity only by horror. Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found a legitimate use; they had been collected from the various demolitions which are going on every day in Paris. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, "Fancy Goods." The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed to be the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil, and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall of this frail construction, which seemed rather more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred their numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes, the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough deal boards nailed so as to overlap, and shabbily thatched with rushes.

°°°°Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of the necessity for being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags that were used to clean them, fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat was munching the shoots of a starved and dusty vine that clung to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, was licking them over. The fowls, scared by Derville's approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

°°°°"And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!" said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the general effect of the squalid scene.

°°°°The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, in the hope that they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole thing tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither of them replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity, if I may combine those two words. Derville repeated his questions, but without success. Provoked by the saucy cunning of these three imps, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry which young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

°°°°The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold of his doorway with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely- colored pipe--a technical phrase to a smoker--a humble, short clay pipe of the kind called "/brule-queule/." He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join his benefactor the sooner, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

°°°°"Silence in the ranks!"

°°°°The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

°°°°"Why did you not write to me?" he said to Derville. "Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there," he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer's hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

°°°°Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; and, in fact, Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel's bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread two or three of those old fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating salt-petre, green with mould, and full of cracks, were so excessively damp that on the side where the Colonel's bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the /Bulletins de la Grande Armee/, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel's reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit to Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived in them traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

°°°°"Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?" he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

°°°°"But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!"

°°°°The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the deplorable experience which they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

°°°°"Here," said he to himself, "is a man who has of course spent my money in satisfying a trooper's three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!"

°°°°"To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----" And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--"I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace."

°°°°Derville reflected that there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums of money he had advanced, so he merely said:

°°°°"But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, but where you would have been better lodged?"

°°°°"Why," replied the Colonel, "the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me /gratis/ for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old /Egyptian/--"

°°°°"An Egyptian!"

°°°°"We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read."

°°°°"He might have lodged you better for your money," said Derville.

°°°°"Bah!" said the Colonel, "his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune . . . However, it does very well."

°°°°"Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!"

°°°°"Curse the money! To think I haven't got any!" he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

°°°°Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

°°°°"Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business," said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

°°°°"To me," said the soldier, "it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau."

°°°°"Things are not done so in the legal world," said Derville. "Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing that justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

°°°°"In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets."

°°°°"And my fortune?"

°°°°"Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?"

°°°°"Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?"

°°°°"My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs."

°°°°"And you call that justice!" said the Colonel, in dismay.

°°°°"Why, certainly--"

°°°°"A pretty kind of justice!"

°°°°"So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, that what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor."

°°°°"But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----"

°°°°"I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to."

°°°°"That would be to sell my wife!"

°°°°"With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in the position in which you are, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice."

°°°°"Let us go together."

°°°°"What, just as you are?" said the lawyer. "No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot."

°°°°"Can I possibly gain it?"

°°°°"On every count," replied Derville. "But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor."

°°°°"To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that," said he simply.

°°°°"Well, until then," Derville went on, "will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it."

°°°°Large tears gathered in the poor veteran's faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

°°°°"I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!" he cried. "I will call out: 'I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!'--The statue--he--he will know me."

°°°°"And you will find yourself in Charenton."

°°°°At this terrible name the soldier's transports collapsed.

°°°°"And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?"

°°°°"The war office!" said Derville. "Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire."

°°°°The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

°°°°His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements, which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

°°°°Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

°°°°"Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests."

°°°°"Do what you will," said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death."

°°°°"Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?"

°°°°"That is not my view of it," said the lawyer. "We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud's intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension."

°°°°"Well, proceed then," said Chabert. "I put myself entirely in your hands."

°°°°"I will send you a power of attorney to sign," said Derville. "Good- bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me."

°°°°Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer's hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him excepting with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

°°°°During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer's; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir," said he, taking Derville by the arm, "if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General's."

°°°°"And what then?" replied Derville. "What concern have you with him?-- But who are you?" said the cautious lawyer.

°°°°"I am Louis Vergniaud," he replied at once. "I have a few words to say to you."

°°°°"So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?"

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think? --Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it's neighbors' fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings."

°°°°"He?"

°°°°"Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, 'Really, General----' 'Bah!' says he, 'I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.'--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados-- Do you know him, sir?"

°°°°"But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you."

°°°°"He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it's just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----"

°°°°Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

°°°°"On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!" thought he.

°°°°"All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure."

°°°°"And will that be soon?"

°°°°"Why, yes."

°°°°"Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!" and the cowkeeper's tanned face seemed to expand.

°°°°"Now," said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, "let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but . . ."

°°°°And he set to work to study the Countess' position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves up when concocting their own plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

°°°°But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer's cleverness.

°°°°Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old /Parlement/ of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon's blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor's advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised the restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

°°°°The Emperor fell.

°°°°At the time of Comte Chabert's death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband's fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving of this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband's will; but Napoleon's hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count's marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

°°°°Then came the Restoration. The Count's political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the "Gulf of Revolution should be closed"--for this phrase of the King's, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer's preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

°°°°Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master's influence, and he made the Count's fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness of which most women have a share more or less, understood the man's motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well, that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

°°°°The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess' abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress' capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on the housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess' greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

°°°°At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert's widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

°°°°A speech he made, /a propos/ of Talleyrand's marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess' heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband's return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

°°°°"There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud's position," said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. "How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the /pairie/ by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the /Parlement/ is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King's great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess," thought he as he went up the steps.

°°°°Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

°°°°She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, while playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert's wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

°°°°"The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them."

°°°°A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

°°°°"Good-morning, Monsieur Derville," said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

°°°°"Madame," said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. "I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter."

°°°°"I am so /grieved/, M. le Comte is away--"

°°°°"I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count."

°°°°"Then I will send for Delbecq," said she.

°°°°"He would be of no use to you, clever as he is," replied Derville. "Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!"

°°°°"Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?" said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

°°°°"Madame," he said with cold and piercing solemnity, "you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point."

°°°°"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

°°°°"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

°°°°"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come."

°°°°"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

°°°°"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--"

°°°°"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

°°°°"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----"

°°°°The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's attorney, be so good as to--"

°°°°"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening."

°°°°"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

°°°°"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

°°°°"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

°°°°"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you."

°°°°"And who is he?"

°°°°"Comte Ferraud."

°°°°"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--"

°°°°"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--"

°°°°"He would defend me, monsieur."

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

°°°°"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

°°°°The Countess turned pale.

°°°°"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

°°°°"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?"

°°°°"Compromise!" said Derville.

°°°°"Does he still love me?" she said.

°°°°"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

°°°°The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

°°°°"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.

°°°°A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and seemed to have acquired youth and /impasto/, to borrow a picturesque word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture and a book.

°°°°When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville's office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off, when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a dress which, though simple, was cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was. She wore a pretty drawn bonnet lined with pink, which framed her face to perfection, softening its outlines and making it look younger.

°°°°If the clients were rejuvenescent, the office was unaltered, and presented the same picture as that described at the beginning of this story. Simonnin was eating his breakfast, his shoulder leaning against the window, which was then open, and he was staring up at the blue sky in the opening of the courtyard enclosed by four gloomy houses.

°°°°"Ah, ha!" cried the little clerk, "who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?"

°°°°"The chief is a great magician," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Then there is no trick to play on him this time?" asked Desroches.

°°°°"His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud," said Boucard.

°°°°"What next?" said Godeschal. "Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?"

°°°°"Here she is," answered Simonnin.

°°°°"So you are not deaf, you young rogue!" said Chabert, taking the gutter-jumper by the ear and twisting it, to the delight of the other clerks, who began to laugh, looking at the Colonel with the curious attention due to so singular a personage.

°°°°Comte Chabert was in Derville's private room at the moment when his wife came in by the door of the office.

°°°°"I say, Boucard, there is going to be a queer scene in the chief's room! There is a woman who can spend her days alternately, the odd with Comte Ferraud, and the even with Comte Chabert."

°°°°"And in leap year," said Godeschal, "they must settle the /count/ between them."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen, you can be heard!" said Boucard severely. "I never was in an office where there was so much jesting as there is here over the clients."

°°°°Derville had made the Colonel retire to the bedroom when the Countess was admitted.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert, I have placed you apart. If, however, you should wish it--"

°°°°"It is an attention for which I am obliged to you."

°°°°"I have drawn up the memorandum of an agreement of which you and M. Chabert can discuss the conditions, here, and now. I will go alternately to him and to you, and explain your views respectively."

°°°°"Let me see, monsieur," said the Countess impatiently.

°°°°Derville read aloud:

°°°°" 'Between the undersigned:

°°°°" 'M. Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, Marechal de Camp, and Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, living in Paris, Rue du Petit-Banquier, on the one part;

°°°°" 'And Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the aforesaid M. le Comte Chabert, /nee/--' "

°°°°"Pass over the preliminaries," said she. "Come to the conditions."

°°°°"Madame," said the lawyer, "the preamble briefly sets forth the position in which you stand to each other. Then, by the first clause, you acknowledge, in the presence of three witnesses, of whom two shall be notaries, and one the dairyman with whom your husband has been lodging, to all of whom your secret is known, and who will be absolutely silent--you acknowledge, I say, that the individual designated in the documents subjoined to the deed, and whose identity is to be further proved by an act of recognition prepared by your notary, Alexandre Crottat, is your first husband, Comte Chabert. By the second clause Comte Chabert, to secure your happiness, will undertake to assert his rights only under certain circumstances set forth in the deed.--And these," said Derville, in a parenthesis, "are none other than a failure to carry out the conditions of this secret agreement.--M. Chabert, on his part, agrees to accept judgment on a friendly suit, by which his certificate of death shall be annulled, and his marriage dissolved."

°°°°"That will not suit me in the least," said the Countess with surprise. "I will be a party to no suit; you know why."

°°°°"By the third clause," Derville went on, with imperturbable coolness, "you pledge yourself to secure to Hyacinthe Comte Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock held in his name, to revert to you at his death--"

°°°°"But it is much too dear!" exclaimed the Countess.

°°°°"Can you compromise the matter cheaper?"

°°°°"Possibly."

°°°°"But what do you want, madame?"

°°°°"I want--I will not have a lawsuit. I want--"

°°°°"You want him to remain dead?" said Derville, interrupting her hastily.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, "if twenty-four thousand francs a year are necessary, we will go to law--"

°°°°"Yes, we will go to law," said the Colonel in a deep voice, as he opened the door and stood before his wife, with one hand in his waistcoat and the other hanging by his side--an attitude to which the recollection of his adventure gave horrible significance.

°°°°"It is he," said the Countess to herself.

°°°°"Too dear!" the old soldier exclaimed. "I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you--you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved--"

°°°°"But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!" cried the Countess, in feigned amazement.

°°°°"Indeed!" said the old man, in a tone of intense irony. "Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais Royal----"

°°°°The Countess turned pale. Seeing her grow white under her rouge, the old soldier paused, touched by the acute suffering he was inflicting on the woman he had once so ardently loved; but she shot such a venomous glance at him that he abruptly went on:

°°°°"You were with La--"

°°°°"Allow me, Monsieur Derville," said the Countess to the lawyer. "You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things."

°°°°She rose and went out. Derville rushed after her; but the Countess had taken wings, and seemed to have flown from the place.

°°°°On returning to his private room, he found the Colonel in a towering rage, striding up and down.

°°°°"In those times a man took his wife where he chose," said he. "But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted to appearances. She has no heart."

°°°°"Well, Colonel, was I not right to beg you not to come?--I am now positive of your identity; when you came in, the Countess gave a little start, of which the meaning was unequivocal. But you have lost your chances. Your wife knows that you are unrecognizable."

°°°°"I will kill her!"

°°°°"Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch. Besides you might miss! That would be unpardonable. A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife.--Let me set things straight; you are only a big child. Go now. Take care of yourself; she is capable of setting some trap for you and shutting you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you against a surprise."

°°°°The unhappy Colonel obeyed his young benefactor, and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly went down the dark staircase, lost in gloomy thoughts, and crushed perhaps by the blow just dealt him--the most cruel he could feel, the thrust that could most deeply pierce his heart--when he heard the rustle of a woman's dress on the lowest landing, and his wife stood before him.

°°°°"Come, monsieur," said she, taking his arm with a gesture like those familiar to him of old. Her action and the accent of her voice, which had recovered its graciousness, were enough to allay the Colonel's wrath, and he allowed himself to be led to the carriage.

°°°°"Well, get in!" said she, when the footman had let down the step.

°°°°And as if by magic, he found himself sitting by his wife in the brougham.

°°°°"Where to?" asked the servant.

°°°°"To Groslay," said she.

°°°°The horses started at once, and carried them all across Paris.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, in a tone of voice which betrayed one of those emotions which are rare in our lives, and which agitate every part of our being. At such moments the heart, fibres, nerves, countenance, soul, and body, everything, every pore even, feels a thrill. Life no longer seems to be within us; it flows out, springs forth, is communicated as if by contagion, transmitted by a look, a tone of voice, a gesture, impressing our will on others. The old soldier started on hearing this single word, this first, terrible "monsieur!" But still it was at once a reproach and a pardon, a hope and a despair, a question and an answer. This word included them all; none but an actress could have thrown so much eloquence, so many feelings into a single word. Truth is less complete in its utterance; it does not put everything on the outside; it allows us to see what is within. The Colonel was filled with remorse for his suspicions, his demands, and his anger; he looked down not to betray his agitation.

°°°°"Monsieur," repeated she, after an imperceptible pause, "I knew you at once."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old soldier, "those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes."

°°°°Two large tears rolled hot on to his wife's hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

°°°°"Monsieur," she went on, "could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false as mine now is? If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in the privacy of my family. Ought not such a secret to remain buried in our hearts? You will forgive me, I hope, for my apparent indifference to the woes of a Chabert in whose existence I could not possibly believe. I received your letters," she hastily added, seeing in his face the objection it expressed, "but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing was unrecognizable; and after obtaining Napoleon's signature to my second marriage contract, I could not help believing that some clever swindler wanted to make a fool of me. Therefore, to avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud's peace of mind, and disturbing family ties, I was obliged to take precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right, I ask you?"

°°°°"Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot, the owl, the dolt, not to have calculated better what the consequences of such a position might be.--But where are we going?" he asked, seeing that they had reached the barrier of La Chapelle.

°°°°"To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There, monsieur, we will consider the steps to be taken. I know my duties. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? We need not inform the public of a situation, which for me has its ridiculous side, and let us preserve our dignity. You still love me," she said, with a sad, sweet gaze at the Colonel, "but have not I been authorized to form other ties? In so strange a position, a secret voice bids me trust to your kindness, which is so well known to me. Can I be wrong in taking you as the sole arbiter of my fate? Be at once judge and party to the suit. I trust in your noble character; you will be generous enough to forgive me for the consequences of faults committed in innocence. I may then confess to you: I love M. Ferraud. I believed that I had a right to love him. I do not blush to make this confession to you; even if it offends you, it does not disgrace us. I cannot conceal the facts. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother."

°°°°The Colonel with a wave of his hand bid his wife be silent, and for a mile and a half they sat without speaking a single word. Chabert could fancy he saw the two little ones before him.

°°°°"Rosine."

°°°°"Monsieur?"

°°°°"The dead are very wrong to come to life again."

°°°°"Oh, monsieur, no, no! Do not think me ungrateful. Only, you find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old man in a softened tone, "I no longer feel any resentment against you. We will forget anything," he added, with one of those smiles which always reflect a noble soul; "I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me."

°°°°The Countess gave him a flashing look full of such deep gratitude that poor Chabert would have been glad to sink again into his grave at Eylau. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion, of which the whole reward consists in the assurance that they have made the person they love happy.

°°°°"My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested," said the Countess.

°°°°The conversation turned to other subjects, for it was impossible to dwell very long on this one. Though the couple came back again and again to their singular position, either by some allusion or of serious purpose, they had a delightful drive, recalling the events of their former life together and the times of the Empire. The Countess knew how to lend peculiar charm to her reminiscences, and gave the conversation the tinge of melancholy that was needed to keep it serious. She revived his love without awakening his desires, and allowed her first husband to discern the mental wealth she had acquired while trying to accustom him to moderate his pleasure to that which a father may feel in the society of a favorite daughter.

°°°°The Colonel had known the Countess of the Empire; he found her a Countess of the Restoration.

°°°°At last, by a cross-road, they arrived at the entrance to a large park lying in the little valley which divides the heights of Margency from the pretty village of Groslay. The Countess had there a delightful house, where the Colonel on arriving found everything in readiness for his stay there, as well as for his wife's. Misfortune is a kind of talisman whose virtue consists in its power to confirm our original nature; in some men it increases their distrust and malignancy, just as it improves the goodness of those who have a kind heart.

°°°°Sorrow had made the Colonel even more helpful and good than he had always been, and he could understand some secrets of womanly distress which are unrevealed to most men. Nevertheless, in spite of his loyal trustfulness, he could not help saying to his wife:

°°°°"Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?"

°°°°"Yes," replied she, "if I found Colonel Chabert in Derville's client."

°°°°The appearance of truth she contrived to give to this answer dissipated the slight suspicions which the Colonel was ashamed to have felt. For three days the Countess was quite charming to her first husband. By tender attentions and unfailing sweetness she seemed anxious to wipe out the memory of the sufferings he had endured, and to earn forgiveness for the woes which, as she confessed, she had innocently caused him. She delighted in displaying for him the charms she knew he took pleasure in, while at the same time she assumed a kind of melancholy; for men are more especially accessible to certain ways, certain graces of the heart or of the mind which they cannot resist. She aimed at interesting him in her position, and appealing to his feelings so far as to take possession of his mind and control him despotically.

°°°°Ready for anything to attain her ends, she did not yet know what she was to do with this man; but at any rate she meant to annihilate him socially. On the evening of the third day she felt that in spite of her efforts she could not conceal her uneasiness as to the results of her manoeuvres. To give herself a minute's reprieve she went up to her room, sat down before her writing-table, and laid aside the mask of composure which she wore in Chabert's presence, like an actress who, returning to her dressing-room after a fatiguing fifth act, drops half dead, leaving with the audience an image of herself which she no longer resembles. She proceeded to finish a letter she had begun to Delbecq, whom she desired to go in her name and demand of Derville the deeds relating to Colonel Chabert, to copy them, and to come to her at once to Groslay. She had hardly finished when she heard the Colonel's step in the passage; uneasy at her absence, he had come to look for her.

°°°°"Alas!" she exclaimed, "I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable . . ."

°°°°"Why, what is the matter?" asked the good man.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing!" she replied.

°°°°She rose, left the Colonel, and went down to speak privately to her maid, whom she sent off to Paris, impressing on her that she was herself to deliver to Delbecq the letter just written, and to bring it back to the writer as soon as he had read it. Then the Countess went out to sit on a bench sufficiently in sight for the Colonel to join her as soon as he might choose. The Colonel, who was looking for her, hastened up and sat down by her.

°°°°"Rosine," said he, "what is the matter with you?"

°°°°She did not answer.

°°°°It was one of those glorious, calm evenings in the month of June, whose secret harmonies infuse such sweetness into the sunset. The air was clear, the stillness perfect, so that far away in the park they could hear the voices of some children, which added a kind of melody to the sublimity of the scene.

°°°°"You do not answer me?" the Colonel said to his wife.

°°°°"My husband----" said the Countess, who broke off, started a little, and with a blush stopped to ask him, "What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?"

°°°°"Call him your husband, my poor child," replied the Colonel, in a kind voice. "Is he not the father of your children?"

°°°°"Well, then," she said, "if he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out that I came here, alone, with a stranger, what am I to say to him? Listen, monsieur," she went on, assuming a dignified attitude, "decide my fate, I am resigned to anything--"

°°°°"My dear," said the Colonel, taking possession of his wife's hands, "I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness--"

°°°°"That is impossible!" she exclaimed, with a sudden spasmodic movement. "Remember that you would have to renounce your identity, and in an authenticated form."

°°°°"What?" said the Colonel. "Is not my word enough for you?"

°°°°The word "authenticated" fell on the old man's heart, and roused involuntary distrust. He looked at his wife in a way that made her color, she cast down her eyes, and he feared that he might find himself compelled to despise her. The Countess was afraid lest she had scared the shy modesty, the stern honesty, of a man whose generous temper and primitive virtues were known to her. Though these feelings had brought the clouds to her brow, they immediately recovered their harmony. This was the way of it. A child's cry was heard in the distance.

°°°°"Jules, leave your sister in peace," the Countess called out.

°°°°"What, are your children here?" said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but I told them not to trouble you."

°°°°The old soldier understood the delicacy, the womanly tact of so gracious a precaution, and took the Countess' hand to kiss it.

°°°°"But let them come," said he.

°°°°The little girl ran up to complain of her brother.

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"It was Jules--"

°°°°"It was her--"

°°°°Their little hands were held out to their mother, and the two childish voices mingled; it was an unexpected and charming picture.

°°°°"Poor little things!" cried the Countess, no longer restraining her tears, "I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother's heart cannot be divided; I want them, I want them."

°°°°"Are you making mamma cry?" said Jules, looking fiercely at the Colonel.

°°°°"Silence, Jules!" said the mother in a decided tone.

°°°°The two children stood speechless, examining their mother and the stranger with a curiosity which it is impossible to express in words.

°°°°"Oh yes!" she cried. "If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything . . ."

°°°°This was the decisive speech which gained all that she had hoped from it.

°°°°"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, as if he were ending a sentence already begun in his mind, "I must return underground again. I had told myself so already."

°°°°"Can I accept such a sacrifice?" replied his wife. "If some men have died to save a mistress' honor, they gave their life but once. But in this case you would be giving your life every day. No, no. It is impossible. If it were only your life, it would be nothing; but to sign a declaration that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to sacrifice your honor, and live a lie every hour of the day! Human devotion cannot go so far. Only think!--No. But for my poor children I would have fled with you by this time to the other end of the world."

°°°°"But," said Chabert, "cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn out as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but a little tobacco and the /Constitutionnel/."

°°°°The Countess melted into tears. There was a contest of generosity between the Comtesse Ferraud and Colonel Chabert, and the soldier came out victorious. One evening, seeing this mother with her children, the soldier was bewitched by the touching grace of a family picture in the country, in the shade and the silence; he made a resolution to remain dead, and, frightened no longer at the authentication of a deed, he asked what he could do to secure beyond all risk the happiness of this family.

°°°°"Do exactly as you like," said the Countess. "I declare to you that I will have nothing to do with this affair. I ought not."

°°°°Delbecq had arrived some days before, and in obedience to the Countess' verbal instructions, the intendant had succeeded in gaining the old soldier's confidence. So on the following morning Colonel Chabert went with the erewhile attorney to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had caused the notary to draw up an affidavit in such terms that, after hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

°°°°"Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!" he exclaimed.

°°°°"Indeed, monsieur," said Delbecq, "I should advise you not to sign in haste. In your place I would get at least thirty thousand francs a year out of the bargain. Madame would pay them."

°°°°After annihilating this scoundrel /emeritus/ by the lightning look of an honest man insulted, the Colonel rushed off, carried away by a thousand contrary emotions. He was suspicious, indignant, and calm again by turns.

°°°°Finally he made his way back into the park of Groslay by a gap in a fence, and slowly walked on to sit down and rest, and meditate at his ease, in a little room under a gazebo, from which the road to Saint- Leu could be seen. The path being strewn with the yellowish sand which is used instead of river-gravel, the Countess, who was sitting in the upper room of this little summer-house, did not hear the Colonel's approach, for she was too much preoccupied with the success of her business to pay the smallest attention to the slight noise made by her husband. Nor did the old man notice that his wife was in the room over him.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur Delbecq, has he signed?" the Countess asked her secretary, whom she saw alone on the road beyond the hedge of a haha.

°°°°"No, madame. I do not even know what has become of our man. The old horse reared."

°°°°"Then we shall be obliged to put him into Charenton," said she, "since we have got him."

°°°°The Colonel, who recovered the elasticity of youth to leap the haha, in the twinkling of an eye was standing in front of Delbecq, on whom he bestowed the two finest slaps that ever a scoundrel's cheeks received.

°°°°"And you may add that old horses can kick!" said he.

°°°°His rage spent, the Colonel no longer felt vigorous enough to leap the ditch. He had seen the truth in all its nakedness. The Countess' speech and Delbecq's reply had revealed the conspiracy of which he was to be the victim. The care taken of him was but a bait to entrap him in a snare. That speech was like a drop of subtle poison, bringing on in the old soldier a return of all his sufferings, physical and moral. He came back to the summer-house through the park gate, walking slowly like a broken man.

°°°°Then for him there was to be neither peace nor truce. From this moment he must begin the odious warfare with this woman of which Derville had spoken, enter on a life of litigation, feed on gall, drink every morning of the cup of bitterness. And then--fearful thought!--where was he to find the money needful to pay the cost of the first proceedings? He felt such disgust of life, that if there had been any water at hand he would have thrown himself into it; that if he had had a pistol, he would have blown out his brains. Then he relapsed into the indecision of mind which, since his conversation with Derville at the dairyman's had changed his character.

°°°°At last, having reached the kiosque, he went up to the gazebo, where little rose-windows afforded a view over each lovely landscape of the valley, and where he found his wife seated on a chair. The Countess was gazing at the distance, and preserved a calm countenance, showing that impenetrable face which women can assume when resolved to do their worst. She wiped her eyes as if she had been weeping, and played absently with the pink ribbons of her sash. Nevertheless, in spite of her apparent assurance, she could not help shuddering slightly when she saw before her her venerable benefactor, standing with folded arms, his face pale, his brow stern.

°°°°"Madame," he said, after gazing at her fixedly for a moment and compelling her to blush, "Madame, I do not curse you--I scorn you. I can now thank the chance that has divided us. I do not feel even a desire for revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on the strength of my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps have made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of the sunshine.--Farewell!"

°°°°The Countess threw herself at his feet; she would have detained him by taking his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust, saying:

°°°°"Do not touch me!"

°°°°The Countess' expression when she heard her husband's retreating steps is quite indescribable. Then, with the deep perspicacity given only by utter villainy, or by fierce worldly selfishness, she knew that she might live in peace on the word and the contempt of this loyal veteran.

°°°°Chabert, in fact, disappeared. The dairyman failed in business, and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel, perhaps, took up some similar industry for a time. Perhaps, like a stone flung into a chasm, he went falling from ledge to ledge, to be lost in the mire of rags that seethes through the streets of Paris.

°°°°Six months after this event, Derville, hearing no more of Colonel Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed that they had no doubt come to a compromise, which the Countess, out of revenge, had had arranged by some other lawyer. So one morning he added up the sums he had advanced to the said Chabert with the costs, and begged the Comtesse Ferraud to claim from M. le Comte Chabert the amount of the bill, assuming that she would know where to find her first husband.

°°°°The very next day Comte Ferraud's man of business, lately appointed President of the County Court in a town of some importance, wrote this distressing note to Derville:

°°°°"MONSIEUR,--

°°°°"Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your   client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the   individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he   came forward under false pretences. "Yours, etc.,                DELBECQ."

°°°°"One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half," cried Derville. "They don't deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand- franc notes!"

°°°°Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader to whom he wished to speak, and who was employed in the Police Court. As chance would have it, Derville went into Court Number 6 at the moment when the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months' imprisonment as a vagabond, and subsequently to be taken to the Mendicity House of Detention, a sentence which, by magistrates' law, is equivalent to perpetual imprisonment. On hearing the name of Hyacinthe, Derville looked at the deliquent, sitting between two /gendarmes/ on the bench for the accused, and recognized in the condemned man his false Colonel Chabert.

°°°°The old soldier was placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In spite of his rags, in spite of the misery stamped on his countenance, it gave evidence of noble pride. His eye had a stoical expression which no magistrate ought to have misunderstood; but as soon as a man has fallen into the hands of justice, he is no more than a moral entity, a matter of law or of fact, just as to statists he has become a zero.

°°°°When the veteran was taken back to the lock-up, to be removed later with the batch of vagabonds at that moment at the bar, Derville availed himself of the privilege accorded to lawyers of going wherever they please in the Courts, and followed him to the lock-up, where he stood scrutinizing him for some minutes, as well as the curious crew of beggars among whom he found himself. The passage to the lock-up at that moment afforded one of those spectacles which, unfortunately, neither legislators, nor philanthropists, nor painters, nor writers come to study. Like all the laboratories of the law, this ante-room is a dark and malodorous place; along the walls runs a wooden seat, blackened by the constant presence there of the wretches who come to this meeting-place of every form of social squalor, where not one of them is missing.

°°°°A poet might say that the day was ashamed to light up this dreadful sewer through which so much misery flows! There is not a spot on that plank where some crime has not sat, in embryo or matured; not a corner where a man has never stood who, driven to despair by the blight which justice has set upon him after his first fault, has not there begun a career, at the end of which looms the guillotine or the pistol-snap of the suicide. All who fall on the pavement of Paris rebound against these yellow-gray walls, on which a philanthropist who was not a speculator might read a justification of the numerous suicides complained of by hypocritical writers who are incapable of taking a step to prevent them--for that justification is written in that ante- room, like a preface to the dramas of the Morgue, or to those enacted on the Place de la Greve.

°°°°At this moment Colonel Chabert was sitting among these men--men with coarse faces, clothed in the horrible livery of misery, and silent at intervals, or talking in a low tone, for three gendarmes on duty paced to and fro, their sabres clattering on the floor.

°°°°"Do you recognize me?" said Derville to the old man, standing in front of him.

°°°°"Yes, sir," said Chabert, rising.

°°°°"If you are an honest man," Derville went on in an undertone, "how could you remain in my debt?"

°°°°The old soldier blushed as a young girl might when accused by her mother of a clandestine love affair.

°°°°"What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?" cried he in a loud voice.

°°°°"Paid me?" said Derville. "She wrote to me that you were a swindler."

°°°°The Colonel cast up his eyes in a sublime impulse of horror and imprecation, as if to call heaven to witness to this fresh subterfuge.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, in a voice that was calm by sheer huskiness, "get the gendarmes to allow me to go into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored."

°°°°At a word from Derville to the sergeant he was allowed to take his client into the room, where Hyacinthe wrote a few lines, and addressed them to the Comtesse Ferraud.

°°°°"Send her that," said the soldier, "and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is not the less there," and he laid his hand on his heart. "Yes, it is there, deep and sincere. But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all."

°°°°"What!" said Derville. "Did you not stipulate for an allowance?"

°°°°"Do not speak of it!" cried the old man. "You cannot conceive how deep my contempt is for the outside life to which most men cling. I was suddenly attacked by a sickness--disgust of humanity. When I think that Napoleon is at Saint-Helena, everything on earth is a matter of indifference to me. I can no longer be a soldier; that is my only real grief. After all," he added with a gesture of childish simplicity, "it is better to enjoy luxury of feeling than of dress. For my part, I fear nobody's contempt."

°°°°And the Colonel sat down on his bench again.

°°°°Derville went away. On returning to his office, he sent Godeschal, at that time his second clerk, to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert's lawyer.

°°°°In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now himself an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, to whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal's staff among beggars by living on at Bicetre as poor women live on at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures who are lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners, which consists in drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords to its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

°°°°"I say, Derville," said Godeschal to his traveling companion, "look at that old fellow. Isn't he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy."

°°°°Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

°°°°"That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?"

°°°°"Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious," said Godeschal.

°°°°"That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger's glare she shot at him at that moment."

°°°°This opening having excited Godeschal's curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

°°°°Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

°°°°"Good-morning, Colonel Chabert," said Derville.

°°°°"Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe," replied the veteran. "I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7," he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--"Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?" he asked after a moment's silence. "He is not married! He is very lucky!"

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Godeschal. "Would you like something to buy snuff?"

°°°°With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

°°°°"Brave troopers!"

°°°°He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

°°°°"Fire! both arms! /Vive Napoleon/!" And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

°°°°"The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish," said Derville.

°°°°"Childish! he?" said another old pauper, who was looking on. "Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, 'Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.'--'I was too young to be there,' said Hyacinthe. 'But I was at Jena.' And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions."

°°°°"What a destiny!" exclaimed Derville. "Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow," Derville went on after a pause, "there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

°°°°"How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris."

°°°°"I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches' office," replied Godeschal.

°°°°PARIS, February-March 1832.

°°°°End



°°°°Father Goriot

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage

°°°°To the great and illustrious Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a token of admiration for his works and genius. DE BALZAC.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans) is an elderly person, who for the past forty years has kept a lodging-house in the Rue Nueve- Sainte-Genevieve, in the district that lies between the Latin Quarter and the Faubourg Saint-Marcel. Her house (known in the neighborhood as the Maison Vauquer) receives men and women, old and young, and no word has ever been breathed against her respectable establishment; but, at the same time, it must be said that as a matter of fact no young woman has been under her roof for thirty years, and that if a young man stays there for any length of time it is a sure sign that his allowance must be of the slenderest. In 1819, however, the time when this drama opens, there was an almost penniless young girl among Mme. Vauquer's boarders.

°°°°That word drama has been somewhat discredited of late; it has been overworked and twisted to strange uses in these days of dolorous literature; but it must do service again here, not because this story is dramatic in the restricted sense of the word, but because some tears may perhaps be shed intra et extra muros before it is over.

°°°°Will any one without the walls of Paris understand it? It is open to doubt. The only audience who could appreciate the results of close observation, the careful reproduction of minute detail and local color, are dwellers between the heights of Montrouge and Montmartre, in a vale of crumbling stucco watered by streams of black mud, a vale of sorrows which are real and joys too often hollow; but this audience is so accustomed to terrible sensations, that only some unimaginable and well-neigh impossible woe could produce any lasting impression there. Now and again there are tragedies so awful and so grand by reason of the complication of virtues and vices that bring them about, that egotism and selfishness are forced to pause and are moved to pity; but the impression that they receive is like a luscious fruit, soon consumed. Civilization, like the car of Juggernaut, is scarcely stayed perceptibly in its progress by a heart less easy to break than the others that lie in its course; this also is broken, and Civilization continues on her course triumphant. And you, too, will do the like; you who with this book in your white hand will sink back among the cushions of your armchair, and say to yourself, "Perhaps this may amuse me." You will read the story of Father Goriot's secret woes, and, dining thereafter with an unspoiled appetite, will lay the blame of your insensibility upon the writer, and accuse him of exaggeration, of writing romances. Ah! once for all, this drama is neither a fiction nor a romance! ALL IS TRUE,--so true, that every one can discern the elements of the tragedy in his own house, perhaps in his own heart.

°°°°The lodging-house is Mme. Vauquer's own property. It is still standing in the lower end of the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, just where the road slopes so sharply down to the Rue de l'Arbalete, that wheeled traffic seldom passes that way, because it is so stony and steep. This position is sufficient to account for the silence prevalent in the streets shut in between the dome of the Pantheon and the dome of the Val-de-Grace, two conspicuous public buildings which give a yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies beneath the shadow of their leaden- hued cupolas.

°°°°In that district the pavements are clean and dry, there is neither mud nor water in the gutters, grass grows in the chinks of the walls. The most heedless passer-by feels the depressing influences of a place where the sound of wheels creates a sensation; there is a grim look about the houses, a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls. A Parisian straying into a suburb apparently composed of lodging-houses and public institutions would see poverty and dullness, old age lying down to die, and joyous youth condemned to drudgery. It is the ugliest quarter of Paris, and, it may be added, the least known. But, before all things, the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve is like a bronze frame for a picture for which the mind cannot be too well prepared by the contemplation of sad hues and sober images. Even so, step by step the daylight decreases, and the cicerone's droning voice grows hollower as the traveler descends into the Catacombs. The comparison holds good! Who shall say which is more ghastly, the sight of the bleached skulls or of dried-up human hearts?

°°°°The front of the lodging-house is at right angles to the road, and looks out upon a little garden, so that you see the side of the house in section, as it were, from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. Beneath the wall of the house front there lies a channel, a fathom wide, paved with cobble-stones, and beside it runs a graveled walk bordered by geraniums and oleanders and pomegranates set in great blue and white glazed earthenware pots. Access into the graveled walk is afforded by a door, above which the words MAISON VAUQUER may be read, and beneath, in rather smaller letters, "Lodgings for both sexes, etc."

°°°°During the day a glimpse into the garden is easily obtained through a wicket to which a bell is attached. On the opposite wall, at the further end of the graveled walk, a green marble arch was painted once upon a time by a local artist, and in this semblance of a shrine a statue representing Cupid is installed; a Parisian Cupid, so blistered and disfigured that he looks like a candidate for one of the adjacent hospitals, and might suggest an allegory to lovers of symbolism. The half-obliterated inscription on the pedestal beneath determines the date of this work of art, for it bears witness to the widespread enthusiasm felt for Voltaire on his return to Paris in 1777:

°°°°"Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;   He is, or was, or ought to be."

°°°°At night the wicket gate is replaced by a solid door. The little garden is no wider than the front of the house; it is shut in between the wall of the street and the partition wall of the neighboring house. A mantle of ivy conceals the bricks and attracts the eyes of passers-by to an effect which is picturesque in Paris, for each of the walls is covered with trellised vines that yield a scanty dusty crop of fruit, and furnish besides a subject of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her lodgers; every year the widow trembles for her vintage.

°°°°A straight path beneath the walls on either side of the garden leads to a clump of lime-trees at the further end of it; LINE- trees, as Mme. Vauquer persists in calling them, in spite of the fact that she was a de Conflans, and regardless of repeated corrections from her lodgers.

°°°°The central space between the walls is filled with artichokes and rows of pyramid fruit-trees, and surrounded by a border of lettuce, pot-herbs, and parsley. Under the lime-trees there are a few green-painted garden seats and a wooden table, and hither, during the dog-days, such of the lodgers as are rich enough to indulge in a cup of coffee come to take their pleasure, though it is hot enough to roast eggs even in the shade.

°°°°The house itself is three stories high, without counting the attics under the roof. It is built of rough stone, and covered with the yellowish stucco that gives a mean appearance to almost every house in Paris. There are five windows in each story in the front of the house; all the blinds visible through the small square panes are drawn up awry, so that the lines are all at cross purposes. At the side of the house there are but two windows on each floor, and the lowest of all are adorned with a heavy iron grating.

°°°°Behind the house a yard extends for some twenty feet, a space inhabited by a happy family of pigs, poultry, and rabbits; the wood-shed is situated on the further side, and on the wall between the wood-shed and the kitchen window hangs the meat-safe, just above the place where the sink discharges its greasy streams. The cook sweeps all the refuse out through a little door into the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, and frequently cleanses the yard with copious supplies of water, under pain of pestilence.

°°°°The house might have been built on purpose for its present uses. Access is given by a French window to the first room on the ground floor, a sitting-room which looks out upon the street through the two barred windows already mentioned. Another door opens out of it into the dining-room, which is separated from the kitchen by the well of the staircase, the steps being constructed partly of wood, partly of tiles, which are colored and beeswaxed. Nothing can be more depressing than the sight of that sitting- room. The furniture is covered with horse hair woven in alternate dull and glossy stripes. There is a round table in the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from Telemaque are depicted, the various classical personages being colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

°°°°The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the language, and which should be called the odeur de pension. The damp atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy, musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet, in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining dining- room.

°°°°The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which the lodgers' table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine, are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long table is so greasy that a waggish externe will write his name on the surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky, worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one- eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire, parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet, its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

°°°°This apartment is in all its glory at seven o'clock in the morning, when Mme. Vauquer's cat appears, announcing the near approach of his mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated countenance, and a nose like a parrot's beak set in the middle of it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn; there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and interpretation of her lodging- house, as surely as her lodging-house implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital. The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room, and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its mistress.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who "have seen a deal of trouble." She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still, "she is a good woman at bottom," said the lodgers who believed that the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

°°°°What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head. How had she lost her money? "Through trouble," was her answer. He had treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody, because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every possible misfortune.

°°°°Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress' shuffling footsteps, hastened to serve the lodgers' breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these externes usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty francs a month.

°°°°At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme. Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary- general in the service of the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred francs a year.

°°°°The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on the third floor were also let-- one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle. Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli, Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as "Father Goriot." The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of passage, to impecunious students, who like "Father Goriot" and Mlle. Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of better.

°°°°At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him. Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that their parents' hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as by those who had brought it to pass.

°°°°Above the third story there was a garret where the linen was hung to dry, and a couple of attics. Christophe, the man-of-all-work, slept in one, and Sylvie, the stout cook, in the other. Beside the seven inmates thus enumerated, taking one year with another, some eight law or medical students dined in the house, as well as two or three regular comers who lived in the neighborhood. There were usually eighteen people at dinner, and there was room, if need be, for twenty at Mme. Vauquer's table; at breakfast, however, only the seven lodgers appeared. It was almost like a family party. Every one came down in dressing-gown and slippers, and the conversation usually turned on anything that had happened the evening before; comments on the dress or appearance of the dinner contingent were exchanged in friendly confidence.

°°°°These seven lodgers were Mme. Vauquer's spoiled children. Among them she distributed, with astronomical precision, the exact proportion of respect and attention due to the varying amounts they paid for their board. One single consideration influenced all these human beings thrown together by chance. The two second- floor lodgers only paid seventy-two francs a month. Such prices as these are confined to the Faubourg Saint-Marcel and the district between La Bourbe and the Salpetriere; and, as might be expected, poverty, more or less apparent, weighed upon them all, Mme. Couture being the sole exception to the rule.

°°°°The dreary surroundings were reflected in the costumes of the inmates of the house; all were alike threadbare. The color of the men's coats were problematical; such shoes, in more fashionable quarters, are only to be seen lying in the gutter; the cuffs and collars were worn and frayed at the edges; every limp article of clothing looked like the ghost of its former self. The women's dresses were faded, old-fashioned, dyed and re-dyed; they wore gloves that were glazed with hard wear, much-mended lace, dingy ruffles, crumpled muslin fichus. So much for their clothing; but, for the most part, their frames were solid enough; their constitutions had weathered the storms of life; their cold, hard faces were worn like coins that have been withdrawn from circulation, but there were greedy teeth behind the withered lips. Dramas brought to a close or still in progress are foreshadowed by the sight of such actors as these, not the dramas that are played before the footlights and against a background of painted canvas, but dumb dramas of life, frost-bound dramas that sere hearts like fire, dramas that do not end with the actors' lives.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau, that elderly young lady, screened her weak eyes from the daylight by a soiled green silk shade with a rim of brass, an object fit to scare away the Angel of Pity himself. Her shawl, with its scanty, draggled fringe, might have covered a skeleton, so meagre and angular was the form beneath it. Yet she must have been pretty and shapely once. What corrosive had destroyed the feminine outlines? Was it trouble, or vice, or greed? Had she loved too well? Had she been a second-hand clothes dealer, a frequenter of the backstairs of great houses, or had she been merely a courtesan? Was she expiating the flaunting triumphs of a youth overcrowded with pleasures by an old age in which she was shunned by every passer-by? Her vacant gaze sent a chill through you; her shriveled face seemed like a menace. Her voice was like the shrill, thin note of the grasshopper sounding from the thicket when winter is at hand. She said that she had nursed an old gentleman, ill of catarrh of the bladder, and left to die by his children, who thought that he had nothing left. His bequest to her, a life annuity of a thousand francs, was periodically disputed by his heirs, who mingled slander with their persecutions. In spite of the ravages of conflicting passions, her face retained some traces of its former fairness and fineness of tissue, some vestiges of the physical charms of her youth still survived.

°°°°M. Poiret was a sort of automaton. He might be seen any day sailing like a gray shadow along the walks of the Jardin des Plantes, on his head a shabby cap, a cane with an old yellow ivory handle in the tips of his thin fingers; the outspread skirts of his threadbare overcoat failed to conceal his meagre figure; his breeches hung loosely on his shrunken limbs; the thin, blue-stockinged legs trembled like those of a drunken man; there was a notable breach of continuity between the dingy white waistcoat and crumpled shirt frills and the cravat twisted about a throat like a turkey gobbler's; altogether, his appearance set people wondering whether this outlandish ghost belonged to the audacious race of the sons of Japhet who flutter about on the Boulevard Italien. What devouring kind of toil could have so shriveled him? What devouring passions had darkened that bulbous countenance, which would have seemed outrageous as a caricature? What had he been? Well, perhaps he had been part of the machinery of justice, a clerk in the office to which the executioner sends in his accounts,--so much for providing black veils for parricides, so much for sawdust, so much for pulleys and cord for the knife. Or he might have been a receiver at the door of a public slaughter-house, or a sub-inspector of nuisances. Indeed, the man appeared to have been one of the beasts of burden in our great social mill; one of those Parisian Ratons whom their Bertrands do not even know by sight; a pivot in the obscure machinery that disposes of misery and things unclean; one of those men, in short, at sight of whom we are prompted to remark that, "After all, we cannot do without them."

°°°°Stately Paris ignores the existence of these faces bleached by moral or physical suffering; but, then, Paris is in truth an ocean that no line can plumb. You may survey its surface and describe it; but no matter how numerous and painstaking the toilers in this sea, there will always be lonely and unexplored regions in its depths, caverns unknown, flowers and pearls and monsters of the deep overlooked or forgotten by the divers of literature. The Maison Vauquer is one of these curious monstrosities.

°°°°Two, however, of Mme. Vauquer's boarders formed a striking contrast to the rest. There was a sickly pallor, such as is often seen in anaemic girls, in Mlle. Victorine Taillefer's face; and her unvarying expression of sadness, like her embarrassed manner and pinched look, was in keeping with the general wretchedness of the establishment in the Rue Nueve-Saint-Genevieve, which forms a background to this picture; but her face was young, there was youthfulness in her voice and elasticity in her movements. This young misfortune was not unlike a shrub, newly planted in an uncongenial soil, where its leaves have already begun to wither. The outlines of her figure, revealed by her dress of the simplest and cheapest materials, were also youthful. There was the same kind of charm about her too slender form, her faintly colored face and light-brown hair, that modern poets find in mediaeval statuettes; and a sweet expression, a look of Christian resignation in the dark gray eyes. She was pretty by force of contrast; if she had been happy, she would have been charming. Happiness is the poetry of woman, as the toilette is her tinsel. If the delightful excitement of a ball had made the pale face glow with color; if the delights of a luxurious life had brought the color to the wan cheeks that were slightly hollowed already; if love had put light into the sad eyes, then Victorine might have ranked among the fairest; but she lacked the two things which create woman a second time--pretty dresses and love- letters.

°°°°A book might have been made of her story. Her father was persuaded that he had sufficient reason for declining to acknowledge her, and allowed her a bare six hundred francs a year; he had further taken measures to disinherit his daughter, and had converted all his real estate into personalty, that he might leave it undivided to his son. Victorine's mother had died broken-hearted in Mme. Couture's house; and the latter, who was a near relation, had taken charge of the little orphan. Unluckily, the widow of the commissary-general to the armies of the Republic had nothing in the world but her jointure and her widow's pension, and some day she might be obliged to leave the helpless, inexperienced girl to the mercy of the world. The good soul, therefore, took Victorine to mass every Sunday, and to confession once a fortnight, thinking that, in any case, she would bring up her ward to be devout. She was right; religion offered a solution of the problem of the young girl's future. The poor child loved the father who refused to acknowledge her. Once every year she tried to see him to deliver her mother's message of forgiveness, but every year hitherto she had knocked at that door in vain; her father was inexorable. Her brother, her only means of communication, had not come to see her for four years, and had sent her no assistance; yet she prayed to God to unseal her father's eyes and to soften her brother's heart, and no accusations mingled with her prayers. Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exhausted the vocabulary of abuse, and failed to find words that did justice to the banker's iniquitous conduct; but while they heaped execrations on the millionaire, Victorine's words were as gentle as the moan of the wounded dove, and affection found expression even in the cry drawn from her by pain.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac was a thoroughly southern type; he had a fair complexion, blue eyes, black hair. In his figure, manner, and his whole bearing it was easy to see that he had either come of a noble family, or that, from his earliest childhood, he had been gently bred. If he was careful of his wardrobe, only taking last year's clothes into daily wear, still upon occasion he could issue forth as a young man of fashion. Ordinarily he wore a shabby coat and waistcoat, the limp black cravat, untidily knotted, that students affect, trousers that matched the rest of his costume, and boots that had been resoled.

°°°°Vautrin (the man of forty with the dyed whiskers) marked a transition stage between these two young people and the others. He was the kind of man that calls forth the remark: "He looks a jovial sort!" He had broad shoulders, a well-developed chest, muscular arms, and strong square-fisted hands; the joints of his fingers were covered with tufts of fiery red hair. His face was furrowed by premature wrinkles; there was a certain hardness about it in spite of his bland and insinuating manner. His bass voice was by no means unpleasant, and was in keeping with his boisterous laughter. He was always obliging, always in good spirits; if anything went wrong with one of the locks, he would soon unscrew it, take it to pieces, file it, oil and clean and set it in order, and put it back in its place again; "I am an old hand at it," he used to say. Not only so, he knew all about ships, the sea, France, foreign countries, men, business, law, great houses and prisons,--there was nothing that he did not know. If any one complained rather more than usual, he would offer his services at once. He had several times lent money to Mme. Vauquer, or to the boarders; but, somehow, those whom he obliged felt that they would sooner face death than fail to repay him; a certain resolute look, sometimes seen on his face, inspired fear of him, for all his appearance of easy good-nature. In the way he spat there was an imperturbable coolness which seemed to indicate that this was a man who would not stick at a crime to extricate himself from a false position. His eyes, like those of a pitiless judge, seemed to go to the very bottom of all questions, to read all natures, all feelings and thoughts. His habit of life was very regular; he usually went out after breakfast, returning in time for dinner, and disappeared for the rest of the evening, letting himself in about midnight with a latch key, a privilege that Mme. Vauquer accorded to no other boarder. But then he was on very good terms with the widow; he used to call her "mamma," and put his arm round her waist, a piece of flattery perhaps not appreciated to the full! The worthy woman might imagine this to be an easy feat; but, as a matter of fact, no arm but Vautrin's was long enough to encircle her.

°°°°It was a characteristic trait of his generously to pay fifteen francs a month for the cup of coffee with a dash of brandy in it, which he took after dinner. Less superficial observers than young men engulfed by the whirlpool of Parisian life, or old men, who took no interest in anything that did not directly concern them, would not have stopped short at the vaguely unsatisfactory impression that Vautrin made upon them. He knew or guessed the concerns of every one about him; but none of them had been able to penetrate his thoughts, or to discover his occupation. He had deliberately made his apparent good-nature, his unfailing readiness to oblige, and his high spirits into a barrier between himself and the rest of them, but not seldom he gave glimpses of appalling depths of character. He seemed to delight in scourging the upper classes of society with the lash of his tongue, to take pleasure in convicting it of inconsistency, in mocking at law and order with some grim jest worthy of Juvenal, as if some grudge against the social system rankled in him, as if there were some mystery carefully hidden away in his life.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer felt attracted, perhaps unconsciously, by the strength of the one man, and the good looks of the other; her stolen glances and secret thoughts were divided between them; but neither of them seemed to take any notice of her, although some day a chance might alter her position, and she would be a wealthy heiress. For that matter, there was not a soul in the house who took any trouble to investigate the various chronicles of misfortunes, real or imaginary, related by the rest. Each one regarded the others with indifference, tempered by suspicion; it was a natural result of their relative positions. Practical assistance not one could give, this they all knew, and they had long since exhausted their stock of condolence over previous discussions of their grievances. They were in something the same position as an elderly couple who have nothing left to say to each other. The routine of existence kept them in contact, but they were parts of a mechanism which wanted oil. There was not one of them but would have passed a blind man begging in the street, not one that felt moved to pity by a tale of misfortune, not one who did not see in death the solution of the all- absorbing problem of misery which left them cold to the most terrible anguish in others.

°°°°The happiest of these hapless beings was certainly Mme. Vauquer, who reigned supreme over this hospital supported by voluntary contributions. For her, the little garden, which silence, and cold, and rain, and drought combined to make as dreary as an Asian steppe, was a pleasant shaded nook; the gaunt yellow house, the musty odors of a back shop had charms for her, and for her alone. Those cells belonged to her. She fed those convicts condemned to penal servitude for life, and her authority was recognized among them. Where else in Paris would they have found wholesome food in sufficient quantity at the prices she charged them, and rooms which they were at liberty to make, if not exactly elegant or comfortable, at any rate clean and healthy? If she had committed some flagrant act of injustice, the victim would have borne it in silence.

°°°°Such a gathering contained, as might have been expected, the elements out of which a complete society might be constructed. And, as in a school, as in the world itself, there was among the eighteen men and women who met round the dinner table a poor creature, despised by all the others, condemned to be the butt of all their jokes. At the beginning of Eugene de Rastignac's second twelvemonth, this figure suddenly started out into bold relief against the background of human forms and faces among which the law student was yet to live for another two years to come. This laughing-stock was the retired vermicelli-merchant, Father Goriot, upon whose face a painter, like the historian, would have concentrated all the light in his picture.

°°°°How had it come about that the boarders regarded him with a half- malignant contempt? Why did they subject the oldest among their number to a kind of persecution, in which there was mingled some pity, but no respect for his misfortunes? Had he brought it on himself by some eccentricity or absurdity, which is less easily forgiven or forgotten than more serious defects? The question strikes at the root of many a social injustice. Perhaps it is only human nature to inflict suffering on anything that will endure suffering, whether by reason of its genuine humility, or indifference, or sheer helplessness. Do we not, one and all, like to feel our strength even at the expense of some one or of something? The poorest sample of humanity, the street arab, will pull the bell handle at every street door in bitter weather, and scramble up to write his name on the unsullied marble of a monument.

°°°°In the year 1813, at the age of sixty-nine or thereabouts, "Father Goriot" had sold his business and retired--to Mme. Vauquer's boarding house. When he first came there he had taken the rooms now occupied by Mme. Couture; he had paid twelve hundred francs a year like a man to whom five louis more or less was a mere trifle. For him Mme. Vauquer had made various improvements in the three rooms destined for his use, in consideration of a certain sum paid in advance, so it was said, for the miserable furniture, that is to say, for some yellow cotton curtains, a few chairs of stained wood covered with Utrecht velvet, several wretched colored prints in frames, and wall papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained. Possibly it was the careless generosity with which Father Goriot allowed himself to be overreached at this period of his life (they called him Monsieur Goriot very respectfully then) that gave Mme. Vauquer the meanest opinion of his business abilities; she looked on him as an imbecile where money was concerned.

°°°°Goriot had brought with him a considerable wardrobe, the gorgeous outfit of a retired tradesman who denies himself nothing. Mme. Vauquer's astonished eyes beheld no less than eighteen cambric- fronted shirts, the splendor of their fineness being enhanced by a pair of pins each bearing a large diamond, and connected by a short chain, an ornament which adorned the vermicelli-maker's shirt front. He usually wore a coat of corn-flower blue; his rotund and portly person was still further set off by a clean white waistcoat, and a gold chain and seals which dangled over that broad expanse. When his hostess accused him of being "a bit of a beau," he smiled with the vanity of a citizen whose foible is gratified. His cupboards (ormoires, as he called them in the popular dialect) were filled with a quantity of plate that he brought with him. The widow's eyes gleamed as she obligingly helped him to unpack the soup ladles, table-spoons, forks, cruet- stands, tureens, dishes, and breakfast services--all of silver, which were duly arranged upon shelves, besides a few more or less handsome pieces of plate, all weighing no inconsiderable number of ounces; he could not bring himself to part with these gifts that reminded him of past domestic festivals.

°°°°"This was my wife's present to me on the first anniversary of our wedding day," he said to Mme. Vauquer, as he put away a little silver posset dish, with two turtle-doves billing on the cover. "Poor dear! she spent on it all the money she had saved before we were married. Do you know, I would sooner scratch the earth with my nails for a living, madame, than part with that. But I shall be able to take my coffee out of it every morning for the rest of my days, thank the Lord! I am not to be pitied. There's not much fear of my starving for some time to come."

°°°°Finally, Mme. Vauquer's magpie's eye had discovered and read certain entries in the list of shareholders in the funds, and, after a rough calculation, was disposed to credit Goriot (worthy man) with something like ten thousand francs a year. From that day forward Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans), who, as a matter of fact, had seen forty-eight summers, though she would only own to thirty-nine of them--Mme. Vauquer had her own ideas. Though Goriot's eyes seemed to have shrunk in their sockets, though they were weak and watery, owing to some glandular affection which compelled him to wipe them continually, she considered him to be a very gentlemanly and pleasant-looking man. Moreover, the widow saw favorable indications of character in the well-developed calves of his legs and in his square-shaped nose, indications still further borne out by the worthy man's full-moon countenance and look of stupid good-nature. This, in all probability, was a strongly-build animal, whose brains mostly consisted in a capacity for affection. His hair, worn in ailes de pigeon, and duly powdered every morning by the barber from the Ecole Polytechnique, described five points on his low forehead, and made an elegant setting to his face. Though his manners were somewhat boorish, he was always as neat as a new pin and he took his snuff in a lordly way, like a man who knows that his snuff- box is always likely to be filled with maccaboy, so that when Mme. Vauquer lay down to rest on the day of M. Goriot's installation, her heart, like a larded partridge, sweltered before the fire of a burning desire to shake off the shroud of Vauquer and rise again as Goriot. She would marry again, sell her boarding-house, give her hand to this fine flower of citizenship, become a lady of consequence in the quarter, and ask for subscriptions for charitable purposes; she would make little Sunday excursions to Choisy, Soissy, Gentilly; she would have a box at the theatre when she liked, instead of waiting for the author's tickets that one of her boarders sometimes gave her, in July; the whole Eldorado of a little Parisian household rose up before Mme. Vauquer in her dreams. Nobody knew that she herself possessed forty thousand francs, accumulated sou by sou, that was her secret; surely as far as money was concerned she was a very tolerable match. "And in other respects, I am quite his equal," she said to herself, turning as if to assure herself of the charms of a form that the portly Sylvie found moulded in down feathers every morning.

°°°°For three months from that day Mme. Veuve Vauquer availed herself of the services of M. Goriot's coiffeur, and went to some expense over her toilette, expense justifiable on the ground that she owed it to herself and her establishment to pay some attention to appearances when such highly-respectable persons honored her house with their presence. She expended no small amount of ingenuity in a sort of weeding process of her lodgers, announcing her intention of receiving henceforward none but people who were in every way select. If a stranger presented himself, she let him know that M. Goriot, one of the best known and most highly- respected merchants in Paris, had singled out her boarding-house for a residence. She drew up a prospectus headed MAISON VAUQUER, in which it was asserted that hers was "one of the oldest and most highly recommended boarding-houses in the Latin Quarter." "From the windows of the house," thus ran the prospectus, "there is a charming view of the Vallee des Gobelins (so there is--from the third floor), and a BEAUTIFUL garden, EXTENDING down to AN AVENUE OF LINDENS at the further end." Mention was made of the bracing air of the place and its quiet situation.

°°°°It was this prospectus that attracted Mme. la Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil, a widow of six and thirty, who was awaiting the final settlement of her husband's affairs, and of another matter regarding a pension due to her as the wife of a general who had died "on the field of battle." On this Mme. Vauquer saw to her table, lighted a fire daily in the sitting-room for nearly six months, and kept the promise of her prospectus, even going to some expense to do so. And the Countess, on her side, addressed Mme. Vauquer as "my dear," and promised her two more boarders, the Baronne de Vaumerland and the widow of a colonel, the late Comte de Picquoisie, who were about to leave a boarding-house in the Marais, where the terms were higher than at the Maison Vauquer. Both these ladies, moreover, would be very well to do when the people at the War Office had come to an end of their formalities. "But Government departments are always so dilatory," the lady added.

°°°°After dinner the two widows went together up to Mme. Vauquer's room, and had a snug little chat over some cordial and various delicacies reserved for the mistress of the house. Mme. Vauquer's ideas as to Goriot were cordially approved by Mme. de l'Ambermesnil; it was a capital notion, which for that matter she had guessed from the very first; in her opinion the vermicelli maker was an excellent man.

°°°°"Ah! my dear lady, such a well-preserved man of his age, as sound as my eyesight--a man who might make a woman happy!" said the widow.

°°°°The good-natured Countess turned to the subject of Mme. Vauquer's dress, which was not in harmony with her projects. "You must put yourself on a war footing," said she.

°°°°After much serious consideration the two widows went shopping together--they purchased a hat adorned with ostrich feathers and a cap at the Palais Royal, and the Countess took her friend to the Magasin de la Petite Jeannette, where they chose a dress and a scarf. Thus equipped for the campaign, the widow looked exactly like the prize animal hung out for a sign above an a la mode beef shop; but she herself was so much pleased with the improvement, as she considered it, in her appearance, that she felt that she lay under some obligation to the Countess; and, though by no means open-handed, she begged that lady to accept a hat that cost twenty francs. The fact was that she needed the Countess' services on the delicate mission of sounding Goriot; the countess must sing her praises in his ears. Mme. de l'Ambermesnil lent herself very good-naturedly to this manoeuvre, began her operations, and succeeded in obtaining a private interview; but the overtures that she made, with a view to securing him for herself, were received with embarrassment, not to say a repulse. She left him, revolted by his coarseness.

°°°°"My angel," said she to her dear friend, "you will make nothing of that man yonder. He is absurdly suspicious, and he is a mean curmudgeon, an idiot, a fool; you would never be happy with him."

°°°°After what had passed between M. Goriot and Mme. de l'Ambermesnil, the Countess would no longer live under the same roof. She left the next day, forgot to pay for six months' board, and left behind her wardrobe, cast-off clothing to the value of five francs. Eagerly and persistently as Mme. Vauquer sought her quondam lodger, the Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil was never heard of again in Paris. The widow often talked of this deplorable business, and regretted her own too confiding disposition. As a matter of fact, she was as suspicious as a cat; but she was like many other people, who cannot trust their own kin and put themselves at the mercy of the next chance comer--an odd but common phenomenon, whose causes may readily be traced to the depths of the human heart.

°°°°Perhaps there are people who know that they have nothing more to look for from those with whom they live; they have shown the emptiness of their hearts to their housemates, and in their secret selves they are conscious that they are severely judged, and that they deserve to be judged severely; but still they feel an unconquerable craving for praises that they do not hear, or they are consumed by a desire to appear to possess, in the eyes of a new audience, the qualities which they have not, hoping to win the admiration or affection of strangers at the risk of forfeiting it again some day. Or, once more, there are other mercenary natures who never do a kindness to a friend or a relation simply because these have a claim upon them, while a service done to a stranger brings its reward to self-love. Such natures feel but little affection for those who are nearest to them; they keep their kindness for remoter circles of acquaintance, and show most to those who dwell on its utmost limits. Mme. Vauquer belonged to both these essentially mean, false, and execrable classes.

°°°°"If I had been there at the time," Vautrin would say at the end of the story, I would have shown her up, and that misfortune would not have befallen you. I know that kind of phiz!"

°°°°Like all narrow natures, Mme. Vauquer was wont to confine her attention to events, and did not go very deeply into the causes that brought them about; she likewise preferred to throw the blame of her own mistakes on other people, so she chose to consider that the honest vermicelli maker was responsible for her misfortune. It had opened her eyes, so she said, with regard to him. As soon as she saw that her blandishments were in vain, and that her outlay on her toilette was money thrown away, she was not slow to discover the reason of his indifference. It became plain to her at once that there was SOME OTHER ATTRACTION, to use her own expression. In short, it was evident that the hope she had so fondly cherished was a baseless delusion, and that she would "never make anything out of that man yonder," in the Countess' forcible phrase. The Countess seemed to have been a judge of character. Mme. Vauquer's aversion was naturally more energetic than her friendship, for her hatred was not in proportion to her love, but to her disappointed expectations. The human heart may find here and there a resting-place short of the highest height of affection, but we seldom stop in the steep, downward slope of hatred. Still, M. Goriot was a lodger, and the widow's wounded self-love could not vent itself in an explosion of wrath; like a monk harassed by the prior of his convent, she was forced to stifle her sighs of disappointment, and to gulp down her craving for revenge. Little minds find gratification for their feelings, benevolent or otherwise, by a constant exercise of petty ingenuity. The widow employed her woman's malice to devise a system of covert persecution. She began by a course of retrenchment--various luxuries which had found their way to the table appeared there no more.

°°°°"No more gherkins, no more anchovies; they have made a fool of me!" she said to Sylvie one morning, and they returned to the old bill of fare.

°°°°The thrifty frugality necessary to those who mean to make their way in the world had become an inveterate habit of life with M. Goriot. Soup, boiled beef, and a dish of vegetables had been, and always would be, the dinner he liked best, so Mme. Vauquer found it very difficult to annoy a boarder whose tastes were so simple. He was proof against her malice, and in desperation she spoke to him and of him slightingly before the other lodgers, who began to amuse themselves at his expense, and so gratified her desire for revenge.

°°°°Towards the end of the first year the widow's suspicions had reached such a pitch that she began to wonder how it was that a retired merchant with a secure income of seven or eight thousand livres, the owner of such magnificent plate and jewelry handsome enough for a kept mistress, should be living in her house. Why should he devote so small a proportion of his money to his expenses? Until the first year was nearly at an end, Goriot had dined out once or twice every week, but these occasions came less frequently, and at last he was scarcely absent from the dinner- table twice a month. It was hardly expected that Mme. Vauquer should regard the increased regularity of her boarder's habits with complacency, when those little excursions of his had been so much to her interest. She attributed the change not so much to a gradual diminution of fortune as to a spiteful wish to annoy his hostess. It is one of the most detestable habits of a Liliputian mind to credit other people with its own malignant pettiness.

°°°°Unluckily, towards the end of the second year, M. Goriot's conduct gave some color to the idle talk about him. He asked Mme. Vauquer to give him a room on the second floor, and to make a corresponding reduction in her charges. Apparently, such strict economy was called for, that he did without a fire all through the winter. Mme. Vauquer asked to be paid in advance, an arrangement to which M. Goriot consented, and thenceforward she spoke of him as "Father Goriot."

°°°°What had brought about this decline and fall? Conjecture was keen, but investigation was difficult. Father Goriot was not communicative; in the sham countess' phrase he was "a curmudgeon." Empty-headed people who babble about their own affairs because they have nothing else to occupy them, naturally conclude that if people say nothing of their doings it is because their doings will not bear being talked about; so the highly respectable merchant became a scoundrel, and the late beau was an old rogue. Opinion fluctuated. Sometimes, according to Vautrin, who came about this time to live in the Maison Vauquer, Father Goriot was a man who went on 'Change and DABBLED (to use the sufficiently expressive language of the Stock Exchange) in stocks and shares after he had ruined himself by heavy speculation. Sometimes it was held that he was one of those petty gamblers who nightly play for small stakes until they win a few francs. A theory that he was a detective in the employ of the Home Office found favor at one time, but Vautrin urged that "Goriot was not sharp enough for one of that sort." There were yet other solutions; Father Goriot was a skinflint, a shark of a money- lender, a man who lived by selling lottery tickets. He was by turns all the most mysterious brood of vice and shame and misery; yet, however vile his life might be, the feeling of repulsion which he aroused in others was not so strong that he must be banished from their society--he paid his way. Besides, Goriot had his uses, every one vented his spleen or sharpened his wit on him; he was pelted with jokes and belabored with hard words. The general consensus of opinion was in favor of a theory which seemed the most likely; this was Mme. Vauquer's view. According to her, the man so well preserved at his time of life, as sound as her eyesight, with whom a woman might be very happy, was a libertine who had strange tastes. These are the facts upon which Mme. Vauquer's slanders were based.

°°°°Early one morning, some few months after the departure of the unlucky Countess who had managed to live for six months at the widow's expense, Mme. Vauquer (not yet dressed) heard the rustle of a silk dress and a young woman's light footstep on the stair; some one was going to Goriot's room. He seemed to expect the visit, for his door stood ajar. The portly Sylvie presently came up to tell her mistress that a girl too pretty to be honest, "dressed like a goddess," and not a speck of mud on her laced cashmere boots, had glided in from the street like a snake, had found the kitchen, and asked for M. Goriot's room. Mme. Vauquer and the cook, listening, overheard several words affectionately spoken during the visit, which lasted for some time. When M. Goriot went downstairs with the lady, the stout Sylvie forthwith took her basket and followed the lover-like couple, under pretext of going to do her marketing.

°°°°"M. Goriot must be awfully rich, all the same, madame," she reported on her return, "to keep her in such style. Just imagine it! There was a splendid carriage waiting at the corner of the Place de l'Estrapade, and SHE got into it."

°°°°While they were at dinner that evening, Mme. Vauquer went to the window and drew the curtain, as the sun was shining into Goriot's eyes.

°°°°"You are beloved of fair ladies, M. Goriot--the sun seeks you out," she said, alluding to his visitor. "Peste! you have good taste; she was very pretty."

°°°°"That was my daughter," he said, with a kind of pride in his voice, and the rest chose to consider this as the fatuity of an old man who wishes to save appearances.

°°°°A month after this visit M. Goriot received another. The same daughter who had come to see him that morning came again after dinner, this time in evening dress. The boarders, in deep discussion in the dining-room, caught a glimpse of a lovely, fair-haired woman, slender, graceful, and much too distinguished- looking to be a daughter of Father Goriot's.

°°°°"Two of them!" cried the portly Sylvie, who did not recognize the lady of the first visit.

°°°°A few days later, and another young lady--a tall, well-moulded brunette, with dark hair and bright eyes--came to ask for M. Goriot.

°°°°"Three of them!" said Sylvie.

°°°°Then the second daughter, who had first come in the morning to see her father, came shortly afterwards in the evening. She wore a ball dress, and came in a carriage.

°°°°"Four of them!" commented Mme. Vauquer and her plump handmaid. Sylvie saw not a trace of resemblance between this great lady and the girl in her simple morning dress who had entered her kitchen on the occasion of her first visit.

°°°°At that time Goriot was paying twelve hundred francs a year to his landlady, and Mme. Vauquer saw nothing out of the common in the fact that a rich man had four or five mistresses; nay, she thought it very knowing of him to pass them off as his daughters. She was not at all inclined to draw a hard-and-fast line, or to take umbrage at his sending for them to the Maison Vauquer; yet, inasmuch as these visits explained her boarder's indifference to her, she went so far (at the end of the second year) as to speak of him as an "ugly old wretch." When at length her boarder declined to nine hundred francs a year, she asked him very insolently what he took her house to be, after meeting one of these ladies on he stairs. Father Goriot answered that the lady was his eldest daughter.

°°°°"So you have two or three dozen daughters, have you?" said Mme. Vauquer sharply.

°°°°"I have only two," her boarder answered meekly, like a ruined man who is broken in to all the cruel usage of misfortune.

°°°°Towards the end of the third year Father Goriot reduced his expenses still further; he went up to the third story, and now paid forty-five francs a month. He did without snuff, told his hairdresser that he no longer required his services, and gave up wearing powder. When Goriot appeared for the first time in this condition, an exclamation of astonishment broke from his hostess at the color of his hair--a dingy olive gray. He had grown sadder day by day under the influence of some hidden trouble; among all the faces round the table, his was the most woe-begone. There was no longer any doubt. Goriot was an elderly libertine, whose eyes had only been preserved by the skill of the physician from the malign influence of the remedies necessitated by the state of his health. The disgusting color of his hair was a result of his excesses and of the drugs which he had taken that he might continue his career. The poor old man's mental and physical condition afforded some grounds for the absurd rubbish talked about him. When his outfit was worn out, he replaced the fine linen by calico at fourteen sous the ell. His diamonds, his gold snuff-box, watch-chain and trinkets, disappeared one by one. He had left off wearing the corn-flower blue coat, and was sumptuously arrayed, summer as well as winter, in a coarse chestnut-brown coat, a plush waistcoat, and doeskin breeches. He grew thinner and thinner; his legs were shrunken, his cheeks, once so puffed out by contented bourgeois prosperity, were covered with wrinkles, and the outlines of the jawbones were distinctly visible; there were deep furrows in his forehead. In the fourth year of his residence in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve he was no longer like his former self. The hale vermicelli manufacturer, sixty-two years of age, who had looked scarce forty, the stout, comfortable, prosperous tradesman, with an almost bucolic air, and such a brisk demeanor that it did you good to look at him; the man with something boyish in his smile, had suddenly sunk into his dotage, and had become a feeble, vacillating septuagenarian.

°°°°The keen, bright blue eyes had grown dull, and faded to a steel- gray color; the red inflamed rims looked as though they had shed tears of blood. He excited feelings of repulsion in some, and of pity in others. The young medical students who came to the house noticed the drooping of his lower lip and the conformation of the facial angle; and, after teasing him for some time to no purpose, they declared that cretinism was setting in.

°°°°One evening after dinner Mme. Vauquer said half banteringly to him, "So those daughters of yours don't come to see you any more, eh?" meaning to imply her doubts as to his paternity; but Father Goriot shrank as if his hostess had touched him with a sword- point.

°°°°"They come sometimes," he said in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Aha! you still see them sometimes?" cried the students. "Bravo, Father Goriot!"

°°°°The old man scarcely seemed to hear the witticisms at his expense that followed on the words; he had relapsed into the dreamy state of mind that these superficial observers took for senile torpor, due to his lack of intelligence. If they had only known, they might have been deeply interested by the problem of his condition; but few problems were more obscure. It was easy, of course, to find out whether Goriot had really been a vermicelli manufacturer; the amount of his fortune was readily discoverable; but the old people, who were most inquisitive as to his concerns, never went beyond the limits of the Quarter, and lived in the lodging-house much as oysters cling to a rock. As for the rest, the current of life in Paris daily awaited them, and swept them away with it; so soon as they left the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, they forgot the existence of the old man, their butt at dinner. For those narrow souls, or for careless youth, the misery in Father Goriot's withered face and its dull apathy were quite incompatible with wealth or any sort of intelligence. As for the creatures whom he called his daughters, all Mme. Vauquer's boarders were of her opinion. With the faculty for severe logic sedulously cultivated by elderly women during long evenings of gossip till they can always find an hypothesis to fit all circumstances, she was wont to reason thus:

°°°°"If Father Goriot had daughters of his own as rich as those ladies who came here seemed to be, he would not be lodging in my house, on the third floor, at forty-five francs a month; and he would not go about dressed like a poor man."

°°°°No objection could be raised to these inferences. So by the end of the month of November 1819, at the time when the curtain rises on this drama, every one in the house had come to have a very decided opinion as to the poor old man. He had never had either wife or daughter; excesses had reduced him to this sluggish condition; he was a sort of human mollusk who should be classed among the capulidoe, so one of the dinner contingent, an employe at the Museum, who had a pretty wit of his own. Poiret was an eagle, a gentleman, compared with Goriot. Poiret would join the talk, argue, answer when he was spoken to; as a matter of fact, his talk, arguments, and responses contributed nothing to the conversation, for Poiret had a habit of repeating what the others said in different words; still, he did join in the talk; he was alive, and seemed capable of feeling; while Father Goriot (to quote the Museum official again) was invariably at zero--Reaumur.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac had just returned to Paris in a state of mind not unknown to young men who are conscious of unusual powers, and to those whose faculties are so stimulated by a difficult position, that for the time being they rise above the ordinary level.

°°°°Rastignac's first year of study for the preliminary examinations in law had left him free to see the sights of Paris and to enjoy some of its amusements. A student has not much time on his hands if he sets himself to learn the repertory of every theatre, and to study the ins and outs of the labyrinth of Paris. To know its customs; to learn the language, and become familiar with the amusements of the capital, he must explore its recesses, good and bad, follow the studies that please him best, and form some idea of the treasures contained in galleries and museums.

°°°°At this stage of his career a student grows eager and excited about all sorts of follies that seem to him to be of immense importance. He has his hero, his great man, a professor at the College de France, paid to talk down to the level of his audience. He adjusts his cravat, and strikes various attitudes for the benefit of the women in the first galleries at the Opera- Comique. As he passes through all these successive initiations, and breaks out of his sheath, the horizons of life widen around him, and at length he grasps the plan of society with the different human strata of which it is composed.

°°°°If he begins by admiring the procession of carriages on sunny afternoons in the Champs-Elysees, he soon reaches the further stage of envying their owners. Unconsciously, Eugene had served his apprenticeship before he went back to Angouleme for the long vacation after taking his degrees as bachelor of arts and bachelor of law. The illusions of childhood had vanished, so also had the ideas he brought with him from the provinces; he had returned thither with an intelligence developed, with loftier ambitions, and saw things as they were at home in the old manor house. His father and mother, his two brothers and two sisters, with an aged aunt, whose whole fortune consisted in annuities, lived on the little estate of Rastignac. The whole property brought in about three thousand francs; and though the amount varied with the season (as must always be the case in a vine- growing district), they were obliged to spare an unvarying twelve hundred francs out of their income for him. He saw how constantly the poverty, which they had generously hidden from him, weighed upon them; he could not help comparing the sisters, who had seemed so beautiful to his boyish eyes, with women in Paris, who had realized the beauty of his dreams. The uncertain future of the whole family depended upon him. It did not escape his eyes that not a crumb was wasted in the house, nor that the wine they drank was made from the second pressing; a multitude of small things, which it is useless to speak of in detail here, made him burn to distinguish himself, and his ambition to succeed increased tenfold.

°°°°He meant, like all great souls, that his success should be owing entirely to his merits; but his was pre-eminently a southern temperament, the execution of his plans was sure to be marred by the vertigo that seizes on youth when youth sees itself alone in a wide sea, uncertain how to spend its energies, whither to steer its course, how to adapt its sails to the winds. At first he determined to fling himself heart and soul into his work, but he was diverted from this purpose by the need of society and connections; then he saw how great an influence women exert in social life, and suddenly made up his mind to go out into this world to seek a protectress there. Surely a clever and high- spirited young man, whose wit and courage were set off to advantage by a graceful figure and the vigorous kind of beauty that readily strikes a woman's imagination, need not despair of finding a protectress. These ideas occurred to him in his country walks with his sisters, whom he had once joined so gaily. The girls thought him very much changed.

°°°°His aunt, Mme. de Marcillac, had been presented at court, and had moved among the brightest heights of that lofty region. Suddenly the young man's ambition discerned in those recollections of hers, which had been like nursery fairy tales to her nephews and nieces, the elements of a social success at least as important as the success which he had achieved at the Ecole de Droit. He began to ask his aunt about those relations; some of the old ties might still hold good. After much shaking of the branches of the family tree, the old lady came to the conclusion that of all persons who could be useful to her nephew among the selfish genus of rich relations, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was the least likely to refuse. To this lady, therefore, she wrote in the old-fashioned style, recommending Eugene to her; pointing out to her nephew that if he succeeded in pleasing Mme. de Beauseant, the Vicomtesse would introduce him to other relations. A few days after his return to Paris, therefore, Rastignac sent his aunt's letter to Mme. de Beauseant. The Vicomtesse replied by an invitation to a ball for the following evening. This was the position of affairs at the Maison Vauquer at the end of November 1819.

°°°°A few days later, after Mme. de Beauseant's ball, Eugene came in at two o'clock in the morning. The persevering student meant to make up for the lost time by working until daylight. It was the first time that he had attempted to spend the night in this way in that silent quarter. The spell of a factitious energy was upon him; he had beheld the pomp and splendor of the world. He had not dined at the Maison Vauquer; the boarders probably would think that he would walk home at daybreak from the dance, as he had done sometimes on former occasions, after a fete at the Prado, or a ball at the Odeon, splashing his silk stockings thereby, and ruining his pumps.

°°°°It so happened that Christophe took a look into the street before drawing the bolts of the door; and Rastignac, coming in at that moment, could go up to his room without making any noise, followed by Christophe, who made a great deal. Eugene exchanged his dress suit for a shabby overcoat and slippers, kindled a fire with some blocks of patent fuel, and prepared for his night's work in such a sort that the faint sounds he made were drowned by Christophe's heavy tramp on the stairs.

°°°°Eugene sat absorbed in thought for a few moments before plunging into his law books. He had just become aware of the fact that the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was one of the queens of fashion, that her house was thought to be the pleasantest in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. And not only so, she was, by right of her fortune, and the name she bore, one of the most conspicuous figures in that aristocratic world. Thanks to the aunt, thanks to Mme. de Marcillac's letter of introduction, the poor student had been kindly received in that house before he knew the extent of the favor thus shown to him. It was almost like a patent of nobility to be admitted to those gilded salons; he had appeared in the most exclusive circle in Paris, and now all doors were open for him. Eugene had been dazzled at first by the brilliant assembly, and had scarcely exchanged a few words with the Vicomtesse; he had been content to single out a goddess among this throng of Parisian divinities, one of those women who are sure to attract a young man's fancy.

°°°°The Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud was tall and gracefully made; she had one of the prettiest figures in Paris. Imagine a pair of great dark eyes, a magnificently moulded hand, a shapely foot. There was a fiery energy in her movements; the Marquis de Ronquerolles had called her "a thoroughbred," "a pure pedigree," these figures of speech have replaced the "heavenly angel" and Ossianic nomenclature; the old mythology of love is extinct, doomed to perish by modern dandyism. But for Rastignac, Mme. Anastasie de Restaud was the woman for whom he had sighed. He had contrived to write his name twice upon the list of partners upon her fan, and had snatched a few words with her during the first quadrille.

°°°°"Where shall I meet you again, Madame?" he asked abruptly, and the tones of his voice were full of the vehement energy that women like so well.

°°°°"Oh, everywhere!" said she, "in the Bois, at the Bouffons, in my own house."

°°°°With the impetuosity of his adventurous southern temper, he did all he could to cultivate an acquaintance with this lovely countess, making the best of his opportunities in the quadrille and during a waltz that she gave him. When he told her that he was a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's, the Countess, whom he took for a great lady, asked him to call at her house, and after her parting smile, Rastignac felt convinced that he must make this visit. He was so lucky as to light upon some one who did not laugh at his ignorance, a fatal defect among the gilded and insolent youth of that period; the coterie of Maulincourts, Maximes de Trailles, de Marsays, Ronquerolles, Ajuda-Pintos, and Vandenesses who shone there in all the glory of coxcombry among the best-dressed women of fashion in Paris--Lady Brandon, the Duchesse de Langeais, the Comtesse de Kergarouet, Mme. de Serizy, the Duchesse de Carigliano, the Comtesse Ferraud, Mme. de Lanty, the Marquise d'Aiglemont, Mme. Firmiani, the Marquise de Listomere and the Marquise d'Espard, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and the Grandlieus. Luckily, therefore, for him, the novice happened upon the Marquis de Montriveau, the lover of the Duchesse de Langeais, a general as simple as a child; from him Rastignac learned that the Comtesse lived in the Rue du Helder.

°°°°Ah, what it is to be young, eager to see the world, greedily on the watch for any chance that brings you nearer the woman of your dreams, and behold two houses open their doors to you! To set foot in the Vicomtesse de Beauseant's house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; to fall on your knees before a Comtesse de Restaud in the Chaussee d'Antin; to look at one glance across a vista of Paris drawing-rooms, conscious that, possessing sufficient good looks, you may hope to find aid and protection there in a feminine heart! To feel ambitious enough to spurn the tight-rope on which you must walk with the steady head of an acrobat for whom a fall is impossible, and to find in a charming woman the best of all balancing poles.

°°°°He sat there with his thoughts for a while, Law on the one hand, and Poverty on the other, beholding a radiant vision of a woman rise above the dull, smouldering fire. Who would not have paused and questioned the future as Eugene was doing? who would not have pictured it full of success? His wondering thoughts took wings; he was transported out of the present into that blissful future; he was sitting by Mme. de Restaud's side, when a sort of sigh, like the grunt of an overburdened St. Joseph, broke the silence of the night. It vibrated through the student, who took the sound for a death groan. He opened his door noiselessly, went out upon the landing, and saw a thin streak of light under Father Goriot's door. Eugene feared that his neighbor had been taken ill; he went over and looked through the keyhole; the old man was busily engaged in an occupation so singular and so suspicious that Rastignac thought he was only doing a piece of necessary service to society to watch the self-styled vermicelli maker's nocturnal industries.

°°°°The table was upturned, and Goriot had doubtless in some way secured a silver plate and cup to the bar before knotting a thick rope round them; he was pulling at this rope with such enormous force that they were being crushed and twisted out of shape; to all appearance he meant to convert the richly wrought metal into ingots.

°°°°"Peste! what a man!" said Rastignac, as he watched Goriot's muscular arms; there was not a sound in the room while the old man, with the aid of the rope, was kneading the silver like dough. "Was he then, indeed, a thief, or a receiver of stolen goods, who affected imbecility and decrepitude, and lived like a beggar that he might carry on his pursuits the more securely?" Eugene stood for a moment revolving these questions, then he looked again through the keyhole.

°°°°Father Goriot had unwound his coil of rope; he had covered the table with a blanket, and was now employed in rolling the flattened mass of silver into a bar, an operation which he performed with marvelous dexterity.

°°°°"Why, he must be as strong as Augustus, King of Poland!" said Eugene to himself when the bar was nearly finished.

°°°°Father Goriot looked sadly at his handiwork, tears fell from his eyes, he blew out the dip which had served him for a light while he manipulated the silver, and Eugene heard him sigh as he lay down again.

°°°°"He is mad," thought the student.

°°°°"Poor child!" Father Goriot said aloud. Rastignac, hearing those words, concluded to keep silence; he would not hastily condemn his neighbor. He was just in the doorway of his room when a strange sound from the staircase below reached his ears; it might have been made by two men coming up in list slippers. Eugene listened; two men there certainly were, he could hear their breathing. Yet there had been no sound of opening the street door, no footsteps in the passage. Suddenly, too, he saw a faint gleam of light on the second story; it came from M. Vautrin's room.

°°°°"There are a good many mysteries here for a lodging-house!" he said to himself.

°°°°He went part of the way downstairs and listened again. The rattle of gold reached his ears. In another moment the light was put out, and again he distinctly heard the breathing of two men, but no sound of a door being opened or shut. The two men went downstairs, the faint sounds growing fainter as they went.

°°°°"Who is there?" cried Mme. Vauquer out of her bedroom window.

°°°°"I, Mme. Vauquer," answered Vautrin's deep bass voice. "I am coming in."

°°°°"That is odd! Christophe drew the bolts," said Eugene, going back to his room. "You have to sit up at night, it seems, if you really mean to know all that is going on about you in Paris."

°°°°These incidents turned his thought from his ambitious dreams; he betook himself to his work, but his thought wandered back to Father Goriot's suspicious occupation; Mme. de Restaud's face swam again and again before his eyes like a vision of a brilliant future; and at last he lay down and slept with clenched fists. When a young man makes up his mind that he will work all night, the chances are that seven times out of ten he will sleep till morning. Such vigils do not begin before we are turned twenty.

°°°°The next morning Paris was wrapped in one of the dense fogs that throw the most punctual people out in their calculations as to the time; even the most business-like folk fail to keep their appointments in such weather, and ordinary mortals wake up at noon and fancy it is eight o'clock. On this morning it was half- past nine, and Mme. Vauquer still lay abed. Christophe was late, Sylvie was late, but the two sat comfortably taking their coffee as usual. It was Sylvie's custom to take the cream off the milk destined for the boarders' breakfast for her own, and to boil the remainder for some time, so that madame should not discover this illegal exaction.

°°°°"Sylvie," said Christophe, as he dipped a piece of toast into the coffee, "M. Vautrin, who is not such a bad sort, all the same, had two people come to see him again last night. If madame says anything, mind you say nothing about it."

°°°°"Has he given you something?"

°°°°"He gave me a five-franc piece this month, which is as good as saying, 'Hold your tongue.' "

°°°°"Except him and Mme. Couture, who doesn't look twice at every penny, there's no one in the house that doesn't try to get back with the left hand all that they give with the right at New Year," said Sylvie.

°°°°"And, after all," said Christophe, "what do they give you? A miserable five-franc piece. There is Father Goriot, who has cleaned his shoes himself these two years past. There is that old beggar Poiret, who goes without blacking altogether; he would sooner drink it than put it on his boots. Then there is that whipper-snapper of a student, who gives me a couple of francs, Two francs will not pay for my brushes, and he sells his old clothes, and gets more for them than they are worth. Oh! they're a shabby lot!"

°°°°"Pooh!" said Sylvie, sipping her coffee, "our places are the best in the Quarter, that I know. But about that great big chap Vautrin, Christophe; has any one told you anything about him?"

°°°°"Yes. I met a gentleman in the street a few days ago; he said to me, 'There's a gentleman in your place, isn't there? a tall man that dyes his whiskers?' I told him, 'No, sir; they aren't dyed. A gay fellow like him hasn't the time to do it.' And when I told M. Vautrin about it afterwards, he said, 'Quite right, my boy. That is the way to answer them. There is nothing more unpleasant than to have your little weaknesses known; it might spoil many a match.' "

°°°°"Well, and for my part," said Sylvie, "a man tried to humbug me at the market wanting to know if I had seen him put on his shirt. Such bosh! There," she cried, interrupting herself, "that's a quarter to ten striking at the Val-de-Grace, and not a soul stirring!"

°°°°"Pooh! they are all gone out. Mme. Couture and the girl went out at eight o'clock to take the wafer at Saint-Etienne. Father Goriot started off somewhere with a parcel, and the student won't be back from his lecture till ten o'clock. I saw them go while I was sweeping the stairs; Father Goriot knocked up against me, and his parcel was as hard as iron. What is the old fellow up to, I wonder? He is as good as a plaything for the rest of them; they can never let him alone; but he is a good man, all the same, and worth more than all of them put together. He doesn't give you much himself, but he sometimes sends you with a message to ladies who fork out famous tips; they are dressed grandly, too."

°°°°"His daughters, as he calls them, eh? There are a dozen of them."

°°°°"I have never been to more than two--the two who came here."

°°°°"There is madame moving overhead; I shall have to go, or she will raise a fine racket. Just keep an eye on the milk, Christophe; don't let the cat get at it."

°°°°Sylvie went up to her mistress' room.

°°°°"Sylvie! How is this? It's nearly ten o'clock, and you let me sleep like a dormouse! Such a thing has never happened before."

°°°°"It's the fog; it is that thick, you could cut it with a knife."

°°°°"But how about breakfast?"

°°°°"Bah! the boarders are possessed, I'm sure. They all cleared out before there was a wink of daylight."

°°°°"Do speak properly, Sylvie," Mme. Vauquer retorted; "say a blink of daylight."

°°°°"Ah, well, madame, whichever you please. Anyhow, you can have breakfast at ten o'clock. La Michonnette and Poiret have neither of them stirred. There are only those two upstairs, and they are sleeping like the logs they are."

°°°°"But, Sylvie, you put their names together as if----"

°°°°"As if what?" said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. "The two of them make a pair."

°°°°"It is a strange thing, isn't it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last night after Christophe had bolted the door?"

°°°°"Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?"

°°°°"Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears on the table, those at five a penny."

°°°°A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all haste.

°°°°"Mistigris!" she cried.

°°°°The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

°°°°"Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!" she said. "Sylvie! Sylvie!"

°°°°"Yes, madame; what is it?"

°°°°"Just see what the cat has done!"

°°°°"It is all that stupid Christophe's fault. I told him to stop and lay the table. What has become of him? Don't you worry, madame; Father Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won't know the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats."

°°°°"I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?" said Mme. Vauquer, setting the plates round the table.

°°°°"Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"I have overslept myself," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same."

°°°°The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the sitting-room, singing loudly:

°°°°" 'Tis the same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance . .

°°°°"Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!" he cried at the sight of his hostess, and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

°°°°"There! have done----"

°°°°" 'Impertinence!' Say it!" he answered. "Come, say it! Now, isn't that what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah! I am a nice man, am I not?

°°°°"For the locks of brown and the golden hair   A sighing lover . . .

°°°°"Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

°°°°. . . . led by chance."

°°°°"What?" asked the widow.

°°°°"Father Goriot in the goldsmith's shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there, and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that's not used to the trade."

°°°°"Really? You don't say so?"

°°°°"Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair. He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went into a money-lender's house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father's bones, a Turk, a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob HIM, for he puts all his coin into the Bank."

°°°°"Then what was Father Goriot doing there?"

°°°°"Doing?" said Vautrin. "Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----"

°°°°"There he is!" cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Christophe," cried Father Goriot's voice, "come upstairs with me."

°°°°Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

°°°°"Where are you going?" Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

°°°°"Out on an errand for M. Goriot."

°°°°"What may that be?" said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe's hand. "Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud," he read. "Where are you going with it?" he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

°°°°"To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands myself."

°°°°"What is there inside it?" said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the light. "A banknote? No." He peered into the envelope. "A receipted account!" he cried. "My word! 'tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you, old chap," he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe's head, and spinning the man round like a thimble; "you will have a famous tip."

°°°°By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme. Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

°°°°"The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance."

°°°°When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

°°°°"Where have you been this morning, fair lady?" said Mme. Vauquer, turning to Mme. Couture.

°°°°"We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She is trembling like a leaf," Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

°°°°"Warm yourself, Victorine," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften your father's heart," said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the orphan girl; "but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl needs a dowry nowadays."

°°°°"Poor child!" said Mme. Vauquer. "Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself."

°°°°Victorine's eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

°°°°"If we could only see him!" said the Commissary-General's widow; "if I could speak to him myself and give him his wife's last letter! I have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my handwriting----"

°°°°" 'Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!' " exclaimed Vautrin, breaking in upon her. "So that is how you are, is it? In a few days' time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall see."

°°°°"Oh! sir," said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin, who showed no sign of being touched by it, "if you know of any way of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his affection and my mother's honor are more to me than all the money in the world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----"

°°°°"The same old story everywhere," sang Vautrin, with a satirical intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven people thus assembled bade each other good- morning, and took their places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student's footstep was heard outside.

°°°°"Ah! here you are, M. Eugene," said Sylvie; "every one is breakfasting at home to-day."

°°°°The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside Goriot.

°°°°"I have just met with a queer adventure," he said, as he helped himself abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer's eyes gauged as usual.

°°°°"An adventure?" queried Poiret.

°°°°"Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?" Vautrin asked of Poiret. "M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing."

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

°°°°"Tell us about your adventure!" demanded M. Vautrin.

°°°°"Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a king---"

°°°°"Fisher," put in Vautrin, interrupting.

°°°°"What do you mean, sir?" said Eugene sharply.

°°°°"I said 'fisher,' because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than kings."

°°°°"Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a king," said Poiret the ditto-ist, "because----"

°°°°"In fact"--the law-student cut him short--"I danced with one of the handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this divine countess about nine o'clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how my heart beat! I began to think----"

°°°°"That she was coming here," said Vautrin, with a keen look at the student. "I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman's heart, you will find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder."

°°°°The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

°°°°"Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!" cried Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

°°°°"It is just as I guessed," said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme. Vauquer's ear.

°°°°Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own thoughts than he did at that moment.

°°°°"Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! there you are!" answered Vautrin. "Old Father Goriot there knew it quite well! and why should I not know it too?"

°°°°"M. Goriot?" the student cried.

°°°°"What is it?" asked the old man. "So she was very beautiful, was she, yesterday night?"

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"Look at the old wretch," said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; "how his eyes light up!"

°°°°"Then does he really keep her?" said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to the student.

°°°°"Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty," Eugene answered. Father Goriot watched him with eager eyes. "If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there, my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list, and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a galloping horse, or a woman dancing."

°°°°"So the wheel turns," said Vautrin; "yesterday night at a duchess' ball, this morning in a money-lender's office, on the lowest rung of the ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers' hearts to find something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside down. Just a Parisienne through and through!"

°°°°Father Goriot's face, which had shone at the student's words like the sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of Vautrin's.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. Vauquer, "but where is your adventure? Did you speak to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?"

°°°°"She did not see me," said Eugene. "But only think of meeting one of the prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o'clock! She could not have reached home after the ball till two o'clock this morning. Wasn't it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of adventures."

°°°°"Pshaw! much funnier things than THAT happen here!" exclaimed Vautrin.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

°°°°"Well, did you see?" said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest of the circle. "He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain."

°°°°"Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de Restaud is anything to Father Goriot," cried the student.

°°°°"Well, and if you don't," broke in Vautrin, "we are not set on convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed to be like the sound of a trumpet to a trooper's horse. "Aha!" said Vautrin, stopping in his speech to give her a searching glance, "so we have had our little experiences, have we?"

°°°°The old maid lowered her eyes like a nun who sees a statue.

°°°°"Well," he went on, "when folk of that kind get a notion into their heads, they cannot drop it. They must drink the water from some particular spring--it is stagnant as often as not; but they will sell their wives and families, they will sell their own souls to the devil to get it. For some this spring is play, or the stock-exchange, or music, or a collection of pictures or insects; for others it is some woman who can give them the dainties they like. You might offer these last all the women on earth--they would turn up their noses; they will have the only one who can gratify their passion. It often happens that the woman does not care for them at all, and treats them cruelly; they buy their morsels of satisfaction very dear; but no matter, the fools are never tired of it; they will take their last blanket to the pawnbroker's to give their last five-franc piece to her. Father Goriot here is one of that sort. He is discreet, so the Countess exploits him--just the way of the gay world. The poor old fellow thinks of her and of nothing else. In all other respects you see he is a stupid animal; but get him on that subject, and his eyes sparkle like diamonds. That secret is not difficult to guess. He took some plate himself this morning to the melting-pot, and I saw him at Daddy Gobseck's in the Rue des Gres. And now, mark what follows--he came back here, and gave a letter for the Comtesse de Restaud to that noodle of a Christophe, who showed us the address; there was a receipted bill inside it. It is clear that it was an urgent matter if the Countess also went herself to the old money lender. Father Goriot has financed her handsomely. There is no need to tack a tale together; the thing is self-evident. So that shows you, sir student, that all the time your Countess was smiling, dancing, flirting, swaying her peach-flower crowned head, with her gown gathered into her hand, her slippers were pinching her, as they say; she was thinking of her protested bills, or her lover's protested bills."

°°°°"You have made me wild to know the truth," cried Eugene; "I will go to call on Mme. de Restaud to-morrow."

°°°°"Yes," echoed Poiret; "you must go and call on Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"And perhaps you will find Father Goriot there, who will take payment for the assistance he politely rendered."

°°°°Eugene looked disgusted. "Why, then, this Paris of yours is a slough."

°°°°"And an uncommonly queer slough, too," replied Vautrin. "The mud splashes you as you drive through it in your carriage--you are a respectable person; you go afoot and are splashed--you are a scoundrel. You are so unlucky as to walk off with something or other belonging to somebody else, and they exhibit you as a curiosity in the Place du Palais-de-Justice; you steal a million, and you are pointed out in every salon as a model of virtue. And you pay thirty millions for the police and the courts of justice, for the maintenance of law and order! A pretty slate of things it is!"

°°°°"What," cried Mme. Vauquer, "has Father Goriot really melted down his silver posset-dish?"

°°°°"There were two turtle-doves on the lid, were there not?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that there were."

°°°°"Then, was he fond of it?" said Eugene. "He cried while he was breaking up the cup and plate. I happened to see him by accident."

°°°°"It was dear to him as his own life," answered the widow.

°°°°"There! you see how infatuated the old fellow is!" cried Vautrin. "The woman yonder can coax the soul out of him"

°°°°The student went up to his room. Vautrin went out, and a few moments later Mme. Couture and Victorine drove away in a cab which Sylvie had called for them. Poiret gave his arm to Mlle. Michonneau, and they went together to spend the two sunniest hours of the day in the Jardin des Plantes.

°°°°"Well, those two are as good as married," was the portly Sylvie's comment. "They are going out together to-day for the first time. They are such a couple of dry sticks that if they happen to strike against each other they will draw sparks like flint and steel."

°°°°"Keep clear of Mlle. Michonneau's shawl, then, said Mme. Vauquer, laughing; "it would flare up like tinder."

°°°°At four o'clock that evening, when Goriot came in, he saw, by the light of two smoky lamps, that Victorine's eyes were red. Mme. Vauquer was listening to the history of the visit made that morning to M. Taillefer; it had been made in vain. Taillefer was tired of the annual application made by his daughter and her elderly friend; he gave them a personal interview in order to arrive at an understanding with them.

°°°°"My dear lady," said Mme. Couture, addressing Mme. Vauquer, "just imagine it; he did not even ask Victorine to sit down, she was standing the whole time. He said to me quite coolly, without putting himself in a passion, that we might spare ourselves the trouble of going there; that the young lady (he would not call her his daughter) was injuring her cause by importuning him (IMPORTUNING! once a year, the wretch!); that as Victorine's mother had nothing when he married her, Victorine ought not to expect anything from him; in fact, he said the most cruel things, that made the poor child burst out crying. The little thing threw herself at her father's feet and spoke up bravely; she said that she only persevered in her visits for her mother's sake; that she would obey him without a murmur, but that she begged him to read her poor dead mother's farewell letter. She took it up and gave it to him, saying the most beautiful things in the world, most beautifully expressed; I do not know where she learned them; God

°°°°must have put them into her head, for the poor child was inspired to speak so nicely that it made me cry like a fool to hear her talk. And what do you think the monster was doing all the time? Cutting his nails! He took the letter that poor Mme. Taillefer had soaked with tears, and flung it on to the chimney-piece. 'That is all right,' he said. He held out his hands to raise his daughter, but she covered them with kisses, and he drew them away again. Scandalous, isn't it? And his great booby of a son came in and took no notice of his sister."

°°°°"What inhuman wretches they must be!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"And then they both went out of the room," Mme. Couture went on, without heeding the worthy vermicelli maker's exclamation; "father and son bowed to me, and asked me to excuse them on account of urgent business! That is the history of our call. Well, he has seen his daughter at any rate. How he can refuse to acknowledge her I cannot think, for they are as alike as two peas."

°°°°The boarders dropped in one after another, interchanging greetings and empty jokes that certain classes of Parisians regard as humorous and witty. Dulness is their prevailing ingredient, and the whole point consists in mispronouncing a word or a gesture. This kind of argot is always changing. The essence of the jest consists in some catchword suggested by a political event, an incident in the police courts, a street song, or a bit of burlesque at some theatre, and forgotten in a month. Anything and everything serves to keep up a game of battledore and shuttlecock with words and ideas. The diorama, a recent invention, which carried an optical illusion a degree further than panoramas, had given rise to a mania among art students for ending every word with RAMA. The Maison Vauquer had caught the infection from a young artist among the boarders.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur-r-r Poiret," said the employe from the Museum, "how is your health-orama?" Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned to Mme. Couture and Victorine with a "Ladies, you seem melancholy."

°°°°"Is dinner ready?" cried Horace Bianchon, a medical student, and a friend of Rastignac's; "my stomach is sinking usque ad talones."

°°°°"There is an uncommon frozerama outside," said Vautrin. "Make room there, Father Goriot! Confound it, your foot covers the whole front of the stove."

°°°°"Illustrious M. Vautrin," put in Bianchon, "why do you say frozerama? It is incorrect; it should be frozenrama."

°°°°"No, it shouldn't," said the official from the Museum; "frozerama is right by the same rule that you say 'My feet are froze.' "

°°°°"Ah! ah!"

°°°°"Here is his Excellency the Marquis de Rastignac, Doctor of the Law of Contraries," cried Bianchon, seizing Eugene by the throat, and almost throttling him.

°°°°"Hallo there! hallo!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau came noiselessly in, bowed to the rest of the party, and took her place beside the three women without saying a word.

°°°°"That old bat always makes me shudder," said Bianchon in a low voice, indicating Mlle. Michonneau to Vautrin. "I have studied Gall's system, and I am sure she has the bump of Judas."

°°°°"Then you have seen a case before?" said Vautrin.

°°°°"Who has not?" answered Bianchon. "Upon my word, that ghastly old maid looks just like one of the long worms that will gnaw a beam through, give them time enough."

°°°°"That is the way, young man," returned he of the forty years and the dyed whiskers:

°°°°"The rose has lived the life of a rose--   A morning's space."

°°°°"Aha! here is a magnificent soupe-au-rama," cried Poiret as Christophe came in bearing the soup with cautious heed.

°°°°"I beg your pardon, sir," said Mme. Vauquer; "it is soupe aux choux."

°°°°All the young men roared with laughter.

°°°°"Had you there, Poiret!"

°°°°"Poir-r-r-rette! she had you there!"

°°°°"Score two points to Mamma Vauquer," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Did any of you notice the fog this morning?" asked the official.

°°°°"It was a frantic fog," said Bianchon, "a fog unparalleled, doleful, melancholy, sea-green, asthmatical--a Goriot of a fog!"

°°°°"A Goriorama," said the art student, "because you couldn't see a thing in it."

°°°°"Hey! Milord Gaoriotte, they air talking about yoo-o-ou!"

°°°°Father Goriot, seated at the lower end of the table, close to the door through which the servant entered, raised his face; he had smelt at a scrap of bread that lay under his table napkin, an old trick acquired in his commercial capacity, that still showed itself at times.

°°°°"Well," Madame Vauquer cried in sharp tones, that rang above the rattle of spoons and plates and the sound of other voices, "and is there anything the matter with the bread?"

°°°°"Nothing whatever, madame," he answered; "on the contrary, it is made of the best quality of corn; flour from Etampes."

°°°°"How could you tell?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"By the color, by the flavor."

°°°°"You knew the flavor by the smell, I suppose," said Mme. Vauquer. "You have grown so economical, you will find out how to live on the smell of cooking at last."

°°°°"Take out a patent for it, then," cried the Museum official; "you would make a handsome fortune."

°°°°"Never mind him," said the artist; "he does that sort of thing to delude us into thinking that he was a vermicelli maker."

°°°°"Your nose is a corn-sampler, it appears?" inquired the official.

°°°°"Corn WHAT?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"Corn-el."

°°°°"Corn-et."

°°°°"Corn-elian."

°°°°"Corn-ice."

°°°°"Corn-ucopia."

°°°°"Corn-crake."

°°°°"Corn-cockle."

°°°°"Corn-orama."

°°°°The eight responses came like a rolling fire from every part of the room, and the laughter that followed was the more uproarious because poor Father Goriot stared at the others with a puzzled look, like a foreigner trying to catch the meaning of words in a language which he does not understand.

°°°°"Corn? . . ." he said, turning to Vautrin, his next neighbor.

°°°°"Corn on your foot, old man!" said Vautrin, and he drove Father Goriot's cap down over his eyes by a blow on the crown.

°°°°The poor old man thus suddenly attacked was for a moment too bewildered to do anything. Christophe carried off his plate, thinking that he had finished his soup, so that when Goriot had pushed back his cap from his eyes his spoon encountered the table. Every one burst out laughing. "You are a disagreeable joker, sir," said the old man, "and if you take any further liberties with me----"

°°°°"Well, what then, old boy?" Vautrin interrupted.

°°°°"Well, then, you shall pay dearly for it some day----"

°°°°"Down below, eh?" said the artist, "in the little dark corner where they put naughty boys."

°°°°"Well, mademoiselle," Vautrin said, turning to Victorine, "you are eating nothing. So papa was refractory, was he?"

°°°°"A monster!" said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"Mademoiselle might make application for aliment pending her suit; she is not eating anything. Eh! eh! just see how Father Goriot is staring at Mlle. Victorine."

°°°°The old man had forgotten his dinner, he was so absorbed in gazing at the poor girl; the sorrow in her face was unmistakable,--the slighted love of a child whose father would not recognize her.

°°°°"We are mistaken about Father Goriot, my dear boy," said Eugene in a low voice. "He is not an idiot, nor wanting in energy. Try your Gall system on him, and let me know what you think. I saw him crush a silver dish last night as if it had been made of wax; there seems to be something extra-ordinary going on in his mind just now, to judge by his face. His life is so mysterious that it must be worth studying. Oh! you may laugh, Bianchon; I am not joking."

°°°°"The man is a subject, is he?" said Bianchon; "all right! I will dissect him, if he will give me the chance."

°°°°"No; feel his bumps."

°°°°"Hm!--his stupidity might perhaps be contagious."

°°°°The next day Rastignac dressed himself very elegantly, and about three o'clock in the afternoon went to call on Mme. de Restaud. On the way thither he indulged in the wild intoxicating dreams which fill a young head so full of delicious excitement. Young men at his age take no account of obstacles nor of dangers; they see success in every direction; imagination has free play, and turns their lives into a romance; they are saddened or discouraged by the collapse of one of the visionary schemes that have no existence save in their heated fancy. If youth were not ignorant and timid, civilization would be impossible.

°°°°Eugene took unheard-of pains to keep himself in a spotless condition, but on his way through the streets he began to think about Mme. de Restaud and what he should say to her. He equipped himself with wit, rehearsed repartees in the course of an imaginary conversation, and prepared certain neat speeches a la Talleyrand, conjuring up a series of small events which should prepare the way for the declaration on which he had based his future; and during these musings the law student was bespattered with mud, and by the time he reached the Palais Royal he was obliged to have his boots blacked and his trousers brushed.

°°°°"If I were rich," he said, as he changed the five-franc piece he had brought with him in case anything might happen, "I would take a cab, then I could think at my ease."

°°°°At last he reached the Rue du Helder, and asked for the Comtesse de Restaud. He bore the contemptuous glances of the servants, who had seen him cross the court on foot, with the cold fury of a man who knows that he will succeed some day. He understood the meaning of their glances at once, for he had felt his inferiority as soon as he entered the court, where a smart cab was waiting. All the delights of life in Paris seemed to be implied by this visible and manifest sign of luxury and extravagance. A fine horse, in magnificent harness, was pawing the ground, and all at once the law student felt out of humor with himself. Every compartment in his brain which he had thought to find so full of wit was bolted fast; he grew positively stupid. He sent up his name to the Countess, and waited in the ante-chamber, standing on one foot before a window that looked out upon the court; mechanically he leaned his elbow against the sash, and stared before him. The time seemed long; he would have left the house but for the southern tenacity of purpose which works miracles when it is single-minded.

°°°°"Madame is in her boudoir, and cannot see any one at present, sir," said the servant. "She gave me no answer; but if you will go into the dining-room, there is some one already there."

°°°°Rastignac was impressed with a sense of the formidable power of the lackey who can accuse or condemn his masters by a word; he coolly opened the door by which the man had just entered the ante-chamber, meaning, no doubt, to show these insolent flunkeys that he was familiar with the house; but he found that he had thoughtlessly precipitated himself into a small room full of dressers, where lamps were standing, and hot-water pipes, on which towels were being dried; a dark passage and a back staircase lay beyond it. Stifled laughter from the ante-chamber added to his confusion.

°°°°"This way to the drawing-room, sir," said the servant, with the exaggerated respect which seemed to be one more jest at his expense.

°°°°Eugene turned so quickly that he stumbled against a bath. By good luck, he managed to keep his hat on his head, and saved it from immersion in the water; but just as he turned, a door opened at the further end of the dark passage, dimly lighted by a small lamp. Rastignac heard voices and the sound of a kiss; one of the speakers was Mme. de Restaud, the other was Father Goriot. Eugene followed the servant through the dining-room into the drawing- room; he went to a window that looked out into the courtyard, and stood there for a while. He meant to know whether this Goriot was really the Goriot that he knew. His heart beat unwontedly fast; he remembered Vautrin's hideous insinuations. A well-dressed young man suddenly emerged from the room almost as Eugene entered it, saying impatiently to the servant who stood at the door: "I am going, Maurice. Tell Madame la Comtesse that I waited more than half an hour for her."

°°°°Whereupon this insolent being, who, doubtless, had a right to be insolent, sang an Italian trill, and went towards the window where Eugene was standing, moved thereto quite as much by a desire to see the student's face as by a wish to look out into the courtyard.

°°°°"But M. le Comte had better wait a moment longer; madame is disengaged," said Maurice, as he returned to the ante-chamber.

°°°°Just at that moment Father Goriot appeared close to the gate; he had emerged from a door at the foot of the back staircase. The worthy soul was preparing to open his umbrella regardless of the fact that the great gate had opened to admit a tilbury, in which a young man with a ribbon at his button-hole was seated. Father Goriot had scarcely time to start back and save himself. The horse took fright at the umbrella, swerved, and dashed forward towards the flight of steps. The young man looked round in annoyance, saw Father Goriot, and greeted him as he went out with constrained courtesy, such as people usually show to a money- lender so long as they require his services, or the sort of respect they feel it necessary to show for some one whose reputation has been blown upon, so that they blush to acknowledge his acquaintance. Father Goriot gave him a little friendly nod and a good-natured smile. All this happened with lightning speed. Eugene was so deeply interested that he forgot that he was not alone till he suddenly heard the Countess' voice.

°°°°"Oh! Maxime, were you going away?" she said reproachfully, with a shade of pique in her manner. The Countess had not seen the incident nor the entrance of the tilbury. Rastignac turned abruptly and saw her standing before him, coquettishly dressed in a loose white cashmere gown with knots of rose-colored ribbon here and there; her hair was carelessly coiled about her head, as is the wont of Parisian women in the morning; there was a soft fragrance about her--doubtless she was fresh from a bath;--her graceful form seemed more flexible, her beauty more luxuriant. Her eyes glistened. A young man can see everything at a glance; he feels the radiant influence of woman as a plant discerns and absorbs its nutriment from the air; he did not need to touch her hands to feel their cool freshness. He saw faint rose tints through the cashmere of the dressing gown; it had fallen slightly open, giving glimpses of a bare throat, on which the student's eyes rested. The Countess had no need of the adventitious aid of corsets; her girdle defined the outlines of her slender waist; her throat was a challenge to love; her feet, thrust into slippers, were daintily small. As Maxime took her hand and kissed it, Eugene became aware of Maxime's existence, and the Countess saw Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! is that you M. de Rastignac? I am very glad to see you," she said, but there was something in her manner that a shrewd observer would have taken as a hint to depart.

°°°°Maxime, as the Countess Anastasie had called the young man with the haughty insolence of bearing, looked from Eugene to the lady, and from the lady to Eugene; it was sufficiently evident that he wished to be rid of the latter. An exact and faithful rendering of the glance might be given in the words: "Look here, my dear; I hope you intend to send this little whipper-snapper about his business."

°°°°The Countess consulted the young man's face with an intent submissiveness that betrays all the secrets of a woman's heart, and Rastignac all at once began to hate him violently. To begin with, the sight of the fair carefully arranged curls on the other's comely head had convinced him that his own crop was hideous; Maxime's boots, moreover, were elegant and spotless, while his own, in spite of all his care, bore some traces of his recent walk; and, finally, Maxime's overcoat fitted the outline of his figure gracefully, he looked like a pretty woman, while Eugene was wearing a black coat at half-past two. The quick- witted child of the Charente felt the disadvantage at which he was placed beside this tall, slender dandy, with the clear gaze and the pale face, one of those men who would ruin orphan children without scruple. Mme. de Restaud fled into the next room without waiting for Eugene to speak; shaking out the skirts of her dressing-gown in her flight, so that she looked like a white butterfly, and Maxime hurried after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant's ball; he guessed the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he said to himself, "This is my rival; I mean to cut him out."

°°°°Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls's eye twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and so sulkily, that Anastasie's fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, "Why do you not go?" a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make their exit.

°°°°Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

°°°°"Madame," he began, "I hastened to call upon you----"

°°°°He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess; he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime with a cordial "Good morning," that astonished Eugene not a little. The young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

°°°°"M. de Restaud," said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law student.

°°°°Eugene bowed profoundly.

°°°°"This gentleman," she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband, "is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last ball."

°°°°Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs! These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house, produced a magical effect. The Count's stiff manner relaxed at once as he returned the student's bow.

°°°°"Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance," he said.

°°°°Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a fairy's wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open again; Rastignac's carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer's lodging- house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

°°°°"I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct," the Comte de Restaud said, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, they are extinct," answered the law student. "My great- uncle, the Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family. They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault, Mme. de Beauseant's grandfather on the mother's side. We are the younger branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King's service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated."

°°°°"Was not your great-uncle in command of the Vengeur before 1789?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the Warwick."

°°°°Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who should say, "If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that fellow, it is all over with us." Anastasie understood the glance that M. de Trailles gave her. With a woman's admirable tact, she began to smile and said:

°°°°"Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the Warwick and the Vengeur."

°°°°She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the boudoir. The morganatic couple (to use a convenient German expression which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

°°°°"Anastasie!" he cried pettishly, "just stay a moment, dear; you know very well that----"

°°°°"I am coming back in a minute," she interrupted; "I have a commission for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it."

°°°°She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her husband's voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands' characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, "You are busy, I do not want to interrupt you; good-day," and he went.

°°°°"Just wait a moment, Maxime!" the Count called after him.

°°°°"Come and dine with us," said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure that Rastignac had taken his leave.

°°°°The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover, for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate, hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair typical Parisian.

°°°°"Anastasie!" the Count called again to his wife.

°°°°"Poor Maxime!" she said, addressing the young man. "Come, we must resign ourselves. This evening----"

°°°°"I hope, Nasie," he said in her ear, "that you will give orders not to admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you will compel me to kill him."

°°°°"Are you mad, Maxime?" she said. "A young lad of a student is, on the contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him."

°°°°Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip, and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had been closed after him.

°°°°"What do you think, dear?" cried the Count, her husband, "this gentleman's family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted."

°°°°"Delighted to find that we have acquaintances in common," said the Countess, with a preoccupied manner.

°°°°"More than you think," said Eugene, in a low voice.

°°°°"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

°°°°"Why, only just now," said the student, "I saw a gentleman go out at the gate, Father Goriot, my next door neighbor in the house where I am lodging."

°°°°At the sound of this name, and the prefix that embellished it, the Count, who was stirring the fire, let the tongs fall as though they had burned his fingers, and rose to his feet.

°°°°"Sir," he cried, "you might have called him 'Monsieur Goriot'!"

°°°°The Countess turned pale at first at the sight of her husband's vexation, then she reddened; clearly she was embarrassed, her answer was made in a tone that she tried to make natural, and with an air of assumed carelessness:

°°°°"You could not know any one who is dearer to us both . . ."

°°°°She broke off, glanced at the piano as if some fancy had crossed her mind, and asked, "Are you fond of music, M. de Rastignac?"

°°°°"Exceedingly," answered Eugene, flushing, and disconcerted by a dim suspicion that he had somehow been guilty of a clumsy piece of folly.

°°°°"Do you sing?" she cried, going to the piano, and, sitting down before it, she swept her fingers over the keyboard from end to end. R-r-r-rah!

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°The Comte de Restaud walked to and fro.

°°°°"That is a pity; you are without one great means of success.--Ca- ro, ca-a-ro, ca-a-a-ro, non du-bi-ta-re," sang the Countess.

°°°°Eugene had a second time waved a magic wand when he uttered Goriot's name, but the effect seemed to be entirely opposite to that produced by the formula "related to Mme. de Beauseant." His position was not unlike that of some visitor permitted as a favor to inspect a private collection of curiosities, when by inadvertence he comes into collision with a glass case full of sculptured figures, and three or four heads, imperfectly secured, fall at the shock. He wished the earth would open and swallow him. Mme. de Restaud's expression was reserved and chilly, her eyes had grown indifferent, and sedulously avoided meeting those of the unlucky student of law.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "you wish to talk with M. de Restaud; permit me to wish you good-day----"

°°°°The Countess interrupted him by a gesture, saying hastily, "Whenever you come to see us, both M. de Restaud and I shall be delighted to see you."

°°°°Eugene made a profound bow and took his leave, followed by M. de Restaud, who insisted, in spite of his remonstrances, on accompanying him into the hall.

°°°°"Neither your mistress nor I are at home to that gentleman when he calls," the Count said to Maurice.

°°°°As Eugene set foot on the steps, he saw that it was raining.

°°°°"Come," said he to himself, "somehow I have just made a mess of it, I do not know how. And now I am going to spoil my hat and coat into the bargain. I ought to stop in my corner, grind away at law, and never look to be anything but a boorish country magistrate. How can I go into society, when to manage properly you want a lot of cabs, varnished boots, gold watch chains, and all sorts of things; you have to wear white doeskin gloves that cost six francs in the morning, and primrose kid gloves every evening? A fig for that old humbug of a Goriot!"

°°°°When he reached the street door, the driver of a hackney coach, who had probably just deposited a wedding party at their door, and asked nothing better than a chance of making a little money for himself without his employer's knowledge, saw that Eugene had no umbrella, remarked his black coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, and varnished boots, and stopped and looked at him inquiringly. Eugene, in the blind desperation that drives a young man to plunge deeper and deeper into an abyss, as if he might hope to find a fortunate issue in its lowest depths, nodded in reply to the driver's signal, and stepped into the cab; a few stray petals of orange blossom and scraps of wire bore witness to its recent occupation by a wedding party.

°°°°"Where am I to drive, sir?" demanded the man, who, by this time, had taken off his white gloves.

°°°°"Confound it!" Eugene said to himself, "I am in for it now, and at least I will not spend cab-hire for nothing!--Drive to the Hotel Beauseant," he said aloud.

°°°°"Which?" asked the man, a portentous word that reduced Eugene to confusion. This young man of fashion, species incerta, did not know that there were two Hotels Beauseant; he was not aware how rich he was in relations who did not care about him.

°°°°"The Vicomte de Beauseant, Rue----"

°°°°"De Grenelle," interrupted the driver, with a jerk of his head. "You see, there are the hotels of the Marquis and Comte de Beauseant in the Rue Saint-Dominique," he added, drawing up the step.

°°°°"I know all about that," said Eugene, severely.--"Everybody is laughing at me to-day, it seems!" he said to himself, as he deposited his hat on the opposite seat. "This escapade will cost me a king's ransom, but, at any rate, I shall call on my so- called cousin in a thoroughly aristocratic fashion. Goriot has cost me ten francs already, the old scoundrel. My word! I will tell Mme. de Beauseant about my adventure; perhaps it may amuse her. Doubtless she will know the secret of the criminal relation between that handsome woman and the old rat without a tail. It would be better to find favor in my cousin's eyes than to come in contact with that shameless woman, who seems to me to have very expensive tastes. Surely the beautiful Vicomtesse's personal interest would turn the scale for me, when the mere mention of her name produces such an effect. Let us look higher. If you set yourself to carry the heights of heaven, you must face God."

°°°°The innumerable thoughts that surged through his brain might be summed up in these phrases. He grew calmer, and recovered something of his assurance as he watched the falling rain. He told himself that though he was about to squander two of the precious five-franc pieces that remained to him, the money was well laid out in preserving his coat, boots, and hat; and his cabman's cry of "Gate, if you please," almost put him in spirits. A Swiss, in scarlet and gold, appeared, the great door groaned on its hinges, and Rastignac, with sweet satisfaction, beheld his equipage pass under the archway and stop before the flight of steps beneath the awning. The driver, in a blue-and-red greatcoat, dismounted and let down the step. As Eugene stepped out of the cab, he heard smothered laughter from the peristyle. Three or four lackeys were making merry over the festal appearance of the vehicle. In another moment the law student was enlightened as to the cause of their hilarity; he felt the full force of the contrast between his equipage and one of the smartest broughams in Paris; a coachman, with powdered hair, seemed to find it difficult to hold a pair of spirited horses, who stood chafing the bit. In Mme. de Restaud's courtyard, in the Chaussee d'Antin, he had seen the neat turnout of a young man of six-and-twenty; in the Faubourg Saint-Germain he found the luxurious equipage of a man of rank; thirty thousand francs would not have purchased it.

°°°°"Who can be here?" said Eugene to himself. He began to understand, though somewhat tardily, that he must not expect to find many women in Paris who were not already appropriated, and that the capture of one of these queens would be likely to cost something more than bloodshed. "Confound it all! I expect my cousin also has her Maxime."

°°°°He went up the steps, feeling that he was a blighted being. The glass door was opened for him; the servants were as solemn as jackasses under the curry comb. So far, Eugene had only been in the ballroom on the ground floor of the Hotel Beauseant; the fete had followed so closely on the invitation, that he had not had time to call on his cousin, and had therefore never seen Mme. de Beauseant's apartments; he was about to behold for the first time a great lady among the wonderful and elegant surroundings that reveal her character and reflect her daily life. He was the more curious, because Mme. de Restaud's drawing-room had provided him with a standard of comparison.

°°°°At half-past four the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was visible. Five minutes earlier she would not have received her cousin, but Eugene knew nothing of the recognized routine of various houses in Paris. He was conducted up the wide, white-painted, crimson- carpeted staircase, between the gilded balusters and masses of flowering plants, to Mme. de Beauseant's apartments. He did not know the rumor current about Mme. de Beauseant, one of the biographies told, with variations, in whispers, every evening in the salons of Paris.

°°°°For three years past her name had been spoken of in connection with that of one of the most wealthy and distinguished Portuguese nobles, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto. It was one of those innocent liaisons which possess so much charm for the two thus attached to each other that they find the presence of a third person intolerable. The Vicomte de Beauseant, therefore, had himself set an example to the rest of the world by respecting, with as good a grace as might be, this morganatic union. Any one who came to call on the Vicomtesse in the early days of this friendship was sure to find the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto there. As, under the circumstances, Mme. de Beauseant could not very well shut her door against these visitors, she gave them such a cold reception, and showed so much interest in the study of the ceiling, that no one could fail to understand how much he bored her; and when it became known in Paris that Mme. de Beauseant was bored by callers between two and four o'clock, she was left in perfect solitude during that interval. She went to the Bouffons or to the Opera with M. de Beauseant and M. d'Ajuda-Pinto; and M. de Beauseant, like a well-bred man of the world, always left his wife and the Portuguese as soon as he had installed them. But M. d'Ajuda-Pinto must marry, and a Mlle. de Rochefide was the young lady. In the whole fashionable world there was but one person who as yet knew nothing of the arrangement, and that was Mme. de Beauseant. Some of her friends had hinted at the possibility, and she had laughed at them, believing that envy had prompted those ladies to try to make mischief. And now, though the bans were about to be published, and although the handsome Portuguese had come that day to break the news to the Vicomtesse, he had not found courage as yet to say one word about his treachery. How was it? Nothing is doubtless more difficult than the notification of an ultimatum of this kind. There are men who feel more at their ease when they stand up before another man who threatens their lives with sword or pistol than in the presence of a woman who, after two hours of lamentations and reproaches, falls into a dead swoon and requires salts. At this moment, therefore, M. d'Ajuda-Pinto was on thorns, and anxious to take his leave. He told himself that in some way or other the news would reach Mme. de Beauseant; he would write, it would be much better to do it by letter, and not to utter the words that should stab her to the heart.

°°°°So when the servant announced M. Eugene de Rastignac, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto trembled with joy. To be sure, a loving woman shows even more ingenuity in inventing doubts of her lover than in varying the monotony of his happiness; and when she is about to be forsaken, she instinctively interprets every gesture as rapidly as Virgil's courser detected the presence of his companion by snuffing the breeze. It was impossible, therefore, that Mme. de Beauseant should not detect that involuntary thrill of satisfaction; slight though it was, it was appalling in its artlessness.

°°°°Eugene had yet to learn that no one in Paris should present himself in any house without first making himself acquainted with the whole history of its owner, and of its owner's wife and family, so that he may avoid making any of the terrible blunders which in Poland draw forth the picturesque exclamation, "Harness five bullocks to your cart!" probably because you will need them all to pull you out of the quagmire into which a false step has plunged you. If, down to the present day, our language has no name for these conversational disasters, it is probably because they are believed to be impossible, the publicity given in Paris to every scandal is so prodigious. After the awkward incident at Mme. de Restaud's, no one but Eugene could have reappeared in his character of bullock-driver in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room. But if Mme. de Restaud and M. de Trailles had found him horribly in the way, M. d'Ajuda hailed his coming with relief.

°°°°"Good-bye," said the Portuguese, hurrying to the door, as Eugene made his entrance into a dainty little pink-and-gray drawing- room, where luxury seemed nothing more than good taste.

°°°°"Until this evening," said Mme. de Beauseant, turning her head to give the Marquis a glance. "We are going to the Bouffons, are we not?"

°°°°"I cannot go," he said, with his fingers on the door handle.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant rose and beckoned to him to return. She did not pay the slightest attention to Eugene, who stood there dazzled by the sparkling marvels around him; he began to think that this was some story out of the Arabian Nights made real, and did not know where to hide himself, when the woman before him seemed to be unconscious of his existence. The Vicomtesse had raised the forefinger of her right hand, and gracefully signed to the Marquis to seat himself beside her. The Marquis felt the imperious sway of passion in her gesture; he came back towards her. Eugene watched him, not without a feeling of envy.

°°°°"That is the owner of the brougham!" he said to himself. "But is it necessary to have a pair of spirited horses, servants in livery, and torrents of gold to draw a glance from a woman here in Paris?"

°°°°The demon of luxury gnawed at his heart, greed burned in his veins, his throat was parched with the thirst of gold.

°°°°He had a hundred and thirty francs every quarter. His father, mother, brothers, sisters, and aunt did not spend two hundred francs a month among them. This swift comparison between his present condition and the aims he had in view helped to benumb his faculties.

°°°°"Why not?" the Vicomtesse was saying, as she smiled at the Portuguese. "Why cannot you come to the Italiens?"

°°°°"Affairs! I am to dine with the English Ambassador."

°°°°"Throw him over."

°°°°When a man once enters on a course of deception, he is compelled to add lie to lie. M. d'Ajuda therefore said, smiling, "Do you lay your commands on me?"

°°°°"Yes, certainly."

°°°°"That was what I wanted to have you say to me," he answered, dissembling his feelings in a glance which would have reassured any other woman.

°°°°He took the Vicomtesse's hand, kissed it, and went.

°°°°Eugene ran his fingers through his hair, and constrained himself to bow. He thought that now Mme. de Beauseant would give him her attention; but suddenly she sprang forward, rushed to a window in the gallery, and watched M. d'Ajuda step into his carriage; she listened to the order that he gave, and heard the Swiss repeat it to the coachman:

°°°°"To M. de Rochefide's house."

°°°°Those words, and the way in which M. d'Ajuda flung himself back in the carriage, were like a lightning flash and a thunderbolt for her; she walked back again with a deadly fear gnawing at her heart. The most terrible catastrophes only happen among the heights. The Vicomtesse went to her own room, sat down at a table, and took up a sheet of dainty notepaper.

°°°°"When, instead of dining with the English Ambassador,"   she wrote, "you go to the Rochefides, you owe me an   explanation, which I am waiting to hear."

°°°°She retraced several of the letters, for her hand was trembling so that they were indistinct; then she signed the note with an initial C for "Claire de Bourgogne," and rang the bell.

°°°°"Jacques," she said to the servant, who appeared immediately, "take this note to M. de Rochefide's house at half-past seven and ask for the Marquis d'Ajuda. If M. d'Ajuda is there, leave the note without waiting for an answer; if he is not there, bring the note back to me."

°°°°"Madame la Vicomtess, there is a visitor in the drawing-room."

°°°°"Ah! yes, of course," she said, opening the door.

°°°°Eugene was beginning to feel very uncomfortable, but at last the Vicomtesse appeared; she spoke to him, and the tremulous tones of her voice vibrated through his heart.

°°°°"Pardon me, monsieur," she said; "I had a letter to write. Now I am quite at liberty."

°°°°She scarcely knew what she was saying, for even as she spoke she thought, "Ah! he means to marry Mlle. de Rochefide? But is he still free? This evening the marriage shall be broken off, or else . . . But before to-morrow I shall know."

°°°°"Cousin . . ." the student replied.

°°°°"Eh?" said the Countess, with an insolent glance that sent a cold shudder through Eugene; he understood what that "Eh?" meant; he had learned a great deal in three hours, and his wits were on the alert. He reddened:

°°°°"Madame . . ." he began; he hesitated a moment, and then went on. "Pardon me; I am in such need of protection that the nearest scrap of relationship could do me no harm."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant smiled but there was sadness in her smile; even now she felt forebodings of the coming pain, the air she breathed was heavy with the storm that was about to burst.

°°°°"If you knew how my family are situated," he went on, "you would love to play the part of a beneficent fairy godmother who graciously clears the obstacles from the path of her protege."

°°°°"Well, cousin," she said, laughing, "and how can I be of service to you?"

°°°°"But do I know even that? I am distantly related to you, and this obscure and remote relationship is even now a perfect godsend to me. You have confused my ideas; I cannot remember the things that I meant to say to you. I know no one else here in Paris. . . . Ah! if I could only ask you to counsel me, ask you to look upon me as a poor child who would fain cling to the hem of your dress, who would lay down his life for you."

°°°°"Would you kill a man for me?"

°°°°"Two," said Eugene.

°°°°"You, child. Yes, you are a child," she said, keeping back the tears that came to her eyes; "you would love sincerely."

°°°°"Oh!" he cried, flinging up his head.

°°°°The audacity of the student's answer interested the Vicomtesse in him. The southern brain was beginning to scheme for the first time. Between Mme. de Restaud's blue boudoir and Mme. de Beauseant's rose-colored drawing-room he had made a three years' advance in a kind of law which is not a recognized study in Paris, although it is a sort of higher jurisprudence, and, when well understood, is a highroad to success of every kind.

°°°°"Ah! that is what I meant to say!" said Eugene. "I met Mme. de Restaud at your ball, and this morning I went to see her.

°°°°"You must have been very much in the way," said Mme. de Beauseant, smiling as she spoke.

°°°°"Yes, indeed. I am a novice, and my blunders will set every one against me, if you do not give me your counsel. I believe that in Paris it is very difficult to meet with a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion who would be willing to teach me, what you women can explain so well--life. I shall find a M. de Trailles everywhere. So I have come to you to ask you to give me a key to a puzzle, to entreat you to tell me what sort of blunder I made this morning. I mentioned an old man----"

°°°°"Madame la Duchess de Langeais," Jacques cut the student short; Eugene gave expression to his intense annoyance by a gesture.

°°°°"If you mean to succeed," said the Vicomtesse in a low voice, "in the first place you must not be so demonstrative."

°°°°"Ah! good morning, dear," she continued, and rising and crossing the room, she grasped the Duchess' hands as affectionately as if they had been sisters; the Duchess responded in the prettiest and most gracious way.

°°°°"Two intimate friends!" said Rastignac to himself. "Henceforward I shall have two protectresses; those two women are great friends, no doubt, and this newcomer will doubtless interest herself in her friend's cousin."

°°°°"To what happy inspiration do I owe this piece of good fortune, dear Antoinette?" asked Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°"Well, I saw M. d'Ajuda-Pinto at M. de Rochefide's door, so I thought that if I came I should find you alone."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant's mouth did not tighten, her color did not rise, her expression did not alter, or rather, her brow seemed to clear as the Duchess uttered those deadly words.

°°°°"If I had known that you were engaged----" the speaker added, glancing at Eugene.

°°°°"This gentleman is M. Eugene de Rastignac, one of my cousins," said the Vicomtesse. "Have you any news of General de Montriveau?" she continued. "Serizy told me yesterday that he never goes anywhere now; has he been to see you to-day?"

°°°°It was believed that the Duchess was desperately in love with M. de Montriveau, and that he was a faithless lover; she felt the question in her very heart, and her face flushed as she answered:

°°°°"He was at the Elysee yesterday."

°°°°"In attendance?"

°°°°"Claire," returned the Duchess, and hatred overflowed in the glances she threw at Mme. de Beauseant; "of course you know that M. d'Ajuda-Pinto is going to marry Mlle. de Rochefide; the bans will be published to-morrow."

°°°°This thrust was too cruel; the Vicomtesse's face grew white, but she answered, laughing, "One of those rumors that fools amuse themselves with. What should induce M. d'Ajuda to take one of the noblest names in Portugal to the Rochefides? The Rochefides were only ennobled yesterday."

°°°°"But Bertha will have two hundred thousand livres a year, they say."

°°°°"M. d'Ajuda is too wealthy to marry for money."

°°°°"But, my dear, Mlle. de Rochefide is a charming girl."

°°°°"Indeed?"

°°°°"And, as a matter of fact, he is dining with them to-day; the thing is settled. It is very surprising to me that you should know so little about it."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant turned to Rastignac. "What was the blunder that you made, monsieur?" she asked. "The poor boy is only just launched into the world, Antoinette, so that he understands nothing of all this that we are speaking of. Be merciful to him, and let us finish our talk to-morrow. Everything will be announced to-morrow, you know, and your kind informal communication can be accompanied by official confirmation."

°°°°The Duchess gave Eugene one of those insolent glances that measure a man from head to foot, and leave him crushed and annihilated.

°°°°"Madame, I have unwittingly plunged a dagger into Mme. de Restaud's heart; unwittingly--therein lies my offence," said the student of law, whose keen brain had served him sufficiently well, for he had detected the biting epigrams that lurked beneath this friendly talk. "You continue to receive, possibly you fear, those who know the amount of pain that they deliberately inflict; but a clumsy blunderer who has no idea how deeply he wounds is looked upon as a fool who does not know how to make use of his opportunities, and every one despise him."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant gave the student a glance, one of those glances in which a great soul can mingle dignity and gratitude. It was like balm to the law student, who was still smarting under the Duchess' insolent scrutiny; she had looked at him as an auctioneer might look at some article to appraise its value.

°°°°"Imagine, too, that I had just made some progress with the Comte de Restaud; for I should tell you, madame," he went on, turning to the Duchess with a mixture of humility and malice in his manner, "that as yet I am only a poor devil of a student, very much alone in the world, and very poor----"

°°°°"You should not tell us that, M. de Rastignac. We women never care about anything that no one else will take."

°°°°"Bah!" said Eugene. "I am only two-and-twenty, and I must make up my mind to the drawbacks of my time of life. Besides, I am confessing my sins, and it would be impossible to kneel in a more charming confessional; you commit your sins in one drawing-room, and receive absolution for them in another."

°°°°The Duchess' expression grew colder, she did not like the flippant tone of these remarks, and showed that she considered them to be in bad taste by turning to the Vicomtesse with--"This gentleman has only just come----"

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant began to laugh outright at her cousin and at the Duchess both.

°°°°"He has only just come to Paris, dear, and is in search of some one who will give him lessons in good taste."

°°°°"Mme. la Duchesse," said Eugene, "is it not natural to wish to be initiated into the mysteries which charm us?" ("Come, now," he said to himself, "my language is superfinely elegant, I'm sure.")

°°°°"But Mme. de Restaud is herself, I believe, M. de Trailles' pupil," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Of that I had no idea, madame," answered the law student, "so I rashly came between them. In fact, I got on very well with the lady's husband, and his wife tolerated me for a time until I took it into my head to tell them that I knew some one of whom I had just caught a glimpse as he went out by a back staircase, a man who had given the Countess a kiss at the end of a passage."

°°°°"Who was it?" both women asked together.

°°°°"An old man who lives at the rate of two louis a month in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, where I, a poor student, lodge likewise. He is a truly unfortunate creature, everybody laughs at him--we all call him 'Father Goriot.' "

°°°°"Why, child that you are," cried the Vicomtesse, "Mme. de Restaud was a Mlle. Goriot!"

°°°°"The daughter of a vermicelli manufacturer," the Duchess added; "and when the little creature went to Court, the daughter of a pastry-cook was presented on the same day. Do you remember, Claire? The King began to laugh, and made some joke in Latin about flour. People--what was it?--people----"

°°°°"Ejusdem farinae," said Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that was it," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Oh! is that her father?" the law student continued, aghast.

°°°°"Yes, certainly; the old man had two daughters; he dotes on them, so to speak, though they will scarcely acknowledge him."

°°°°"Didn't the second daughter marry a banker with a German name?" the Vicomtesse asked, turning to Mme. de Langeais, "a Baron de Nucingen? And her name is Delphine, is it not? Isn't she a fair- haired woman who has a side-box at the Opera? She comes sometimes to the Bouffons, and laughs loudly to attract attention."

°°°°The Duchess smiled and said:

°°°°"I wonder at you, dear. Why do you take so much interest in people of that kind? One must have been as madly in love as Restaud was, to be infatuated with Mlle. Anastasie and her flour sacks. Oh! he will not find her a good bargain! She is in M. de Trailles' hands, and he will ruin her."

°°°°"And they do not acknowledge their father!" Eugene repeated.

°°°°"Oh! well, yes, their father, the father, a father," replied the Vicomtesse, "a kind father who gave them each five or six hundred thousand francs, it is said, to secure their happiness by marrying them well; while he only kept eight or ten thousand livres a year for himself, thinking that his daughters would always be his daughters, thinking that in them he would live his life twice over again, that in their houses he should find two homes, where he would be loved and looked up to, and made much of. And in two years' time both his sons-in-law had turned him out of their houses as if he were one of the lowest outcasts."

°°°°Tears came into Eugene's eyes. He was still under the spell of youthful beliefs, he had just left home, pure and sacred feelings had been stirred within him, and this was his first day on the battlefield of civilization in Paris. Genuine feeling is so infectious that for a moment the three looked at each other in silence.

°°°°"Eh, mon Dieu!" said Mme. de Langeais; "yes, it seems very horrible, and yet we see such things every day. Is there not a reason for it? Tell me, dear, have you ever really thought what a son-in-law is? A son-in-law is the man for whom we bring up, you and I, a dear little one, bound to us very closely in innumerable ways; for seventeen years she will be the joy of her family, its 'white soul,' as Lamartine says, and suddenly she will become its scourge. When HE comes and takes her from us, his love from the very beginning is like an axe laid to the root of all the old affection in our darling's heart, and all the ties that bound her to her family are severed. But yesterday our little daughter thought of no one but her mother and father, as we had no thought that was not for her; by to-morrow she will have become a hostile stranger. The tragedy is always going on under our eyes. On the one hand you see a father who has sacrificed himself to his son, and his daughter-in-law shows him the last degree of insolence. On the other hand, it is the son-in-law who turns his wife's mother out of the house. I sometimes hear it said that there is nothing dramatic about society in these days; but the Drama of the Son-in-law is appalling, to say nothing of our marriages, which have come to be very poor farces. I can explain how it all came about in the old vermicelli maker's case. I think I recollect that Foriot----"

°°°°"Goriot, madame."

°°°°"Yes, that Moriot was once President of his Section during the Revolution. He was in the secret of the famous scarcity of grain, and laid the foundation of his fortune in those days by selling flour for ten times its cost. He had as much flour as he wanted. My grandmother's steward sold him immense quantities. No doubt Noriot shared the plunder with the Committee of Public Salvation, as that sort of person always did. I recollect the steward telling my grandmother that she might live at Grandvilliers in complete security, because her corn was as good as a certificate of civism. Well, then, this Loriot, who sold corn to those butchers, has never had but one passion, they say--he idolizes his daughters. He settled one of them under Restaud's roof, and grafted the other into the Nucingen family tree, the Baron de Nucingen being a rich banker who had turned Royalist. You can quite understand that so long as Bonaparte was Emperor, the two sons-in-law could manage to put up with the old Ninety-three; but after the restoration of the Bourbons, M. de Restaud felt bored by the old man's society, and the banker was still more tired of it. His daughters were still fond of him; they wanted 'to keep the goat and the cabbage,' so they used to see Joriot whenever there was no one there, under pretence of affection. 'Come to- day, papa, we shall have you all to ourselves, and that will be much nicer!' and all that sort of thing. As for me, dear, I believe that love has second-sight: poor Ninety-three; his heart must have bled. He saw that his daughters were ashamed of him, that if they loved their husbands his visits must make mischief. So he immolated himself. He made the sacrifice because he was a father; he went into voluntary exile. His daughters were satisfied, so he thought that he had done the best thing he could; but it was a family crime, and father and daughters were accomplices. You see this sort of thing everywhere. What could this old Doriot have been but a splash of mud in his daughters' drawing-rooms? He would only have been in the way, and bored other people, besides being bored himself. And this that happened between father and daughters may happen to the prettiest woman in

°°°°Paris and the man she loves the best; if her love grows tiresome, he will go; he will descend to the basest trickery to leave her. It is the same with all love and friendship. Our heart is a treasury; if you pour out all its wealth at once, you are bankrupt. We show no more mercy to the affection that reveals its utmost extent than we do to another kind of prodigal who has not a penny left. Their father had given them all he had. For twenty years he had given his whole heart to them; then, one day, he gave them all his fortune too. The lemon was squeezed; the girls left the rest in the gutter."

°°°°"The world is very base," said the Vicomtesse, plucking at the threads of her shawl. She did not raise her head as she spoke; the words that Mme. de Langeais had meant for her in the course of her story had cut her to the quick.

°°°°"Base? Oh, no," answered the Duchess; "the world goes its own way, that is all. If I speak in this way, it is only to show that I am not duped by it. I think as you do," she said, pressing the Vicomtesse's hand. "The world is a slough; let us try to live on the heights above it."

°°°°She rose to her feet and kissed Mme. de Beauseant on the forehead as she said: "You look very charming to-day, dear. I have never seen such a lovely color in your cheeks before."

°°°°Then she went out with a slight inclination of the head to the cousin.

°°°°"Father Goriot is sublime!" said Eugene to himself, as he remembered how he had watched his neighbor work the silver vessel into a shapeless mass that night.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant did not hear him; she was absorbed in her own thoughts. For several minutes the silence remained unbroken till the law student became almost paralyzed with embarrassment, and was equally afraid to go or stay or speak a word.

°°°°"The world is basely ungrateful and ill-natured," said the Vicomtesse at last. "No sooner does a trouble befall you than a friend is ready to bring the tidings and to probe your heart with the point of a dagger while calling on you to admire the handle. Epigrams and sarcasms already! Ah! I will defend myself!"

°°°°She raised her head like the great lady that she was, and lightnings flashed from her proud eyes.

°°°°"Ah!" she said, as she saw Eugene, "are you there?"

°°°°"Still," he said piteously.

°°°°"Well, then, M. de Rastignac, deal with the world as it deserves. You are determined to succeed? I will help you. You shall sound the depths of corruption in woman; you shall measure the extent of man's pitiful vanity. Deeply as I am versed in such learning, there were pages in the book of life that I had not read. Now I know all. The more cold-blooded your calculations, the further you will go. Strike ruthlessly; you will be feared. Men and women for you must be nothing more than post-horses; take a fresh relay, and leave the last to drop by the roadside; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition. You will be nothing here, you see, unless a woman interests herself in you; and she must be young and wealthy, and a woman of the world. Yet, if you have a heart, lock it carefully away like a treasure; do not let any one suspect it, or you will be lost; you would cease to be the executioner, you would take the victim's place. And if ever you should love, never let your secret escape you! Trust no one until you are very sure of the heart to which you open your heart. Learn to mistrust every one; take every precaution for the sake of the love which does not exist as yet. Listen, Miguel"-- the name slipped from her so naturally that she did not notice her mistake--"there is something still more appalling than the ingratitude of daughters who have cast off their old father and wish that he were dead, and that is a rivalry between two sisters. Restaud comes of a good family, his wife has been received into their circle; she has been presented at court; and her sister, her wealthy sister, Mme. Delphine de Nucingen, the wife of a great capitalist, is consumed with envy, and ready to die of spleen. There is gulf set between the sisters--indeed, they are sisters no longer--the two women who refuse to acknowledge their father do not acknowledge each other. So Mme. de Nucingen would lap up all the mud that lies between the Rue Saint-Lazare and the Rue de Grenelle to gain admittance to my salon. She fancied that she should gain her end through de Marsay; she has made herself de Marsay's slave, and she bores him. De Marsay cares very little about her. If you will introduce her to me, you will be her darling, her Benjamin; she will idolize you. If, after that, you can love her, do so; if not, make her useful. I will ask her to come once or twice to one of my great crushes, but I will never receive her here in the morning. I will bow to her when I see her, and that will be quite sufficient. You have shut the Comtesse de Restaud's door against you by mentioning Father Goriot's name. Yes, my good friend, you may call at her house twenty times, and every time out of the twenty you will find that she is not at home. The servants have their orders, and will not admit you. Very well, then, now let Father Goriot gain the right of entry into her sister's house for you. The beautiful Mme. de Nucingen will give the signal for a battle. As soon as she singles you out, other women will begin to lose their heads about you, and her enemies and rivals and intimate friends will all try to take you from her. There are women who will fall in love with a man because another woman has chosen him; like the city madams, poor things, who copy our millinery, and hope thereby to acquire our manners. You will have a success, and in Paris success is everything; it is the key of power. If the women credit you with wit and talent, the men will follow suit so long as you do not undeceive them yourself. There will be nothing you may not aspire to; you will go everywhere, and you will find out what the world is--an assemblage of fools and knaves. But you must be neither the one nor the other. I am giving you my name like Ariadne's clue of thread to take with you into the labyrinth; make no unworthy use of it," she said, with a queenly glance and curve of her throat; "give it back to me unsullied. And now, go; leave me. We women also have our battles to fight."

°°°°"And if you should ever need some one who would gladly set a match to a train for you----"

°°°°"Well?" she asked.

°°°°He tapped his heart, smiled in answer to his cousin's smile, and went.

°°°°It was five o'clock, and Eugene was hungry; he was afraid lest he should not be in time for dinner, a misgiving which made him feel that it was pleasant to be borne so quickly across Paris. This sensation of physical comfort left his mind free to grapple with the thoughts that assailed him. A mortification usually sends a young man of his age into a furious rage; he shakes his fist at society, and vows vengeance when his belief in himself is shaken. Just then Rastignac was overwhelmed by the words, "You have shut the Countess' door against you."

°°°°"I shall call!" he said to himself, "and if Mme. de Beauseant is right, if I never find her at home--I . . . well, Mme. de Restaud shall meet me in every salon in Paris. I will learn to fence and have some pistol practice, and kill that Maxime of hers!"

°°°°"And money?" cried an inward monitor. "How about money, where is that to come from?" And all at once the wealth displayed in the Countess de Restaud's drawing-room rose before his eyes. That was the luxury which Goriot's daughter had loved too well, the gilding, the ostentatious splendor, the unintelligent luxury of the parvenu, the riotous extravagance of a courtesan. Then the attractive vision suddenly went under an eclipse as he remembered the stately grandeur of the Hotel de Beauseant. As his fancy wandered among these lofty regions in the great world of Paris, innumerable dark thoughts gathered in his heart; his ideas widened, and his conscience grew more elastic. He saw the world as it is; saw how the rich lived beyond the jurisdiction of law and public opinion, and found in success the ultima ratio mundi.

°°°°"Vautrin is right, success is virtue!" he said to himself.

°°°°Arrived in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, he rushed up to his room for ten francs wherewith to satisfy the demands of the cabman, and went in to dinner. He glanced round the squalid room, saw the eighteen poverty-stricken creatures about to feed like cattle in their stalls, and the sight filled him with loathing. The transition was too sudden, and the contrast was so violent that it could not but act as a powerful stimulant; his ambition developed and grew beyond all social bounds. On the one hand, he beheld a vision of social life in its most charming and refined forms, of quick-pulsed youth, of fair, impassioned faces invested with all the charm of poetry, framed in a marvelous setting of luxury or art; and, on the other hand, he saw a sombre picture, the miry verge beyond these faces, in which passion was extinct and nothing was left of the drama but the cords and pulleys and bare mechanism. Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, the words uttered in anger by the forsaken lady, her petulant offer, came to his mind, and poverty was a ready expositor. Rastignac determined to open two parallel trenches so as to insure success; he would be a learned doctor of law and a man of fashion. Clearly he was still a child! Those two lines are asymptotes, and will never meet.

°°°°"You are very dull, my lord Marquis," said Vautrin, with one of the shrewd glances that seem to read the innermost secrets of another mind.

°°°°"I am not in the humor to stand jokes from people who call me 'my lord Marquis,' " answered Eugene. "A marquis here in Paris, if he is not the veriest sham, ought to have a hundred thousand livres a year at least; and a lodger in the Maison Vauquer is not exactly Fortune's favorite."

°°°°Vautrin's glance at Rastignac was half-paternal, half- contemptuous. "Puppy!" it seemed to say; "I should make one mouthful of him!" Then he answered:

°°°°"You are in a bad humor; perhaps your visit to the beautiful Comtesse de Restaud was not a success."

°°°°"She has shut her door against me because I told her that her father dined at our table," cried Rastignac.

°°°°Glances were exchanged all round the room; Father Goriot looked down.

°°°°"You have sent some snuff into my eye," he said to his neighbor, turning a little aside to rub his hand over his face.

°°°°"Any one who molests Father Goriot will have henceforward to reckon with me," said Eugene, looking at the old man's neighbor; "he is worth all the rest of us put together.--I am not speaking of the ladies," he added, turning in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer.

°°°°Eugene's remarks produced a sensation, and his tone silenced the dinner-table. Vautrin alone spoke. "If you are going to champion Father Goriot, and set up for his responsible editor into the bargain, you had need be a crack shot and know how to handle the foils," he said, banteringly.

°°°°"So I intend," said Eugene.

°°°°"Then you are taking the field today?"

°°°°"Perhaps," Rastignac answered. "But I owe no account of myself to any one, especially as I do not try to find out what other people do of a night."

°°°°Vautrin looked askance at Rastignac.

°°°°"If you do not mean to be deceived by the puppets, my boy, you must go behind and see the whole show, and not peep through holes in the curtain. That is enough," he added, seeing that Eugene was about to fly into a passion. "We can have a little talk whenever you like."

°°°°There was a general feeling of gloom and constraint. Father Goriot was so deeply dejected by the student's remark that he did not notice the change in the disposition of his fellow-lodgers, nor know that he had met with a champion capable of putting an end to the persecution.

°°°°"Then, M. Goriot sitting there is the father of a countess," said Mme. Vauquer in a low voice.

°°°°"And of a baroness," answered Rastignac.

°°°°"That is about all he is capable of," said Bianchon to Rastignac; "I have taken a look at his head; there is only one bump--the bump of Paternity; he must be an ETERNAL FATHER."

°°°°Eugene was too intent on his thoughts to laugh at Bianchon's joke. He determined to profit by Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, and was asking himself how he could obtain the necessary money. He grew grave. The wide savannas of the world stretched before his eyes; all things lay before him, nothing was his. Dinner came to an end, the others went, and he was left in the dining-room.

°°°°"So you have seen my daughter?" Goriot spoke tremulously, and the sound of his voice broke in upon Eugene's dreams. The young man took the elder's hand, and looked at him with something like kindness in his eyes.

°°°°"You are a good and noble man," he said. "We will have some talk about your daughters by and by."

°°°°He rose without waiting for Goriot's answer, and went to his room. There he wrote the following letter to his mother:--

°°°°"My Dear Mother,--Can you nourish your child from your breast again? I am in a position to make a rapid fortune, but I want twelve hundred francs--I must have them at all costs. Say nothing about this to my father; perhaps he might make objections, and unless I have the money, I may be led to put an end to myself, and so escape the clutches of despair. I will tell you everything when I see you. I will not begin to try to describe my present situation; it would take volumes to put the whole story clearly and fully. I have not been gambling, my kind mother, I owe no one a penny; but if you would preserve the life that you gave me, you must send me the sum I mention. As a matter of fact, I go to see the Vicomtesse de Beauseant; she is using her influence for me; I am obliged to go into society, and I have not a penny to lay out on clean gloves. I can manage to exist on bread and water, or go without food, if need be, but I cannot do without the tools with which they cultivate the vineyards in this country. I must resolutely make up my mind at once to make my way, or stick in the mire for the rest of my days. I know that all your hopes are set on me, and I want to realize them quickly. Sell some of your old jewelry, my kind mother; I will give you other jewels very soon. I know enough of our affairs at home to know all that such a sacrifice means, and you must not think that I would lightly ask you to make it; I should be a monster if I could. You must think of my entreaty as a cry forced from me by imperative necessity. Our whole future lies in the subsidy with which I must begin my first campaign, for life in Paris is one continual battle. If you cannot otherwise procure the whole of the money, and are forced to sell our aunt's lace, tell her that I will send her some still handsomer," and so forth.

°°°°He wrote to ask each of his sisters for their savings--would they despoil themselves for him, and keep the sacrifice a secret from the family? To his request he knew that they would not fail to respond gladly, and he added to it an appeal to their delicacy by touching the chord of honor that vibrates so loudly in young and high-strung natures.

°°°°Yet when he had written the letters, he could not help feeling misgivings in spite of his youthful ambition; his heart beat fast, and he trembled. He knew the spotless nobleness of the lives buried away in the lonely manor house; he knew what trouble and what joy his request would cause his sisters, and how happy they would be as they talked at the bottom of the orchard of that dear brother of theirs in Paris. Visions rose before his eyes; a sudden strong light revealed his sisters secretly counting over their little store, devising some girlish stratagem by which the money could be sent to him incognito, essaying, for the first time in their lives, a piece of deceit that reached the sublime in its unselfishness.

°°°°"A sister's heart is a diamond for purity, a deep sea of tenderness!" he said to himself. He felt ashamed of those letters.

°°°°What power there must be in the petitions put up by such hearts; how pure the fervor that bears their souls to Heaven in prayer! What exquisite joy they would find in self-sacrifice! What a pang for his mother's heart if she could not send him all that he asked for! And this noble affection, these sacrifices made at such terrible cost, were to serve as the ladder by which he meant to climb to Delphine de Nucingen. A few tears, like the last grains of incense flung upon the sacred alter fire of the hearth, fell from his eyes. He walked up and down, and despair mingled with his emotion. Father Goriot saw him through the half-open door.

°°°°"What is the matter, sir?" he asked from the threshold.

°°°°"Ah! my good neighbor, I am as much a son and brother as you are a father. You do well to fear for the Comtesse Anastasie; there is one M. Maxime de Trailles, who will be her ruin."

°°°°Father Goriot withdrew, stammering some words, but Eugene failed to catch their meaning.

°°°°The next morning Rastignac went out to post his letters. Up to the last moment he wavered and doubted, but he ended by flinging them into the box. "I shall succeed!" he said to himself. So says the gambler; so says the great captain; but the three words that have been the salvation of some few, have been the ruin of many more.

°°°°A few days after this Eugene called at Mme. de Restaud's house; she was not at home. Three times he tried the experiment, and three times he found her doors closed against him, though he was careful to choose an hour when M. de Trailles was not there. The Vicomtesse was right.

°°°°The student studied no longer. He put in an appearance at lectures simply to answer to his name, and after thus attesting his presence, departed forthwith. He had been through a reasoning process familiar to most students. He had seen the advisability of deferring his studies to the last moment before going up for his examinations; he made up his mind to cram his second and third years' work into the third year, when he meant to begin to work in earnest, and to complete his studies in law with one great effort. In the meantime he had fifteen months in which to navigate the ocean of Paris, to spread the nets and set the lines that would bring him a protectress and a fortune. Twice during that week he saw Mme. de Beauseant; he did not go to her house until he had seen the Marquis d'Ajuda drive away.

°°°°Victory for yet a few more days was with the great lady, the most poetic figure in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; and the marriage of the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto with Mlle. de Rochefide was postponed. The dread of losing her happiness filled those days with a fever of joy unknown before, but the end was only so much the nearer. The Marquis d'Ajuda and the Rochefides agreed that this quarrel and reconciliation was a very fortunate thing; Mme. de Beauseant (so they hoped) would gradually become reconciled to the idea of the marriage, and in the end would be brought to sacrifice d'Ajuda's morning visits to the exigencies of a man's career, exigencies which she must have foreseen. In spite of the most solemn promises, daily renewed, M. d'Ajuda was playing a part, and the Vicomtesse was eager to be deceived. "Instead of taking a leap heroically from the window, she is falling headlong down the staircase," said her most intimate friend, the Duchesse de Langeais. Yet this after-glow of happiness lasted long enough for the Vicomtesse to be of service to her young cousin. She had a half-superstitious affection for him. Eugene had shown her sympathy and devotion at a crisis when a woman sees no pity, no real comfort in any eyes; when if a man is ready with soothing flatteries, it is because he has an interested motive.

°°°°Rastignac made up his mind that he must learn the whole of Goriot's previous history; he would come to his bearings before attempting to board the Maison de Nucingen. The results of his inquiries may be given briefly as follows:--

°°°°In the days before the Revolution, Jean-Joachim Goriot was simply a workman in the employ of a vermicelli maker. He was a skilful, thrifty workman, sufficiently enterprising to buy his master's business when the latter fell a chance victim to the disturbances of 1789. Goriot established himself in the Rue de la Jussienne, close to the Corn Exchange. His plain good sense led him to accept the position of President of the Section, so as to secure for his business the protection of those in power at that dangerous epoch. This prudent step had led to success; the foundations of his fortune were laid in the time of the Scarcity (real or artificial), when the price of grain of all kinds rose enormously in Paris. People used to fight for bread at the bakers' doors; while other persons went to the grocers' shops and bought Italian paste foods without brawling over it. It was during this year that Goriot made the money, which, at a later time, was to give him all the advantage of the great capitalist over the small buyer; he had, moreover, the usual luck of average ability; his mediocrity was the salvation of him. He excited no one's envy, it was not even suspected that he was rich till the peril of being rich was over, and all his intelligence was concentrated, not on political, but on commercial speculations. Goriot was an authority second to none on all questions relating to corn, flour, and "middlings"; and the production, storage, and quality of grain. He could estimate the yield of the harvest, and foresee market prices; he bought his cereals in Sicily, and imported Russian wheat. Any one who had heard him hold forth on the regulations that control the importation and exportation of grain, who had seen his grasp of the subject, his clear insight into the principles involved, his appreciation of weak points in the way that the system worked, would have thought that here was the stuff of which a minister is made. Patient, active, and persevering, energetic and prompt in action, he surveyed his business horizon with an eagle eye. Nothing there took him by surprise; he foresaw all things, knew all that was happening, and kept his own counsel; he was a diplomatist in his quick comprehension of a situation; and in the routine of business he was as patient and plodding as a soldier on the march. But beyond this business horizon he could not see. He used to spend his hours of leisure on the threshold of his shop, leaning against the framework of the door. Take him from his dark little counting-house, and he became once more the rough, slow-witted workman, a man who cannot understand a piece of reasoning, who is indifferent to all intellectual pleasures, and falls asleep at the play, a Parisian Dolibom in short, against whose stupidity other minds are powerless.

°°°°Natures of this kind are nearly all alike; in almost all of them you will find some hidden depth of sublime affection. Two all- absorbing affections filled the vermicelli maker's heart to the exclusion of every other feeling; into them he seemed to put all the forces of his nature, as he put the whole power of his brain into the corn trade. He had regarded his wife, the only daughter of a rich farmer of La Brie, with a devout admiration; his love for her had been boundless. Goriot had felt the charm of a lovely and sensitive nature, which, in its delicate strength, was the very opposite of his own. Is there any instinct more deeply implanted in the heart of man than the pride of protection, a protection which is constantly exerted for a fragile and defenceless creature? Join love thereto, the warmth of gratitude that all generous souls feel for the source of their pleasures, and you have the explanation of many strange incongruities in human nature.

°°°°After seven years of unclouded happiness, Goriot lost his wife. It was very unfortunate for him. She was beginning to gain an ascendency over him in other ways; possibly she might have brought that barren soil under cultivation, she might have widened his ideas and given other directions to his thoughts. But when she was dead, the instinct of fatherhood developed in him till it almost became a mania. All the affection balked by death seemed to turn to his daughters, and he found full satisfaction for his heart in loving them. More or less brilliant proposals were made to him from time to time; wealthy merchants or farmers with daughters vied with each other in offering inducements to him to marry again; but he determined to remain a widower. His father-in-law, the only man for whom he felt a decided friendship, gave out that Goriot had made a vow to be faithful to his wife's memory. The frequenters of the Corn Exchange, who could not comprehend this sublime piece of folly, joked about it among themselves, and found a ridiculous nickname for him. One of them ventured (after a glass over a bargain) to call him by it, and a blow from the vermicelli maker's fist sent him headlong into a gutter in the Rue Oblin. He could think of nothing else when his children were concerned; his love for them made him fidgety and anxious; and this was so well known, that one day a competitor, who wished to get rid of him to secure the field to himself, told Goriot that Delphine had just been knocked down by a cab. The vermicelli maker turned ghastly pale, left the Exchange at once, and did not return for several days afterwards; he was ill in consequence of the shock and the subsequent relief on discovering that it was a false alarm. This time, however, the offender did not escape with a bruised shoulder; at a critical moment in the man's affairs, Goriot drove him into bankruptcy, and forced him to disappear from the Corn Exchange.

°°°°As might have been expected, the two girls were spoiled. With an income of sixty thousand francs, Goriot scarcely spent twelve hundred on himself, and found all his happiness in satisfying the whims of the two girls. The best masters were engaged, that Anastasie and Delphine might be endowed with all the accomplishments which distinguish a good education. They had a chaperon--luckily for them, she was a woman who had good sense and good taste;--they learned to ride; they had a carriage for their use; they lived as the mistress of a rich old lord might live; they had only to express a wish, their father would hasten to give them their most extravagant desires, and asked nothing of them in return but a kiss. Goriot had raised the two girls to the level of the angels; and, quite naturally, he himself was left beneath them. Poor man! he loved them even for the pain that they gave him.

°°°°When the girls were old enough to be married, they were left free to choose for themselves. Each had half her father's fortune as her dowry; and when the Comte de Restaud came to woo Anastasie for her beauty, her social aspirations led her to leave her father's house for a more exalted sphere. Delphine wished for money; she married Nucingen, a banker of German extraction, who became a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire. Goriot remained a vermicelli maker as before. His daughters and his sons-in-law began to demur; they did not like to see him still engaged in trade, though his whole life was bound up with his business. For five years he stood out against their entreaties, then he yielded, and consented to retire on the amount realized by the sale of his business and the savings of the last few years. It was this capital that Mme. Vauquer, in the early days of his residence with her, had calculated would bring in eight or ten thousand livres in a year. He had taken refuge in her lodging- house, driven there by despair when he knew that his daughters were compelled by their husbands not only to refuse to receive him as an inmate in their houses, but even to see him no more except in private.

°°°°This was all the information which Rastignac gained from a M. Muret who had purchased Goriot's business, information which confirmed the Duchesse de Langeais' suppositions, and herewith the preliminary explanation of this obscure but terrible Parisian tragedy comes to an end.

°°°°Towards the end of the first week in December Rastignac received two letters--one from his mother, and one from his eldest sister. His heart beat fast, half with happiness, half with fear, at the sight of the familiar handwriting. Those two little scraps of paper contained life or death for his hopes. But while he felt a shiver of dread as he remembered their dire poverty at home, he knew their love for him so well that he could not help fearing that he was draining their very life-blood. His mother's letter ran as follows:--

°°°°"My Dear Child,--I am sending you the money that you asked for. Make a good use of it. Even to save your life I could not raise so large a sum a second time without your father's knowledge, and there would be trouble about it. We should be obliged to mortgage the land. It is impossible to judge of the merits of schemes of which I am ignorant; but what sort of schemes can they be, that you should fear to tell me about them? Volumes of explanation would not have been needed; we mothers can understand at a word, and that word would have spared me the anguish of uncertainty. I do not know how to hide the painful impression that your letter has made upon me, my dear son. What can you have felt when you were moved to send this chill of dread through my heart? It must have been very painful to you to write the letter that gave me so much pain as I read it. To what courses are you committed? You are going to appear to be something that you are not, and your whole life and success depends upon this? You are about to see a society into which you cannot enter without rushing into expense that you cannot afford, without losing precious time that is needed for your studies. Ah! my dear Eugene, believe your mother, crooked ways cannot lead to great ends. Patience and endurance are the two qualities most needed in your position. I am not scolding you; I do not want any tinge of bitterness to spoil our offering. I am only talking like a mother whose trust in you is as great as her foresight for you. You know the steps that you must take, and I, for my part, know the purity of heart, and how good your intentions are; so I can say to you without a doubt, 'Go forward, beloved!' If I tremble, it is because I am a mother, but my prayers and blessings will be with you at every step. Be very careful, dear boy. You must have a man's prudence, for it lies with you to shape the destinies of five others who are dear to you, and must look to you. Yes, our fortunes depend upon you, and your success is ours. We all pray to God to be with you in all that you do. Your aunt Marcillac has been most generous beyond words in this matter; she saw at once how it was, even down to your gloves. 'But I have a weakness for the eldest!' she said gaily. You must love your aunt very much, dear Eugene. I shall wait till you have succeeded before telling you all that she has done for you, or her money would burn your fingers. You, who are young, do not know what it is to part with something that is a piece of your past! But what would we not sacrifice for your sakes? Your aunt says that I am to send you a kiss on the forehead from her, and that kiss is to bring you luck again and again, she says. She would have written you herself, the dear kind-hearted woman, but she is troubled with the gout in her fingers just now. Your father is very well. The vintage of 1819 has turned out better than we expected. Good-bye, dear boy; I will say nothing about your sisters, because Laure is writing to you, and I must let her have the pleasure of giving you all the home news. Heaven send that you may succeed! Oh! yes, dear Eugene, you must succeed. I have come, through you, to a knowledge of a pain so sharp that I do not think I could endure it a second time. I have come to know what it is to be poor, and to long for money for my children's sake. There, good-bye! Do not leave us for long without news of you; and here, at the last, take a kiss from your mother."

°°°°By the time Eugene had finished the letter he was in tears. He thought of Father Goriot crushing his silver keepsake into a shapeless mass before he sold it to meet his daughter's bill of exchange.

°°°°"Your mother has broken up her jewels for you," he said to himself; "your aunt shed tears over those relics of hers before she sold them for your sake. What right have you to heap execrations on Anastasie? You have followed her example; you have selfishly sacrificed others to your own future, and she sacrifices her father to her lover; and of you two, which is the worse?"

°°°°He was ready to renounce his attempts; he could not bear to take that money. The fires of remorse burned in his heart, and gave him intolerable pain, the generous secret remorse which men seldom take into account when they sit in judgment upon their fellow-men; but perhaps the angels in heaven, beholding it, pardon the criminal whom our justice condemns. Rastignac opened his sister's letter; its simplicity and kindness revived his heart.

°°°°"Your letter came just at the right time, dear brother. Agathe and I had thought of so many different ways of spending our money, that we did not know what to buy with it; and now you have come in, and, like the servant who upset all the watches that belonged to the King of Spain, you have restored harmony; for, really and truly, we did not know which of all the things we wanted we wanted most, and we were always quarreling about it, never thinking, dear Eugene, of a way of spending our money which would satisfy us completely. Agathe jumped for you. Indeed, we have been like two mad things all day, 'to such a prodigious degree' (as aunt would say), that mother said, with her severe expression, 'Whatever can be the matter with you, mesdemoiselles?' I think if we had been scolded a little, we should have been still better pleased. A woman ought to be very glad to suffer for one she loves! I, however, in my inmost soul, was doleful and cross in the midst of all my joy. I shall make a bad wife, I am afraid, I am too fond of spending. I had bought two sashes and a nice little stiletto for piercing eyelet-holes in my stays, trifles that I really did not want, so that I have less than that slow-coach Agathe, who is so economical, and hoards her money like a magpie. She had two hundred francs! And I have only one hundred and fifty! I am nicely punished; I could throw my sash down the well; it will be painful to me to wear it now. Poor dear, I have robbed you. And Agathe was so nice about it. She said, 'Let us send the three hundred and fifty francs in our two names!' But I could not help telling you everything just as it happened.

°°°°"Do you know how we managed to keep your commandments? We took our glittering hoard, we went out for a walk, and when once fairly on the highway we ran all the way to Ruffec, where we handed over the coin, without more ado, to M. Grimbert of the Messageries Royales. We came back again like swallows on the wing. 'Don't you think that happiness has made us lighter?' Agathe said. We said all sorts of things, which I shall not tell you, Monsieur le Parisien, because they were all about you. Oh, we love you dearly, dear brother; it was all summed up in those few words. As for keeping the secret, little masqueraders like us are capable of anything (according to our aunt), even of holding our tongues. Our mother has been on a mysterious journey to Angouleme, and the aunt went with her, not without solemn councils, from which we were shut out, and M. le Baron likewise. They are silent as to the weighty political considerations that prompted their mission, and conjectures are rife in the State of Rastignac. The Infantas are embroidering a muslin robe with open- work sprigs for her Majesty the Queen; the work progresses in the most profound secrecy. There be but two more breadths to finish. A decree has gone forth that no wall shall be built on the side of Verteuil, but that a hedge shall be planted instead thereof. Our subjects may sustain some disappointment of fruit and espaliers, but strangers will enjoy a fair prospect. Should the heir-presumptive lack pocket-handkerchiefs, be it known unto him that the dowager Lady of Marcillac, exploring the recesses of her drawers and boxes (known respectively as Pompeii and Herculaneum), having brought to light a fair piece of cambric whereof she wotted not, the Princesses Agathe and Laure place at their brother's disposal their thread, their needles, and hands somewhat of the reddest. The two young Princes, Don Henri and Don Gabriel, retain their fatal habits of stuffing themselves with grape-jelly, of teasing their sisters, of taking their pleasure by going a-bird-nesting, and of cutting switches for themselves from the osier-beds, maugre the laws of the realm. Moreover, they list not to learn naught, wherefore the Papal Nuncio (called of the commonalty, M. le Cure) threateneth them with excommunication, since that they neglect the sacred canons of grammatical construction for the construction of other canon, deadly engines made of the stems of elder.

°°°°"Farewell, dear brother, never did letter carry so many wishes for your success, so much love fully satisfied. You will have a great deal to tell us when you come home! You will tell me everything, won't you? I am the oldest. From something the aunt let fall, we think you must have had some success.

°°°°"Something was said of a lady, but nothing more was said . . .

°°°°"Of course not, in our family! Oh, by-the-by, Eugene, would you rather that we made that piece of cambric into shirts for you instead of pocket-handkerchiefs? If you want some really nice shirts at once, we ought to lose no time in beginning upon them; and if the fashion is different now in Paris, send us one for a pattern; we want more particularly to know about the cuffs. Good- bye! Good-bye! Take my kiss on the left side of your forehead, on the temple that belongs to me, and to no one else in the world. I am leaving the other side of the sheet for Agathe, who has solemnly promised not to read a word that I have written; but, all the same, I mean to sit by her side while she writes, so as to be quite sure that she keeps her word.--Your loving sister, "Laure de Rastignac."

°°°°"Yes!" said Eugene to himself. "Yes! Success at all costs now! Riches could not repay such devotion as this. I wish I could give them every sort of happiness! Fifteen hundred and fifty francs," he went on after a pause. "Every shot must go to the mark! Laure is right. Trust a woman! I have only calico shirts. Where some one else's welfare is concerned, a young girl becomes as ingenious as a thief. Guileless where she herself is in question, and full of foresight for me,--she is like a heavenly angel forgiving the strange incomprehensible sins of earth."

°°°°The world lay before him. His tailor had been summoned and sounded, and had finally surrendered. When Rastignac met M. de Trailles, he had seen at once how great a part the tailor plays in a young man's career; a tailor is either a deadly enemy or a staunch friend, with an invoice for a bond of friendship; between these two extremes there is, alack! no middle term. In this representative of his craft Eugene discovered a man who understood that his was a sort of paternal function for young men at their entrance into life, who regarded himself as a stepping- stone between a young man's present and future. And Rastignac in gratitude made the man's fortune by an epigram of a kind in which he excelled at a later period of his life.

°°°°"I have twice known a pair of trousers turned out by him make a match of twenty thousand livres a year!"

°°°°Fifteen hundred francs, and as many suits of clothes as he chose to order! At that moment the poor child of the South felt no more doubts of any kind. The young man went down to breakfast with the indefinable air which the consciousness of the possession of money gives to youth. No sooner are the coins slipped into a student's pocket than his wealth, in imagination at least, is piled into a fantastic column, which affords him a moral support. He begins to hold up his head as he walks; he is conscious that he has a means of bringing his powers to bear on a given point; he looks you straight in the face; his gestures are quick and decided; only yesterday he was diffident and shy, any one might have pushed him aside; to-morrow, he will take the wall of a prime minister. A miracle has been wrought in him. Nothing is beyond the reach of his ambition, and his ambition soars at random; he is light-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic; in short, the fledgling bird has discovered that he has wings. A poor student snatches at every chance pleasure much as a dog runs all sorts of risks to steal a bone, cracking it and sucking the marrow as he flies from pursuit; but a young man who can rattle a few runaway gold coins in his pocket can take his pleasure deliberately, can taste the whole of the sweets of secure possession; he soars far above earth; he has forgotten what the word POVERTY means; all Paris is his. Those are days when the whole world shines radiant with light, when everything glows and sparkles before the eyes of youth, days that bring joyous energy that is never brought into harness, days of debts and of painful fears that go hand in hand with every delight. Those who do not know the left bank of the Seine between the Rue Saint-Jacques and the Rue des Saints-Peres know nothing of life.

°°°°"Ah! if the women of Paris but knew," said Rastignac, as he devoured Mme. Vauquer's stewed pears (at five for a penny), "they would come here in search of a lover."

°°°°Just then a porter from the Messageries Royales appeared at the door of the room; they had previously heard the bell ring as the wicket opened to admit him. The man asked for M. Eugene de Rastignac, holding out two bags for him to take, and a form of receipt for his signature. Vautrin's keen glance cut Eugene like a lash.

°°°°"Now you will be able to pay for those fencing lessons and go to the shooting gallery," he said.

°°°°"Your ship has come in," said Mme. Vauquer, eyeing the bags.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau did not dare to look at the money, for fear her eyes should betray her cupidity.

°°°°"You have a kind mother," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"You have a kind mother, sir," echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, mamma has been drained dry," said Vautrin, "and now you can have your fling, go into society, and fish for heiresses, and dance with countesses who have peach blossom in their hair. But take my advice, young man, and don't neglect your pistol practice."

°°°°Vautrin struck an attitude, as if he were facing an antagonist. Rastignac, meaning to give the porter a tip, felt in his pockets and found nothing. Vautrin flung down a franc piece on the table.

°°°°"Your credit is good," he remarked, eyeing the student, and Rastignac was forced to thank him, though, since the sharp encounter of wits at dinner that day, after Eugene came in from calling on Mme. de Beauseant, he had made up his mind that Vautrin was insufferable. For a week, in fact, they had both kept silence in each other's presence, and watched each other. The student tried in vain to account to himself for this attitude.

°°°°An idea, of course, gains in force by the energy with which it is expressed; it strikes where the brain sends it, by a law as mathematically exact as the law that determines the course of a shell from a mortar. The amount of impression it makes is not to be determined so exactly. Sometimes, in an impressible nature, the idea works havoc, but there are, no less, natures so robustly protected, that this sort of projectile falls flat and harmless on skulls of triple brass, as cannon-shot against solid masonry; then there are flaccid and spongy-fibred natures into which ideas from without sink like spent bullets into the earthworks of a redoubt. Rastignac's head was something of the powder-magazine order; the least shock sufficed to bring about an explosion. He was too quick, too young, not to be readily accessible to ideas; and open to that subtle influence of thought and feeling in others which causes so many strange phenomena that make an impression upon us of which we are all unconscious at the time. Nothing escaped his mental vision; he was lynx-eyed; in him the mental powers of perception, which seem like duplicates of the senses, had the mysterious power of swift projection that astonishes us in intellects of a high order--slingers who are quick to detect the weak spot in any armor.

°°°°In the past month Eugene's good qualities and defects had rapidly developed with his character. Intercourse with the world and the endeavor to satisfy his growing desires had brought out his defects. But Rastignac came from the South side of the Loire, and had the good qualities of his countrymen. He had the impetuous courage of the South, that rushes to the attack of a difficulty, as well as the southern impatience of delay or suspense. These traits are held to be defects in the North; they made the fortune of Murat, but they likewise cut short his career. The moral would appear to be that when the dash and boldness of the South side of the Loire meets, in a southern temperament, with the guile of the North, the character is complete, and such a man will gain (and keep) the crown of Sweden.

°°°°Rastignac, therefore, could not stand the fire from Vautrin's batteries for long without discovering whether this was a friend or a foe. He felt as if this strange being was reading his inmost soul, and dissecting his feelings, while Vautrin himself was so close and secretive that he seemed to have something of the profound and unmoved serenity of a sphinx, seeing and hearing all things and saying nothing. Eugene, conscious of that money in his pocket, grew rebellious.

°°°°"Be so good as to wait a moment," he said to Vautrin, as the latter rose, after slowly emptying his coffee-cup, sip by sip.

°°°°"What for?" inquired the older man, as he put on his large- brimmed hat and took up the sword-cane that he was wont to twirl like a man who will face three or four footpads without flinching.

°°°°"I will repay you in a minute," returned Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he spoke, counted out a hundred and forty francs, and pushed them towards Mme. Vauquer. "Short reckonings make good friends" he added, turning to the widow; "that clears our accounts till the end of the year. Can you give me change for a five-franc piece?"

°°°°"Good friends make short reckonings," echoed Poiret, with a glance at Vautrin.

°°°°"Here is your franc," said Rastignac, holding out the coin to the sphinx in the black wig.

°°°°"Any one might think that you were afraid to owe me a trifle," exclaimed this latter, with a searching glance that seemed to read the young man's inmost thoughts; there was a satirical and cynical smile on Vautrin's face such as Eugene had seen scores of times already; every time he saw it, it exasperated him almost beyond endurance.

°°°°"Well . . . so I am," he answered. He held both the bags in his hand, and had risen to go up to his room.

°°°°Vautrin made as if he were going out through the sitting-room, and the student turned to go through the second door that opened into the square lobby at the foot of the staircase.

°°°°"Do you know, Monsieur le Marquis de Rastignacorama, that what you were saying just now was not exactly polite?" Vautrin remarked, as he rattled his sword-cane across the panels of the sitting-room door, and came up to the student.

°°°°Rastignac looked coolly at Vautrin, drew him to the foot of the staircase, and shut the dining-room door. They were standing in the little square lobby between the kitchen and the dining-room; the place was lighted by an iron-barred fanlight above a door that gave access into the garden. Sylvie came out of her kitchen, and Eugene chose that moment to say:

°°°°MONSIEUR Vautrin, I am not a marquis, and my name is not Rastignacorama."

°°°°"They will fight," said Mlle. Michonneau, in an indifferent tone.

°°°°"Fight!" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Not they," replied Mme. Vauquer, lovingly fingering her pile of coins.

°°°°"But there they are under the lime-trees," cried Mlle. Victorine, who had risen so that she might see out into the garden. "Poor young man! he was in the right, after all."

°°°°"We must go upstairs, my pet," said Mme. Couture; "it is no business of ours."

°°°°At the door, however, Mme. Couture and Victorine found their progress barred by the portly form of Sylvie the cook.

°°°°"What ever can have happened?" she said. "M. Vautrin said to M. Eugene, 'Let us have an explanation!' then he took him by the arm, and there they are, out among the artichokes."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking. "Mamma Vauquer," he said smiling, "don't frighten yourself at all. I am only going to try my pistols under the lime-trees."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur," cried Victorine, clasping her hands as she spoke, "why do you want to kill M. Eugene?"

°°°°Vautrin stepped back a pace or two, and gazed at Victorine.

°°°°"Oh! this is something fresh!" he exclaimed in a bantering tone, that brought the color into the poor girl's face. "That young fellow yonder is very nice, isn't he?" he went on. "You have given me a notion, my pretty child; I will make you both happy."

°°°°Mme. Couture laid her hand on the arm of her ward, and drew the girl away, as she said in her ear:

°°°°"Why, Victorine, I cannot imagine what has come over you this morning."

°°°°"I don't want any shots fired in my garden," said Mme. Vauquer. "You will frighten the neighborhood and bring the police up here all in a moment."

°°°°"Come, keep cool, Mamma Vauquer," answered Vautrin. "There, there; it's all right; we will go to the shooting-gallery."

°°°°He went back to Rastignac, laying his hand familiarly on the young man's arm.

°°°°"When I have given you ocular demonstration of the fact that I can put a bullet through the ace on a card five times running at thirty-five paces," he said, "that won't take away your appetite, I suppose? You look to me to be inclined to be a trifle quarrelsome this morning, and as if you would rush on your death like a blockhead."

°°°°"Do you draw back?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Don't try to raise my temperature," answered Vautrin, "it is not cold this morning. Let us go and sit over there," he added, pointing to the green-painted garden seats; "no one can overhear us. I want a little talk with you. You are not a bad sort of youngster, and I have no quarrel with you. I like you, take Trump--(confound it!)--take Vautrin's word for it. What makes me like you? I will tell you by-and-by. Meantime, I can tell you that I know you as well as if I had made you myself, as I will prove to you in a minute. Put down your bags," he continued, pointing to the round table.

°°°°Rastignac deposited his money on the table, and sat down. He was consumed with curiosity, which the sudden change in the manner of the man before him had excited to the highest pitch. Here was a strange being who, a moment ago, had talked of killing him, and now posed as his protector.

°°°°"You would like to know who I really am, what I was, and what I do now," Vautrin went on. "You want to know too much, youngster. Come! come! keep cool! You will hear more astonishing things than that. I have had my misfortunes. Just hear me out first, and you shall have your turn afterwards. Here is my past in three words. Who am I? Vautrin. What do I do? Just what I please. Let us change the subject. You want to know my character. I am good- natured to those who do me a good turn, or to those whose hearts speak to mine. These last may do anything they like with me; they may bruise my shins, and I shall not tell them to 'mind what they are about'; but, nom d'une pipe, the devil himself is not an uglier customer than I can be if people annoy me, or if I don't happen to take to them; and you may just as well know at once that I think no more of killing a man than of that," and he spat before him as he spoke. "Only when it is absolutely necessary to do so, I do my best to kill him properly. I am what you call an artist. I have read Benvenuto Cellini's Memoirs, such as you see me; and, what is more, in Italian: A fine-spirited fellow he was! From him I learned to follow the example set us by Providence, who strikes us down at random, and to admire the beautiful whenever and wherever it is found. And, setting other questions aside, is it not a glorious part to play, when you pit yourself against mankind, and the luck is on your side? I have thought a good deal about the constitution of your present social Dis- order. A duel is downright childish, my boy! utter nonsense and folly! When one of two living men must be got out of the way, none but an idiot would leave chance to decide which it is to be; and in a duel it is a toss-up--heads or tails--and there you are! Now I, for instance, can hit the ace in the middle of a card five times running, send one bullet after another through the same hole, and at thirty-five paces, moreover! With that little accomplishment you might think yourself certain of killing your man, mightn't you. Well, I have fired, at twenty paces, and missed, and the rogue who had never handled a pistol in his life-- look here!"--(he unbuttoned his waistcoat and exposed his chest, covered, like a bear's back, with a shaggy fell; the student gave a startled shudder)--"he was a raw lad, but he made his mark on me," the extraordinary man went on, drawing Rastignac's fingers over a deep scar on his breast. But that happened when I myself was a mere boy; I was one-and-twenty then (your age), and I had some beliefs left--in a woman's love, and in a pack of rubbish that you will be over head and ears in directly. You and I were to have fought just now, weren't we? You might have killed me. Suppose that I were put under the earth, where would you be? You would have to clear out of this, go to Switzerland, draw on papa's purse--and he has none too much in it as it is. I mean to open your eyes to your real position, that is what I am going to do: but I shall do it from the point of view of a man who, after studying the world very closely, sees that there are but two alternatives--stupid obedience or revolt. I obey nobody; is that clear? Now, do you know how much you will want at the pace you are going? A million; and promptly, too, or that little head of ours will be swaying to and fro in the drag-nets at Saint-Cloud, while we are gone to find out whether or no there is a Supreme Being. I will put you in the way of that million."

°°°°He stopped for a moment and looked at Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! you do not look so sourly at papa Vautrin now! At the mention of the million you look like a young girl when somebody has said, 'I will come for you this evening!' and she betakes herself to her toilette as a cat licks its whiskers over a saucer of milk. All right. Come, now, let us go into the question, young man; all between ourselves, you know. We have a papa and mamma down yonder, a great-aunt, two sisters (aged eighteen and seventeen), two young brothers (one fifteen, and the other ten), that is about the roll-call of the crew. The aunt brings up the two sisters; the cure comes and teaches the boys Latin. Boiled chestnuts are oftener on the table than white bread. Papa makes a suit of clothes last a long while; if mamma has a different dress winter and summer, it is about as much as she has; the sisters manage as best they can. I know all about it; I have lived in the south.

°°°°"That is how things are at home. They send you twelve hundred francs a year, and the whole property only brings in three thousand francs all told. We have a cook and a manservant; papa is a baron, and we must keep up appearances. Then we have our ambitions; we are connected with the Beauseants, and we go afoot through the streets; we want to be rich, and we have not a penny; we eat Mme. Vauquer's messes, and we like grand dinners in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; we sleep on a truckle-bed, and dream of a mansion! I do not blame you for wanting these things. What sort of men do the women run after? Men of ambition. Men of ambition have stronger frames, their blood is richer in iron, their hearts are warmer than those of ordinary men. Women feel that when their power is greatest, they look their best, and that those are their happiest hours; they like power in men, and prefer the strongest even if it is a power that may be their own destruction. I am going to make an inventory of your desires in order to put the question at issue before you. Here it is:--

°°°°"We are as hungry as a wolf, and those newly-cut teeth of ours are sharp; what are we to do to keep the pot boiling? In the first place, we have the Code to browse upon; it is not amusing, and we are none the wiser for it, but that cannot be helped. So far so good. We mean to make an advocate of ourselves with a prospect of one day being made President of a Court of Assize, when we shall send poor devils, our betters, to the galleys with a T.F.* [*Travaux forces.] on their shoulders, so that the rich may be convinced that they can sleep in peace. There is no fun in that; and you are a long while coming to it; for, to begin with, there are two years of nauseous drudgery in Paris, we see all the lollipops that we long for out of our reach. It is tiresome to want things and never to have them. If you were a pallid creature of the mollusk order, you would have nothing to fear, but it is different when you have the hot blood of a lion and are ready to get into a score of scrapes every day of your life. This is the ghastliest form of torture known in this inferno of God's making, and you will give in to it. Or suppose that you are a good boy, drink nothing stronger than milk, and bemoan your hard lot; you, with your generous nature, will endure hardships that would drive a dog mad, and make a start, after long waiting, as deputy to some rascal or other in a hole of a place where the Government will fling you a thousand francs a year like the scraps that are thrown to the butcher's dog. Bark at thieves, plead the cause of the rich, send men of heart to the guillotine, that is your work! Many thanks! If you have no influence, you may rot in your provincial tribunal. At thirty you will be a Justice with twelve hundred francs a year (if you have not flung off the gown for good before then). By the time you are forty you may look to marry a miller's daughter, an heiress with some six thousand livres a year. Much obliged! If you have influence, you may possibly be a Public Prosecutor by the time you are thirty; with a salary of a thousand crowns, you could look to marry the mayor's daughter. Some petty piece of political trickery, such as mistaking Villele for Manuel in a bulletin (the names rhyme, and that quiets your conscience), and you will probably be a Procureur General by the time you are forty, with a chance of becoming a deputy. Please to observe, my dear boy, that our conscience will have been a little damaged in the process, and that we shall endure twenty years of drudgery and hidden poverty, and that our sisters are wearing Dian's livery. I have the honor to call your attention to another fact: to wit, that there are but twenty Procureurs Generaux at a time in all France, while there are some twenty thousand of you young men who aspire to that elevated position; that there are some mountebanks among you who would sell their family to screw their fortunes a peg higher. If this sort of thing sickens you, try another course. The Baron de Rastignac thinks of becoming an advocate, does he? There's a nice prospect for you! Ten years of drudgery straight away. You are obliged to live at the rate of a thousand francs a month; you must have a library of law books, live in chambers, go into society, go down on your knees to ask a solicitor for briefs, lick the dust off the floor of the Palais de Justice. If this kind of business led to anything, I should not say no; but just give me the names of five advocates here in Paris who by the time that they are fifty are making fifty thousand francs a year! Bah! I would sooner turn pirate on the high seas than have my soul shrivel up inside me like that. How will you find the capital? There is but one way, marry a woman who has money. There is no fun in it. Have you a mind to marry? You hang a stone around your neck; for if you marry for money, what becomes of our exalted notions of honor and so forth? You might as well fly in the face of social conventions at once. Is it nothing to crawl like a serpent before your wife, to lick her mother's feet, to descend to dirty actions that would sicken swine--faugh!--never mind if you at least make your fortune. But you will be as doleful as a dripstone if you marry for money. It is better to wrestle with men than to wrangle at home with your wife. You are at the crossway of the roads of life, my boy; choose your way.

°°°°"But you have chosen already. You have gone to see your cousin of Beauseant, and you have had an inkling of luxury; you have been to Mme. de Restaud's house, and in Father Goriot's daughter you have seen a glimpse of the Parisienne for the first time. That day you came back with a word written on your forehead. I knew it, I could read it--'SUCCESS!' Yes, success at any price. 'Bravo,' said I to myself, 'here is the sort of fellow for me.' You wanted money. Where was it all to come from? You have drained your sisters' little hoard (all brothers sponge more or less on their sisters). Those fifteen hundred francs of yours (got together, God knows how! in a country where there are more chestnuts than five-franc pieces) will slip away like soldiers after pillage. And, then, what will you do? Shall you begin to work? Work, or what you understand by work at this moment, means, for a man of Poiret's calibre, an old age in Mamma Vauquer's lodging-house. There are fifty thousand young men in your position at this moment, all bent as you are on solving one and the same problem--how to acquire a fortune rapidly. You are but a unit in that aggregate. You can guess, therefore, what efforts you must make, how desperate the struggle is. There are not fifty thousand good positions for you; you must fight and devour one another like spiders in a pot. Do you know how a man makes his way here? By brilliant genius or by skilful corruption. You must either cut your way through these masses of men like a cannon ball, or steal among them like a plague. Honesty is nothing to the purpose. Men bow before the power of genius; they hate it, and try to slander it, because genius does not divide the spoil; but if genius persists, they bow before it. To sum it all up in a phrase, if they fail to smother genius in the mud, they fall on their knees and worship it. Corruption is a great power in the world, and talent is scarce. So corruption is the weapon of superfluous mediocrity; you will be made to feel the point of it everywhere. You will see women who spend more than ten thousand francs a year on dress, while their husband's salary (his whole income) is six thousand francs. You will see officials buying estates on twelve thousand francs a year. You will see women who sell themselves body and soul to drive in a carriage belonging to the son of a peer of France, who has a right to drive in the middle rank at Longchamp. You have seen that poor simpleton of a Goriot obliged to meet a bill with his daughter's name at the back of it, though her husband has fifty thousand francs a year. I defy you to walk a couple of yards anywhere in Paris without stumbling on some infernal complication. I'll bet my head to a head of that salad that you will stir up a hornet's nest by taking a fancy to the first young, rich, and pretty woman you meet. They are all dodging the law, all at loggerheads with their husbands. If I were to begin to tell you all that vanity or necessity (virtue is not often mixed up in it, you may be sure), all that vanity and necessity drive them to do for lovers, finery, housekeeping, or children, I should never come to an end. So an honest man is the common enemy.

°°°°"But do you know what an honest man is? Here, in Paris, an honest man is the man who keeps his own counsel, and will not divide the plunder. I am not speaking now of those poor bond-slaves who do the work of the world without a reward for their toil--God Almighty's outcasts, I call them. Among them, I grant you, is virtue in all the flower of its stupidity, but poverty is no less their portion. At this moment, I think I see the long faces those good folk would pull if God played a practical joke on them and stayed away at the Last Judgment.

°°°°"Well, then, if you mean to make a fortune quickly, you must either be rich to begin with, or make people believe that you are rich. It is no use playing here except for high stakes; once take to low play, it is all up with you. If in the scores of professions that are open to you, there are ten men who rise very rapidly, people are sure to call them thieves. You can draw your own conclusions. Such is life. It is no cleaner than a kitchen; it reeks like a kitchen; and if you mean to cook your dinner, you must expect to soil your hands; the real art is in getting them clean again, and therein lies the whole morality of our epoch. If I take this tone in speaking of the world to you, I have the right to do so; I know it well. Do you think that I am blaming it? Far from it; the world has always been as it is now. Moralists' strictures will never change it. Mankind are not perfect, but one age is more or less hypocritical than another, and then simpletons say that its morality is high or low. I do not think that the rich are any worse than the poor; man is much the same, high or low, or wherever he is. In a million of these human cattle there may be half a score of bold spirits who rise above the rest, above the laws; I am one of them. And you, if you are cleverer than your fellows, make straight to your end, and hold your head high. But you must lay your account with envy and slander and mediocrity, and every man's hand will be against you. Napoleon met with a Minister of War, Aubry by name, who all but sent him to the colonies.

°°°°"Feel your pulse. Think whether you can get up morning after morning, strengthened in yesterday's purpose. In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline. Listen attentively. You see, I have an idea of my own. My idea is to live a patriarchal life on a vast estate, say a hundred thousand acres, somewhere in the Southern States of America. I mean to be a planter, to have slaves, to make a few snug millions by selling my cattle, timber, and tobacco; I want to live an absolute monarch, and to do just as I please; to lead such a life as no one here in these squalid dens of lath and plaster ever imagines. I am a great poet; I do not write my poems, I feel them, and act them. At this moment I have fifty thousand francs, which might possibly buy forty negroes. I want two hundred thousand francs, because I want to have two hundred negroes to carry out my notions of the patriarachal life properly. Negroes, you see, are like a sort of family ready grown, and there are no inquisitive public prosecutors out there to interfere with you. That investment in ebony ought to mean three or four million francs in ten years' time. If I am successful, no one will ask me who I am. I shall be Mr. Four Millions, an American citizen. I shall be fifty years old by then, and sound and hearty still; I shall enjoy life after my own fashion. In two words, if I find you an heiress with a million, will you give me two hundred thousand francs? Twenty per cent commission, eh? Is that too much? Your little wife will be very much in love with you. Once married, you will show signs of uneasiness and remorse; for a couple of weeks you will be depressed. Then, some night after sundry grimacings, comes the confession, between two kisses, 'Two hundred thousand francs of debts, my darling!' This sort of farce is played every day in Paris, and by young men of the highest fashion. When a young wife has given her heart, she will not refuse her purse. Perhaps you are thinking that you will lose the money for good? Not you. You will make two hundred thousand francs again by some stroke of business. With your capital and your brains you should be able to accumulate as large a fortune as you could wish. ERGO, in six months you will have made your own fortune, and our old friend Vautrin's, and made an amiable woman very happy, to say nothing of your people at home, who must blow on their fingers to warm them, in the winter, for lack of firewood. You need not be surprised at my proposal, nor at the demand I make. Forty-seven out of every sixty great matches here in Paris are made after just such a bargain as this. The Chamber of Notaries compels my gentleman to----"

°°°°"What must I do?" said Rastignac, eagerly interrupting Vautrin's speech.

°°°°"Next to nothing," returned the other, with a slight involuntary movement, the suppressed exultation of the angler when he feels a bite at the end of his line. "Follow me carefully! The heart of a girl whose life is wretched and unhappy is a sponge that will thirstily absorb love; a dry sponge that swells at the first drop of sentiment. If you pay court to a young girl whose existence is a compound of loneliness, despair, and poverty, and who has no suspicion that she will come into a fortune, good Lord! it is quint and quatorze at piquet; it is knowing the numbers of the lottery before-hand; it is speculating in the funds when you have news from a sure source; it is building up a marriage on an indestructible foundation. The girl may come in for millions, and she will fling them, as if they were so many pebbles, at your feet. 'Take it, my beloved! Take it, Alfred, Adolphe, Eugene!' or whoever it was that showed his sense by sacrificing himself for her. And as for sacrificing himself, this is how I understand it. You sell a coat that is getting shabby, so that you can take her to the Cadran bleu, treat her to mushrooms on toast, and then go to the Ambigu-Comique in the evening; you pawn your watch to buy her a shawl. I need not remind you of the fiddle-faddle sentimentality that goes down so well with all women; you spill a few drops of water on your stationery, for instance; those are the tears you shed while far away from her. You look to me as if you were perfectly acquainted with the argot of the heart. Paris, you see, is like a forest in the New World, where you have to deal with a score of varieties of savages--Illinois and Hurons, who live on the proceed of their social hunting. You are a hunter of millions; you set your snares; you use lures and nets; there are many ways of hunting. Some hunt heiresses, others a legacy; some fish for souls, yet others sell their clients, bound hand and foot. Every one who comes back from the chase with his game- bag well filled meets with a warm welcome in good society. In justice to this hospitable part of the world, it must be said that you have to do with the most easy and good-natured of great cities. If the proud aristocracies of the rest of Europe refuse admittance among their ranks to a disreputable millionaire, Paris stretches out a hand to him, goes to his banquets, eats his dinners, and hobnobs with his infamy."

°°°°"But where is such a girl to be found?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Under your eyes; she is yours already."

°°°°"Mlle. Victorine?"

°°°°"Precisely."

°°°°"And what was that you said?"

°°°°"She is in love with you already, your little Baronne de Rastignac!"

°°°°"She has not a penny," Eugene continued, much mystified.

°°°°"Ah! now we are coming to it! Just another word or two, and it will all be clear enough. Her father, Taillefer, is an old scoundrel; it is said that he murdered one of his friends at the time of the Revolution. He is one of your comedians that sets up to have opinions of his own. He is a banker--senior partner in the house of Frederic Taillefer and Company. He has one son, and means to leave all he has to the boy, to the prejudice of Victorine. For my part, I don't like to see injustice of this sort. I am like Don Quixote, I have a fancy for defending the weak against the strong. If it should please God to take that youth away from him, Taillefer would have only his daughter left; he would want to leave his money to some one or other; an absurd notion, but it is only human nature, and he is not likely to have any more children, as I know. Victorine is gentle and amiable; she will soon twist her father round her fingers, and set his head spinning like a German top by plying him with sentiment! She will be too much touched by your devotion to forget you; you will marry her. I mean to play Providence for you, and Providence is to do my will. I have a friend whom I have attached closely to myself, a colonel in the Army of the Loire, who has just been transferred into the garde royale. He has taken my advice and turned ultra-royalist; he is not one of those fools who never change their opinions. Of all pieces of advice, my cherub, I would give you this--don't stick to your opinions any more than to your words. If any one asks you for them, let him have them-- at a price. A man who prides himself on going in a straight line through life is an idiot who believes in infallibility. There are no such things as principles; there are only events, and there are no laws but those of expediency: a man of talent accepts events and the circumstances in which he finds himself, and turns everything to his own ends. If laws and principles were fixed and invariable, nations would not change them as readily as we change our shirts. The individual is not obliged to be more particular than the nation. A man whose services to France have been of the very slightest is a fetich looked on with superstitious awe because he has always seen everything in red; but he is good, at the most, to be put into the Museum of Arts and Crafts, among the automatic machines, and labeled La Fayette; while the prince at whom everybody flings a stone, the man who despises humanity so much that he spits as many oaths as he is asked for in the face of humanity, saved France from being torn in pieces at the Congress of Vienna; and they who should have given him laurels fling mud at him. Oh! I know something of affairs, I can tell you; I have the secrets of many men! Enough. When I find three minds in agreement as to the application of a principle, I shall have a fixed and immovable opinion--I shall have to wait a long while first. In the Tribunals you will not find three judges of the same opinion on a single point of law. To return to the man I was telling you of. He would crucify Jesus Christ again, if I bade him. At a word from his old chum Vautrin he will pick a quarrel with a scamp that will not send so much as five francs to his sister, poor girl, and" (here Vautrin rose to his feet and stood like a fencing-master about to lunge)--"turn him off into the dark!" he added.

°°°°"How frightful!" said Eugene. "You do not really mean it? M. Vautrin, you are joking!"

°°°°"There! there! Keep cool!" said the other. "Don't behave like a baby. But if you find any amusement in it, be indignant, flare up! Say that I am a scoundrel, a rascal, a rogue, a bandit; but do not call me a blackleg nor a spy! There, out with it, fire away! I forgive you; it is quite natural at your age. I was like that myself once. Only remember this, you will do worse things yourself some day. You will flirt with some pretty woman and take her money. You have thought of that, of course," said Vautrin, "for how are you to succeed unless love is laid under contribution? There are no two ways about virtue, my dear student; it either is, or it is not. Talk of doing penance for your sins! It is a nice system of business, when you pay for your crime by an act of contrition! You seduce a woman that you may set your foot on such and such a rung of the social ladder; you sow dissension among the children of a family; you descend, in short, to every base action that can be committed at home or abroad, to gain your own ends for your own pleasure or your profit; and can you imagine that these are acts of faith, hope, or charity? How is it that a dandy, who in a night has robbed a boy of half his fortune, gets only a couple of months in prison; while a poor devil who steals a banknote for a thousand francs, with aggravating circumstances, is condemned to penal servitude? Those are your laws. Not a single provision but lands you in some absurdity. That man with yellow gloves and a golden tongue commits many a murder; he sheds no blood, but he drains his victim's veins as surely; a desperado forces open a door with a crowbar, dark deeds both of them! You yourself will do every one of those things that I suggest to you to-day, bar the bloodshed. Do you believe that there is any absolute standard in this world? Despise mankind and find out the meshes that you can slip through in the net of the Code. The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out, because it was properly executed."

°°°°"Silence, sir! I will not hear any more; you make me doubt myself. At this moment my sentiments are all my science."

°°°°"Just as you please, my fine fellow; I did think you were so weak-minded," said Vautrin, "I shall say no more about it. One last word, however," and he looked hard at the student--"you have my secret," he said.

°°°°"A young man who refuses your offer knows that he must forget it."

°°°°"Quite right, quite right; I am glad to hear you say so. Somebody else might not be so scrupulous, you see. Keep in mind what I want to do for you. I will give you a fortnight. The offer is still open."

°°°°"What a head of iron the man has!" said Eugene to himself, as he watched Vautrin walk unconcernedly away with his cane under his arm. "Yet Mme. de Beauseant said as much more gracefully; he has only stated the case in cruder language. He would tear my heart with claws of steel. What made me think of going to Mme. de Nucingen? He guessed my motives before I knew them myself. To sum it up, that outlaw has told me more about virtue than all I have learned from men and books. If virtue admits of no compromises, I have certainly robbed my sisters," he said, throwing down the bags on the table.

°°°°He sat down again and fell, unconscious of his surroundings, into deep thought.

°°°°"To be faithful to an ideal of virtue! A heroic martyrdom! Pshaw! every one believes in virtue, but who is virtuous? Nations have made an idol of Liberty, but what nation on the face of the earth is free? My youth is still like a blue and cloudless sky. If I set myself to obtain wealth or power, does it mean that I must make up my mind to lie, and fawn, and cringe, and swagger, and flatter, and dissemble? To consent to be the servant of others who have likewise fawned, and lied, and flattered? Must I cringe to them before I can hope to be their accomplice? Well, then, I decline. I mean to work nobly and with a single heart. I will work day and night; I will owe my fortune to nothing but my own exertions. It may be the slowest of all roads to success, but I shall lay my head on the pillow at night untroubled by evil thoughts. Is there a greater thing than this--to look back over your life and know that it is stainless as a lily? I and my life are like a young man and his betrothed. Vautrin has put before me all that comes after ten years of marriage. The devil! my head is swimming. I do not want to think at all; the heart is a sure guide."

°°°°Eugene was roused from his musings by the voice of the stout Sylvie, who announced that the tailor had come, and Eugene therefore made his appearance before the man with the two money bags, and was not ill pleased that it should be so. When he had tried on his dress suit, he put on his new morning costume, which completely metamorphosed him.

°°°°"I am quite equal to M. de Trailles," he said to himself. "In short, I look like a gentleman."

°°°°"You asked me, sir, if I knew the houses where Mme. de Nucingen goes," Father Goriot's voice spoke from the doorway of Eugene's room."

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Very well then, she is going to the Marechale Carigliano's ball on Monday. If you can manage to be there, I shall hear from you whether my two girls enjoyed themselves, and how they were dressed, and all about it in fact."

°°°°"How did you find that out, my good Goriot?" said Eugene, putting a chair by the fire for his visitor.

°°°°"Her maid told me. I hear all about their doings from Therese and Constance," he added gleefully.

°°°°The old man looked like a lover who is still young enough to be made happy by the discovery of some little stratagem which brings him information of his lady-love without her knowledge.

°°°°"YOU will see them both!" he said, giving artless expression to a pang of jealousy.

°°°°"I do not know," answered Eugene. "I will go to Mme. de Beauseant and ask her for an introduction to the Marechale."

°°°°Eugene felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought of appearing before the Vicomtesse, dressed as henceforward he always meant to be. The "abysses of the human heart," in the moralists' phrase, are only insidious thoughts, involuntary promptings of personal interest. The instinct of enjoyment turns the scale; those rapid changes of purpose which have furnished the text for so much rhetoric are calculations prompted by the hope of pleasure. Rastignac beholding himself well dressed and impeccable as to gloves and boots, forgot his virtuous resolutions. Youth, moreover, when bent upon wrongdoing does not dare to behold himself in the mirror of consciousness; mature age has seen itself; and therein lies the whole difference between these two phases of life.

°°°°A friendship between Eugene and his neighbor, Father Goriot, had been growing up for several days past. This secret friendship and the antipathy that the student had begun to entertain for Vautrin arose from the same psychological causes. The bold philosopher who shall investigate the effects of mental action upon the physical world will doubtless find more than one proof of the material nature of our sentiments in other animals. What physiognomist is as quick to discern character as a dog is to discover from a stranger's face whether this is a friend or no? Those by-words--"atoms," "affinities"--are facts surviving in modern languages for the confusion of philosophic wiseacres who amuse themselves by winnowing the chaff of language to find its grammatical roots. We FEEL that we are loved. Our sentiments make themselves felt in everything, even at a great distance. A letter is a living soul, and so faithful an echo of the voice that speaks in it, that finer natures look upon a letter as one of love's most precious treasures. Father Goriot's affection was of the instinctive order, a canine affection raised to a sublime pitch; he had scented compassion in the air, and the kindly respect and youthful sympathy in the student's heart. This friendship had, however, scarcely reached the stage at which confidences are made. Though Eugene had spoken of his wish to meet Mme. de Nucingen, it was not because he counted on the old man to introduce him to her house, for he hoped that his own audacity might stand him in good stead. All that Father Goriot had said as yet about his daughters had referred to the remarks that the student had made so freely in public on that day of the two visits.

°°°°"How could you think that Mme. de Restaud bore you a grudge for mentioning my name?" he had said on the day following that scene at dinner. "My daughters are very fond of me; I am a happy father; but my sons-in-law have behaved badly to me, and rather than make trouble between my darlings and their husbands, I choose to see my daughters secretly. Fathers who can see their daughters at any time have no idea of all the pleasure that all this mystery gives me; I cannot always see mine when I wish, do you understand? So when it is fine I walk out in the Champs- Elysees, after finding out from their waiting-maids whether my daughters mean to go out. I wait near the entrance; my heart beats fast when the carriages begin to come; I admire them in their dresses, and as they pass they give me a little smile, and it seems as if everything was lighted up for me by a ray of bright sunlight. I wait, for they always go back the same way, and then I see them again; the fresh air has done them good and brought color into their cheeks; all about me people say, 'What a beautiful woman that is!' and it does my heart good to hear them.

°°°°"Are they not my own flesh and blood? I love the very horses that draw them; I envy the little lap-dog on their knees. Their happiness is my life. Every one loves after his own fashion, and mine does no one any harm; why should people trouble their heads about me? I am happy in my own way. Is there any law against going to see my girls in the evening when they are going out to a ball? And what a disappointment it is when I get there too late, and am told that 'Madame has gone out!' Once I waited till three o'clock in the morning for Nasie; I had not seen her for two whole days. I was so pleased, that it was almost too much for me! Please do not speak of me unless it is to say how good my daughters are to me. They are always wanting to heap presents upon me, but I will not have it. 'Just keep your money,' I tell them. 'What should I do with it? I want nothing.' And what am I, sir, after all? An old carcase, whose soul is always where my daughters are. When you have seen Mme. de Nucingen, tell me which you like the most," said the old man after a moment's pause, while Eugene put the last touches to his toilette. The student was about to go out to walk in the Garden of the Tuileries until the hour when he could venture to appear in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room.

°°°°That walk was a turning-point in Eugene's career. Several women noticed him; he looked so handsome, so young, and so well dressed. This almost admiring attention gave a new turn to his thoughts. He forgot his sisters and the aunt who had robbed herself for him; he no longer remembered his own virtuous scruples. He had seen hovering above his head the fiend so easy to mistake for an angel, the Devil with rainbow wings, who scatters rubies, and aims his golden shafts at palace fronts, who invests women with purple, and thrones with a glory that dazzles the eyes of fools till they forget the simple origins of royal dominion; he had heard the rustle of that Vanity whose tinsel seems to us to be the symbol of power. However cynical Vautrin's words had been, they had made an impression on his mind, as the sordid features of the old crone who whispers, "A lover, and gold in torrents," remain engraven on a young girl's memory.

°°°°Eugene lounged about the walks till it was nearly five o'clock, then he went to Mme. de Beauseant, and received one of the terrible blows against which young hearts are defenceless. Hitherto the Vicomtesse had received him with the kindly urbanity, the bland grace of manner that is the result of fine breeding, but is only complete when it comes from the heart.

°°°°Today Mme. de Beauseant bowed constrainedly, and spoke curtly:

°°°°"M. de Rastignac, I cannot possibly see you, at least not at this moment. I am engaged . . ."

°°°°An observer, and Rastignac instantly became an observer, could read the whole history, the character and customs of caste, in the phrase, in the tones of her voice, in her glance and bearing. He caught a glimpse of the iron hand beneath the velvet glove-- the personality, the egoism beneath the manner, the wood beneath the varnish. In short, he heard that unmistakable I THE KING that issues from the plumed canopy of the throne, and finds its last echo under the crest of the simplest gentleman.

°°°°Eugene had trusted too implicitly to the generosity of a woman; he could not believe in her haughtiness. Like all the unfortunate, he had subscribed, in all good faith, the generous compact which should bind the benefactor to the recipient, and the first article in that bond, between two large-hearted natures, is a perfect equality. The kindness which knits two souls together is as rare, as divine, and as little understood as the passion of love, for both love and kindness are the lavish generosity of noble natures. Rastignac was set upon going to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball, so he swallowed down this rebuff.

°°°°"Madame," he faltered out, "I would not have come to trouble you about a trifling matter; be so kind as to permit me to see you later, I can wait."

°°°°"Very well, come and dine with me," she said, a little confused by the harsh way in which she had spoken, for this lady was as genuinely kind-hearted as she was high-born.

°°°°Eugene was touched by this sudden relenting, but none the less he said to himself as he went away, "Crawl in the dust, put up with every kind of treatment. What must the rest of the world be like when one of the kindest of women forgets all her promises of befriending me in a moment, and tosses me aside like an old shoe? So it is every one for himself? It is true that her house is not a shop, and I have put myself in the wrong by needing her help. You should cut your way through the world like a cannon ball, as Vautrin said."

°°°°But the student's bitter thoughts were soon dissipated by the pleasure which he promised himself in this dinner with the Vicomtesse. Fate seemed to determine that the smallest accidents in his life should combine to urge him into a career, which the terrible sphinx of the Maison Vauquer had described as a field of battle where you must either slay or be slain, and cheat to avoid being cheated. You leave your conscience and your heart at the barriers, and wear a mask on entering into this game of grim earnest, where, as in ancient Sparta, you must snatch your prize without being detected if you would deserve the crown.

°°°°On his return he found the Vicomtesse gracious and kindly, as she had always been to him. They went together to the dining-room, where the Vicomte was waiting for his wife. In the time of the Restoration the luxury of the table was carried, as is well known, to the highest degree, and M. de Beauseant, like many jaded men of the world, had few pleasures left but those of good cheer; in this matter, in fact, he was a gourmand of the schools of Louis XVIII. and of the Duc d'Escars, and luxury was supplemented by splendor. Eugene, dining for the first time in a house where the traditions of grandeur had descended through many generations, had never seen any spectacle like this that now met his eyes. In the time of the Empire, balls had always ended with a supper, because the officers who took part in them must be fortified for immediate service, and even in Paris might be called upon to leave the ballroom for the battlefield. This arrangement had gone out of fashion under the Monarchy, and Eugene had so far only been asked to dances. The self-possession which pre-eminently distinguished him in later life already stood him in good stead, and he did not betray his amazement. Yet as he saw for the first time the finely wrought silver plate, the completeness of every detail, the sumptuous dinner, noiselessly served, it was difficult for such an ardent imagination not to prefer this life of studied and refined luxury to the hardships of the life which he had chosen only that morning.

°°°°His thoughts went back for a moment to the lodging-house, and with a feeling of profound loathing, he vowed to himself that at New Year he would go; prompted at least as much by a desire to live among cleaner surroundings as by a wish to shake off Vautrin, whose huge hand he seemed to feel on his shoulder at that moment. When you consider the numberless forms, clamorous or mute, that corruption takes in Paris, common-sense begins to wonder what mental aberration prompted the State to establish great colleges and schools there, and assemble young men in the capital; how it is that pretty women are respected, or that the gold coin displayed in the money-changer's wooden saucers does not take to itself wings in the twinkling of an eye; and when you come to think further, how comparatively few cases of crime there are, and to count up the misdemeanors committed by youth, is there not a certain amount of respect due to these patient Tantaluses who wrestle with themselves and nearly always come off victorious? The struggles of the poor student in Paris, if skilfully drawn, would furnish a most dramatic picture of modern civilization.

°°°°In vain Mme. de Beauseant looked at Eugene as if asking him to speak; the student was tongue-tied in the Vicomte's presence.

°°°°"Are you going to take me to the Italiens this evening?" the Vicomtesse asked her husband.

°°°°"You cannot doubt that I should obey you with pleasure," he answered, and there was a sarcastic tinge in his politeness which Eugene did not detect, "but I ought to go to meet some one at the Varietes."

°°°°"His mistress," said she to herself.

°°°°"Then, is not Ajuda coming for you this evening?" inquired the Vicomte.

°°°°"No," she answered, petulantly.

°°°°"Very well, then, if you really must have an arm, take that of M. de Rastignac."

°°°°The Vicomtess turned to Eugene with a smile.

°°°°"That would be a very compromising step for you," she said.

°°°°" 'A Frenchman loves danger, because in danger there is glory,' to quote M. de Chateaubriand," said Rastignac, with a bow.

°°°°A few moments later he was sitting beside Mme. de Beauseant in a brougham, that whirled them through the streets of Paris to a fashionable theatre. It seemed to him that some fairy magic had suddenly transported him into a box facing the stage. All the lorgnettes of the house were pointed at him as he entered, and at the Vicomtesse in her charming toilette. He went from enchantment to enchantment.

°°°°"You must talk to me, you know," said Mme. de Beauseant. "Ah! look! There is Mme. de Nucingen in the third box from ours. Her sister and M. de Trailles are on the other side."

°°°°The Vicomtesse glanced as she spoke at the box where Mlle. de Rochefide should have been; M. d'Ajuda was not there, and Mme. de Beauseant's face lighted up in a marvelous way.

°°°°"She is charming," said Eugene, after looking at Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"She has white eyelashes."

°°°°"Yes, but she has such a pretty slender figure!"

°°°°"Her hands are large."

°°°°"Such beautiful eyes!"

°°°°"Her face is long."

°°°°"Yes, but length gives distinction."

°°°°"It is lucky for her that she has some distinction in her face. Just see how she fidgets with her opera-glass! The Goriot blood shows itself in every movement," said the Vicomtesse, much to Eugene's astonishment.

°°°°Indeed, Mme. de Beauseant seemed to be engaged in making a survey of the house, and to be unconscious of Mme. Nucingen's existence; but no movement made by the latter was lost upon the Vicomtesse. The house was full of the loveliest women in Paris, so that Delphine de Nucingen was not a little flattered to receive the undivided attention of Mme. de Beauseant's young, handsome, and well-dressed cousin, who seemed to have no eyes for any one else.

°°°°"If you look at her so persistently, you will make people talk, M. de Rastignac. You will never succeed if you fling yourself at any one's head like that."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Eugene, "you have protected me indeed so far, and now if you would complete your work, I only ask of you a favor which will cost you but little, and be of very great service to me. I have lost my heart."

°°°°"Already!"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"And to that woman!"

°°°°"How could I aspire to find any one else to listen to me?" he asked, with a keen glance at his cousin. "Her Grace the Duchesse de Carigliano is a friend of the Duchesse de Berri," he went on, after a pause; "you are sure to see her, will you be so kind as to present me to her, and to take me to her ball on Monday? I shall meet Mme. de Nucingen there, and enter into my first skirmish."

°°°°"Willingly," she said. "If you have a liking for her already, your affairs of the heart are like to prosper. That is de Marsay over there in the Princesse Galathionne's box. Mme. de Nucingen is racked with jealousy. There is no better time for approaching a woman, especially if she happens to be a banker's wife. All those ladies of the Chaussee-d'Antin love revenge."

°°°°"Then, what would you do yourself in such a case?"

°°°°"I should suffer in silence."

°°°°At this point the Marquis d'Ajuda appeared in Mme. de Beauseant's box.

°°°°"I have made a muddle of my affairs to come to you," he said, "and I am telling you about it, so that it may not be a sacrifice."

°°°°Eugene saw the glow of joy on the Vicomtesse's face, and knew that this was love, and learned the difference between love and the affectations of Parisian coquetry. He admired his cousin, grew mute, and yielded his place to M. d'Ajuda with a sigh.

°°°°"How noble, how sublime a woman is when she loves like that!" he said to himself. "And HE could forsake her for a doll! Oh! how could any one forsake her?"

°°°°There was a boy's passionate indignation in his heart. He could have flung himself at Mme. de Beauseant's feet; he longed for the power of the devil if he could snatch her away and hide her in his heart, as an eagle snatches up some white yeanling from the plains and bears it to its eyrie. It was humiliating to him to think that in all this gallery of fair pictures he had not one picture of his own. "To have a mistress and an almost royal position is a sign of power," he said to himself. And he looked at Mme. de Nucingen as a man measures another who has insulted him.

°°°°The Vicomtesse turned to him, and the expression of her eyes thanked him a thousand times for his discretion. The first act came to an end just then.

°°°°"Do you know Mme. de Nucingen well enough to present M. de Rastignac to her?" she asked of the Marquis d'Ajuda.

°°°°"She will be delighted," said the Marquis. The handsome Portuguese rose as he spoke and took the student's arm, and in another moment Eugene found himself in Mme. de Nucingen's box.

°°°°"Madame," said the Marquis, "I have the honor of presenting to you the Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac; he is a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's. You have made so deep an impression upon him, that I thought I would fill up the measure of his happiness by bringing him nearer to his divinity."

°°°°Words spoken half jestingly to cover their somewhat disrespectful import; but such an implication, if carefully disguised, never gives offence to a woman. Mme. de Nucingen smiled, and offered Eugene the place which her husband had just left.

°°°°"I do not venture to suggest that you should stay with me, monsieur," she said. "Those who are so fortunate as to be in Mme. de Beauseant's company do not desire to leave it."

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, lowering his voice, "I think that to please my cousin I should remain with you. Before my lord Marquis came we were speaking of you and of your exceedingly distinguished appearance," he added aloud.

°°°°M. d'Ajuda turned and left them.

°°°°"Are you really going to stay with me, monsieur?" asked the Baroness. "Then we shall make each other's acquaintance. Mme. de Restaud told me about you, and has made me anxious to meet you."

°°°°"She must be very insincere, then, for she has shut her door on me."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Madame, I will tell you honestly the reason why; but I must crave your indulgence before confiding such a secret to you. I am your father's neighbor; I had no idea that Mme. de Restaud was his daughter. I was rash enough to mention his name; I meant no harm, but I annoyed your sister and her husband very much. You cannot think how severely the Duchesse de Langeais and my cousin blamed this apostasy on a daughter's part, as a piece of bad taste. I told them all about it, and they both burst out laughing. Then Mme. de Beauseant made some comparison between you and your sister, speaking in high terms of you, and saying how very fond you were of my neighbor, M. Goriot. And, indeed, how could you help loving him? He adores you so passionately that I am jealous already. We talked about you this morning for two hours. So this evening I was quite full of all that your father had told me, and while I was dining with my cousin I said that you could not be as beautiful as affectionate. Mme. de Beauseant meant to gratify such warm admiration, I think, when she brought me here, telling me, in her gracious way, that I should see you."

°°°°"Then, even now, I owe you a debt of gratitude, monsieur," said the banker's wife. "We shall be quite old friends in a little while."

°°°°"Although a friendship with you could not be like an ordinary friendship," said Rastignac; "I should never wish to be your friend."

°°°°Such stereotyped phrases as these, in the mouths of beginners, possess an unfailing charm for women, and are insipid only when read coldly; for a young man's tone, glance and attitude give a surpassing eloquence to the banal phrases. Mme. de Nucingen thought that Rastignac was adorable. Then, woman-like, being at a loss how to reply to the student's outspoken admiration, she answered a previous remark.

°°°°"Yes, it is very wrong of my sister to treat our poor father as she does," she said; "he has been a Providence to us. It was not until M. de Nucingen positively ordered me only to receive him in the mornings that I yielded the point. But I have been unhappy about it for a long while; I have shed many tears over it. This violence to my feelings, with my husband's brutal treatment, have been two causes of my unhappy married life. There is certainly no woman in Paris whose lot seems more enviable than mine, and yet, in reality, there is not one so much to be pitied. You will think I must be out of my senses to talk to you like this; but you know my father, and I cannot regard you as a stranger."

°°°°"You will find no one," said Eugene, "who longs as eagerly as I do to be yours. What do all women seek? Happiness." (He answered his own question in low, vibrating tones.) "And if happiness for a woman means that she is to be loved and adored, to have a friend to whom she can pour out her wishes, her fancies, her sorrows and joys; to whom she can lay bare her heart and soul, and all her fair defects and her gracious virtues, without fear of a betrayal; believe me, the devotion and the warmth that never fails can only be found in the heart of a young man who, at a bare sign from you, would go to his death, who neither knows nor cares to know anything as yet of the world, because you will be all the world to him. I myself, you see (you will laugh at my simplicity), have just come from a remote country district; I am quite new to this world of Paris; I have only known true and loving hearts; and I made up my mind that here I should find no love. Then I chanced to meet my cousin, and to see my cousin's heart from very near; I have divined the inexhaustible treasures of passion, and, like Cherubino, I am the lover of all women, until the day comes when I find THE woman to whom I may devote myself. As soon as I saw you, as soon as I came into the theatre this evening, I felt myself borne towards you as if by the current of a stream. I had so often thought of you already, but I had never dreamed that you would be so beautiful! Mme. de Beauseant told me that I must not look so much at you. She does not know the charm of your red lips, your fair face, nor see how soft your eyes are. . . . I also am beginning to talk nonsense; but let me talk."

°°°°Nothing pleases a woman better than to listen to such whispered words as these; the most puritanical among them listens even when she ought not to reply to them; and Rastignac, having once begun, continued to pour out his story, dropping his voice, that she might lean and listen; and Mme. de Nucingen, smiling, glanced from time to time at de Marsay, who still sat in the Princesse Galathionne's box.

°°°°Rastignac did not leave Mme. de Nucingen till her husband came to take her home.

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, "I shall have the pleasure of calling upon you before the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball."

°°°°"If Matame infites you to come," said the Baron, a thickset Alsatian, with indications of a sinister cunning in his full-moon countenance, "you are quide sure of being well receifed."

°°°°"My affairs seem to be in a promising way," said Eugene to himself.--" 'Can you love me?' I asked her, and she did not resent it. The bit is in the horse's mouth, and I have only to mount and ride;" and with that he went to pay his respects to Mme. de Beauseant, who was leaving the theatre on d'Ajuda's arm.

°°°°The student did not know that the Baroness' thoughts had been wandering; that she was even then expecting a letter from de Marsay, one of those letters that bring about a rupture that rends the soul; so, happy in his delusion, Eugene went with the Vicomtesse to the peristyle, where people were waiting till their carriages were announced.

°°°°"That cousin of yours is hardly recognizable for the same man," said the Portuguese laughingly to the Vicomtesse, when Eugene had taken leave of them. "He will break the bank. He is as supple as an eel; he will go a long way, of that I am sure. Who else could have picked out a woman for him, as you did, just when she needed consolation?"

°°°°"But it is not certain that she does not still love the faithless lover," said Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°The student meanwhile walked back from the Theatre-Italien to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, making the most delightful plans as he went. He had noticed how closely Mme. de Restaud had scrutinized him when he sat beside Mme. de Nucingen, and inferred that the Countess' doors would not be closed in the future. Four important houses were now open to him--for he meant to stand well with the Marechale; he had four supporters in the inmost circle of society in Paris. Even now it was clear to him that, once involved in this intricate social machinery, he must attach himself to a spoke of the wheel that was to turn and raise his fortunes; he would not examine himself too curiously as to the methods, but he was certain of the end, and conscious of the power to gain and keep his hold.

°°°°"If Mme. de Nucingen takes an interest in me, I will teach her how to manage her husband. That husband of hers is a great speculator; he might put me in the way of making a fortune by a single stroke."

°°°°He did not say this bluntly in so many words; as yet, indeed, he was not sufficient of a diplomatist to sum up a situation, to see its possibilities at a glance, and calculate the chances in his favor. These were nothing but hazy ideas that floated over his mental horizon; they were less cynical than Vautrin's notions; but if they had been tried in the crucible of conscience, no very pure result would have issued from the test. It is by a succession of such like transactions that men sink at last to the level of the relaxed morality of this epoch, when there have never been so few of those who square their courses with their theories, so few of those noble characters who do not yield to temptation, for whom the slightest deviation from the line of rectitude is a crime. To these magnificent types of uncompromising Right we owe two masterpieces--the Alceste of Moliere, and, in our own day, the characters of Jeanie Deans and her father in Sir Walter Scott's novel. Perhaps a work which should chronicle the opposite course, which should trace out all the devious courses through which a man of the world, a man of ambitions, drags his conscience, just steering clear of crime that he may gain his end and yet save appearances, such a chronicle would be no less edifying and no less dramatic.

°°°°Rastignac went home. He was fascinated by Mme. de Nucingen; he seemed to see her before him, slender and graceful as a swallow. He recalled the intoxicating sweetness of her eyes, her fair hair, the delicate silken tissue of the skin, beneath which it almost seemed to him that he could see the blood coursing; the tones of her voice still exerted a spell over him; he had forgotten nothing; his walk perhaps heated his imagination by sending a glow of warmth through his veins. He knocked unceremoniously at Goriot's door.

°°°°"I have seen Mme. Delphine, neighbor," said he.

°°°°"Where?"

°°°°"At the Italiens."

°°°°"Did she enjoy it?. . . . Just come inside," and the old man left his bed, unlocked the door, and promptly returned again.

°°°°It was the first time that Eugene had been in Father Goriot's room, and he could not control his feeling of amazement at the contrast between the den in which the father lived and the costume of the daughter whom he had just beheld. The window was curtainless, the walls were damp, in places the varnished wall- paper had come away and gave glimpses of the grimy yellow plaster beneath. The wretched bed on which the old man lay boasted but one thin blanket, and a wadded quilt made out of large pieces of Mme. Vauquer's old dresses. The floor was damp and gritty. Opposite the window stood a chest of drawers made of rosewood, one of the old-fashioned kind with a curving front and brass handles, shaped like rings of twisted vine stems covered with flowers and leaves. On a venerable piece of furniture with a wooden shelf stood a ewer and basin and shaving apparatus. A pair of shoes stood in one corner; a night-table by the bed had neither a door nor marble slab. There was not a trace of a fire in the empty grate; the square walnut table with the crossbar against which Father Goriot had crushed and twisted his posset- dish stood near the hearth. The old man's hat was lying on a broken-down bureau. An armchair stuffed with straw and a couple of chairs completed the list of ramshackle furniture. From the tester of the bed, tied to the ceiling by a piece of rag, hung a strip of some cheap material in large red and black checks. No poor drudge in a garret could be worse lodged than Father Goriot in Mme. Vauquer's lodging-house. The mere sight of the room sent a chill through you and a sense of oppression; it was like the worst cell in a prison. Luckily, Goriot could not see the effect that his surroundings produced on Eugene as the latter deposited his candle on the night-table. The old man turned round, keeping the bedclothes huddled up to his chin.

°°°°"Well," he said, "and which do you like the best, Mme. de Restaud or Mme. de Nucingen?"

°°°°"I like Mme. Delphine the best," said the law student, "because she loves you the best."

°°°°At the words so heartily spoken the old man's hand slipped out from under the bedclothes and grasped Eugene's.

°°°°"Thank you, thank you," he said, gratefully. "Then what did she say about me?"

°°°°The student repeated the Baroness' remarks with some embellishments of his own, the old man listening the while as though he heard a voice from Heaven.

°°°°"Dear child!" he said. "Yes, yes, she is very fond of me. But you must not believe all that she tells you about Anastasie. The two sisters are jealous of each other, you see, another proof of their affection. Mme. de Restaud is very fond of me too. I know she is. A father sees his children as God sees all of us; he looks into the very depths of their hearts; he knows their intentions; and both of them are so loving. Oh! if I only had good sons-in-law, I should be too happy, and I dare say there is no perfect happiness here below. If I might live with them-- simply hear their voices, know that they are there, see them go and come as I used to do at home when they were still with me; why, my heart bounds at the thought. . . . Were they nicely dressed?"

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene. "But, M. Goriot, how is it that your daughters have such fine houses, while you live in such a den as this?"

°°°°"Dear me, why should I want anything better?" he replied, with seeming carelessness. "I can't quite explain to you how it is; I am not used to stringing words together properly, but it all lies there----" he said, tapping his heart. "My real life is in my two girls, you see; and so long as they are happy, and smartly dressed, and have soft carpets under their feet, what does it matter what clothes I wear or where I lie down of a night? I shall never feel cold so long as they are warm; I shall never feel dull if they are laughing. I have no troubles but theirs. When you, too, are a father, and you hear your children's little voices, you will say to yourself, 'That has all come from me.' You will feel that those little ones are akin to every drop in your veins, that they are the very flower of your life (and what else are they?); you will cleave so closely to them that you seem to feel every movement that they make. Everywhere I hear their voices sounding in my ears. If they are sad, the look in their eyes freezes my blood. Some day you will find out that there is far more happiness in another's happiness than in your own. It is something that I cannot explain, something within that sends a glow of warmth all through you. In short, I live my life three times over. Shall I tell you something funny? Well, then, since I have been a father, I have come to understand God. He is everywhere in the world, because the whole world comes from Him. And it is just the same with my children, monsieur. Only, I love my daughters better than God loves the world, for the world is not so beautiful as God Himself is, but my children are more beautiful than I am. Their lives are so bound up with mine that I felt somehow that you would see them this evening. Great Heaven! If any man would make my little Delphine as happy as a wife is when she is loved, I would black his boots and run on his errands. That miserable M. de Marsay is a cur; I know all about him from her maid. A longing to wring his neck comes over me now and then. He does not love her! does not love a pearl of a woman, with a voice like a nightingale and shaped like a model. Where can her eyes have been when she married that great lump of an Alsatian? They ought both of them to have married young men, good-looking and good-tempered--but, after all, they had their own way."

°°°°Father Goriot was sublime. Eugene had never yet seen his face light up as it did now with the passionate fervor of a father's love. It is worthy of remark that strong feeling has a very subtle and pervasive power; the roughest nature, in the endeavor to express a deep and sincere affection, communicates to others the influence that has put resonance into the voice, and eloquence into every gesture, wrought a change in the very features of the speaker; for under the inspiration of passion the stupidest human being attains to the highest eloquence of ideas, if not of language, and seems to move in some sphere of light. In the old man's tones and gesture there was something just then of the same spell that a great actor exerts over his audience. But does not the poet in us find expression in our affections?

°°°°"Well," said Eugene, "perhaps you will not be sorry to hear that she is pretty sure to break with de Marsay before long. That sprig of fashion has left her for the Princesse Galathionne. For my part, I fell in love with Mme. Delphine this evening."

°°°°"Stuff!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"I did indeed, and she did not regard me with aversion. For a whole hour we talked of love, and I am to go to call on her on Saturday, the day after to-morrow."

°°°°"Oh! how I should love you, if she should like you. You are kind- hearted; you would never make her miserable. If you were to forsake her, I would cut your throat at once. A woman does not love twice, you see! Good heavens! what nonsense I am talking, M. Eugene! It is cold; you ought not to stay here. MON DIEU! so you have heard her speak? What message did she give you for me?"

°°°°"None at all," said Eugene to himself; aloud he answered, "She told me to tell you that your daughter sends you a good kiss."

°°°°"Good-night, neighbor! Sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you! I have mine already made for me by that message from her. May God grant you all your desires! You have come in like a good angel on me to-night, and brought with you the air that my daughter breathes."

°°°°"Poor old fellow!" said Eugene as he lay down. "It is enough to melt a heart of stone. His daughter no more thought of him than of the Grand Turk."

°°°°Ever after this conference Goriot looked upon his neighbor as a friend, a confidant such as he had never hoped to find; and there was established between the two the only relationship that could attach this old man to another man. The passions never miscalculate. Father Goriot felt that this friendship brought him closer to his daughter Delphine; he thought that he should find a warmer welcome for himself if the Baroness should care for Eugene. Moreover, he had confided one of his troubles to the younger man. Mme. de Nucingen, for whose happiness he prayed a thousand times daily, had never known the joys of love. Eugene was certainly (to make use of his own expression) one of the nicest young men that he had ever seen, and some prophetic instinct seemed to tell him that Eugene was to give her the happiness which had not been hers. These were the beginnings of a friendship that grew up between the old man and his neighbor; but for this friendship the catastrophe of the drama must have remained a mystery.

°°°°The affection with which Father Goriot regarded Eugene, by whom he seated himself at breakfast, the change in Goriot's face, which as a rule, looked as expressionless as a plaster cast, and a few words that passed between the two, surprised the other lodgers. Vautrin, who saw Eugene for the first time since their interview, seemed as if he would fain read the student's very soul. During the night Eugene had had some time in which to scan the vast field which lay before him; and now, as he remembered yesterday's proposal, the thought of Mlle. Taillefer's dowry came, of course, to his mind, and he could not help thinking of Victorine as the most exemplary youth may think of an heiress. It chanced that their eyes met. The poor girl did not fail to see that Eugene looked very handsome in his new clothes. So much was said in the glance, thus exchanged, that Eugene could not doubt but that he was associated in her mind with the vague hopes that lie dormant in a girl's heart and gather round the first attractive newcomer. "Eight hundred thousand francs!" a voice cried in his ears, but suddenly he took refuge in the memories of yesterday evening, thinking that his extemporized passion for Mme. de Nucingen was a talisman that would preserve him from this temptation.

°°°°"They gave Rossini's Barber of Seville at the Italiens yesterday evening," he remarked. "I never heard such delicious music. Good gracious! how lucky people are to have a box at the Italiens!"

°°°°Father Goriot drank in every word that Eugene let fall, and watched him as a dog watches his master's slightest movement.

°°°°"You men are like fighting cocks," said Mme. Vauquer; "you do what you like."

°°°°"How did you get back?" inquired Vautrin.

°°°°"I walked," answered Eugene.

°°°°"For my own part," remarked the tempter, "I do not care about doing things by halves. If I want to enjoy myself that way, I should prefer to go in my carriage, sit in my own box, and do the thing comfortably. Everything or nothing; that is my motto."

°°°°"And a good one, too," commented Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Perhaps you will see Mme. de Nucingen to-day," said Eugene, addressing Goriot in an undertone. "She will welcome you with open arms, I am sure; she would want to ask you for all sorts of little details about me. I have found out that she will do anything in the world to be known by my cousin Mme. de Beauseant; don't forget to tell her that I love her too well not to think of trying to arrange this."

°°°°Rastignac went at once to the Ecole de Droit. He had no mind to stay a moment longer than was necessary in that odious house. He wasted his time that day; he had fallen a victim to that fever of the brain that accompanies the too vivid hopes of youth. Vautrin's arguments had set him meditating on social life, and he was deep in these reflections when he happened on his friend Bianchon in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

°°°°"What makes you look so solemn?" said the medical student, putting an arm through Eugene's as they went towards the Palais.

°°°°"I am tormented by temptations."

°°°°"What kind? There is a cure for temptation."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Yielding to it."

°°°°"You laugh, but you don't know what it is all about. Have you read Rousseau?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Do you remember that he asks the reader somewhere what he would do if he could make a fortune by killing an old mandarin somewhere in China by mere force of wishing it, and without stirring from Paris?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Well, then?"

°°°°"Pshaw! I am at my thirty-third mandarin."

°°°°"Seriously, though. Look here, suppose you were sure that you could do it, and had only to give a nod. Would you do it?"

°°°°"Is he well stricken in years, this mandarin of yours? Pshaw! after all, young or old, paralytic, or well and sound, my word for it. . . . Well, then. Hang it, no!"

°°°°"You are a good fellow, Bianchon. But suppose you loved a woman well enough to lose your soul in hell for her, and that she wanted money for dresses and a carriage, and all her whims, in fact?"

°°°°"Why, here you are taking away my reason, and want me to reason!"

°°°°"Well, then, Bianchon, I am mad; bring me to my senses. I have two sisters as beautiful and innocent as angels, and I want them to be happy. How am I to find two hundred thousand francs apiece for them in the next five years? Now and then in life, you see, you must play for heavy stakes, and it is no use wasting your luck on low play."

°°°°"But you are only stating the problem that lies before every one at the outset of his life, and you want to cut the Gordian knot with a sword. If that is the way of it, dear boy, you must be an Alexander, or to the hulks you go. For my own part, I am quite contented with the little lot I mean to make for myself somewhere in the country, when I mean to step into my father's shoes and plod along. A man's affections are just as fully satisfied by the smallest circle as they can be by a vast circumference. Napoleon himself could only dine once, and he could not have more mistresses than a house student at the Capuchins. Happiness, old man, depends on what lies between the sole of your foot and the crown of your head; and whether it costs a million or a hundred louis, the actual amount of pleasure that you receive rests entirely with you, and is just exactly the same in any case. I am for letting that Chinaman live."

°°°°"Thank you, Bianchon; you have done me good. We will always be friends."

°°°°"I say," remarked the medical student, as they came to the end of a broad walk in the Jardin des Plantes, "I saw the Michonneau and Poiret a few minutes ago on a bench chatting with a gentleman whom I used to see in last year's troubles hanging about the Chamber of Deputies; he seems to me, in fact, to be a detective dressed up like a decent retired tradesman. Let us keep an eye on that couple; I will tell you why some time. Good-bye; it is nearly four o'clock, and I must be in to answer to my name."

°°°°When Eugene reached the lodging-house, he found Father Goriot waiting for him.

°°°°"Here," cried the old man, "here is a letter from her. Pretty handwriting, eh?"

°°°°Eugene broke the seal and read:--

°°°°"Sir,--I have heard from my father that you are fond of Italian music. I shall be delighted if you will do me the pleasure of accepting a seat in my box. La Fodor and Pellegrini will sing on Saturday, so I am sure that you will not refuse me. M. de Nucingen and I shall be pleased if you will dine with us; we shall be quite by ourselves. If you will come and be my escort, my husband will be glad to be relieved from his conjugal duties. Do not answer, but simply come.--Yours sincerely, D. DE N."

°°°°"Let me see it," said Father Goriot, when Eugene had read the letter. "You are going, aren't you?" he added, when he had smelled the writing-paper. "How nice it smells! Her fingers have touched it, that is certain."

°°°°"A woman does not fling herself at a man's head in this way," the student was thinking. "She wants to use me to bring back de Marsay; nothing but pique makes a woman do a thing like this."

°°°°"Well," said Father Goriot, "what are you thinking about?"

°°°°Eugene did not know the fever or vanity that possessed some women in those days; how should he imagine that to open a door in the Faubourg Saint-Germain a banker's wife would go to almost any length. For the coterie of the Faubourg Saint-Germain was a charmed circle, and the women who moved in it were at that time the queens of society; and among the greatest of these Dames du Petit-Chateau, as they were called, were Mme. de Beauseant and her friends the Duchesse de Langeais and the Duchesse de Maufrigneause. Rastignac was alone in his ignorance of the frantic efforts made by women who lived in the Chausee-d'Antin to enter this seventh heaven and shine among the brightest constellations of their sex. But his cautious disposition stood him in good stead, and kept his judgment cool, and the not altogether enviable power of imposing instead of accepting conditions.

°°°°"Yes, I am going," he replied.

°°°°So it was curiosity that drew him to Mme. de Nucingen; while, if she had treated him disdainfully, passion perhaps might have brought him to her feet. Still he waited almost impatiently for to-morrow, and the hour when he could go to her. There is almost as much charm for a young man in a first flirtation as there is in first love. The certainty of success is a source of happiness to which men do not confess, and all the charm of certain women lies in this. The desire of conquest springs no less from the easiness than from the difficulty of triumph, and every passion is excited or sustained by one or the other of these two motives which divide the empire of love. Perhaps this division is one result of the great question of temperaments; which, after all, dominates social life. The melancholic temperament may stand in need of the tonic of coquetry, while those of nervous or sanguine complexion withdraw if they meet with a too stubborn resistance. In other words, the lymphatic temperament is essentially despondent, and the rhapsodic is bilious.

°°°°Eugene lingered over his toilette with an enjoyment of all its little details that is grateful to a young man's self-love, though he will not own to it for fear of being laughed at. He thought, as he arranged his hair, that a pretty woman's glances would wander through the dark curls. He indulged in childish tricks like any young girl dressing for a dance, and gazed complacently at his graceful figure while he smoothed out the creases of his coat.

°°°°"There are worse figures, that is certain," he said to himself.

°°°°Then he went downstairs, just as the rest of the household were sitting down to dinner, and took with good humor the boisterous applause excited by his elegant appearance. The amazement with which any attention to dress is regarded in a lodging-house is a very characteristic trait. No one can put on a new coat but every one else must say his say about it.

°°°°"Clk! clk! clk!" cried Bianchon, making the sound with his tongue against the roof of his mouth, like a driver urging on a horse.

°°°°"He holds himself like a duke and a peer of France," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Are you going a-courting?" inquired Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried the artist.

°°°°"My compliments to my lady your wife," from the employe at the Museum.

°°°°"Your wife; have you a wife?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, in compartments, water-tight and floats, guaranteed fast color, all prices from twenty-five to forty sous, neat check patterns in the latest fashion and best taste, will wash, half- linen, half-cotton, half-wool; a certain cure for toothache and other complaints under the patronage of the Royal College of Physicians! children like it! a remedy for headache, indigestion, and all other diseases affecting the throat, eyes, and ears!" cried Vautrin, with a comical imitation of the volubility of a quack at a fair. "And how much shall we say for this marvel, gentlemen? Twopence? No. Nothing of the sort. All that is left in stock after supplying the Great Mogul. All the crowned heads of Europe, including the Gr-r-rand Duke of Baden, have been anxious to get a sight of it. Walk up! walk up! gentlemen! Pay at the desk as you go in! Strike up the music there! Brooum, la, la, trinn! la, la, boum! boum! Mister Clarinette, there you are out of tune!" he added gruffly; "I will rap your knuckles for you!"

°°°°"Goodness! what an amusing man!" said Mme. Vauquer to Mme. Couture; "I should never feel dull with him in the house."

°°°°This burlesque of Vautrin's was the signal for an outburst of merriment, and under cover of jokes and laughter Eugene caught a glance from Mlle. Taillefer; she had leaned over to say a few words in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"The cab is at the door," announced Sylvie.

°°°°"But where is he going to dine?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"With Madame la Baronne de Nucingen."

°°°°"M. Goriot's daughter," said the law student.

°°°°At this, all eyes turned to the old vermicelli maker; he was gazing at Eugene with something like envy in his eyes.

°°°°Rastignac reached the house in the Rue Saint-Lazare, one of those many-windowed houses with a mean-looking portico and slender columns, which are considered the thing in Paris, a typical banker's house, decorated in the most ostentatious fashion; the walls lined with stucco, the landings of marble mosaic. Mme. de Nucingen was sitting in a little drawing-room; the room was painted in the Italian fashion, and decorated like a restaurant. The Baroness seemed depressed. The effort that she made to hide her feelings aroused Eugene's interest; it was plain that she was not playing a part. He had expected a little flutter of excitement at his coming, and he found her dispirited and sad. The disappointment piqued his vanity.

°°°°"My claim to your confidence is very small, madame," he said, after rallying her on her abstracted mood; "but if I am in the way, please tell me so frankly; I count on your good faith."

°°°°"No, stay with me," she said; "I shall be all alone if you go. Nucingen is dining in town, and I do not want to be alone; I want to be taken out of myself."

°°°°"But what is the matter?"

°°°°"You are the very last person whom I should tell," she exclaimed.

°°°°"Then I am connected in some way in this secret. I wonder what it is?"

°°°°"Perhaps. Yet, no," she went on; "it is a domestic quarrel, which ought to be buried in the depths of the heart. I am very unhappy; did I not tell you so the day before yesterday? Golden chains are the heaviest of all fetters."

°°°°When a woman tells a young man that she is very unhappy, and when the young man is clever, and well dressed, and has fifteen hundred francs lying idle in his pocket, he is sure to think as Eugene said, and he becomes a coxcomb.

°°°°"What can you have left to wish for?" he answered. "You are young, beautiful, beloved, and rich."

°°°°"Do not let us talk of my affairs," she said shaking her head mournfully. "We will dine together tete-a-tete, and afterwards we will go to hear the most exquisite music. Am I to your taste?" she went on, rising and displaying her gown of white cashmere, covered with Persian designs in the most superb taste.

°°°°"I wish that you were altogether mine," said Eugene; "you are charming."

°°°°"You would have a forlorn piece of property," she said, smiling bitterly. "There is nothing about me that betrays my wretchedness; and yet, in spite of appearances, I am in despair. I cannot sleep; my troubles have broken my night's rest; I shall grow ugly."

°°°°"Oh! that is impossible," cried the law student; "but I am curious to know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface."

°°°°"Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me," she said. "Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else, for pity's sake," she added. "Let me show you my rooms."

°°°°"No; let us stay here," answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen's hand in his. She surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

°°°°"Listen," said Rastignac; "if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end to them, even if I have to kill half-a- dozen men; or I shall go, never to return."

°°°°"Very well," she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of despair, "I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes," she said to herself, "I have no other resource left."

°°°°She rang the bell.

°°°°"Are the horses put in for the master?" she asked of the servant.

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve dinner at seven o'clock."

°°°°"Now, come with me," she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in the banker's carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be dreaming.

°°°°"To the Palais-Royal," she said to the coachman; "stop near the Theatre-Francais."

°°°°She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

°°°°"Another moment and she will escape me," he said to himself.

°°°°When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

°°°°"Is it true that you love me?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes," he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the uneasiness that he felt.

°°°°"You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"Are you ready to do my bidding?"

°°°°"Blindly."

°°°°"Have you ever been to a gaming-house?" she asked in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Never."

°°°°"Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse," she said. "Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my troubles when you come back."

°°°°"Devil take me, I'm sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am about, but I will obey you," he added, with inward exultation, as he thought, "She has gone too far to draw back-- she can refuse me nothing now!"

°°°°Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand clothes-dealer, and hurried to number 9, which happened to be the nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his stakes.

°°°°"If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it turns up, you will win thirty-six louis," said a respectable- looking, white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

°°°°Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number 21 (his own age). There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had won.

°°°°"Take your money off, sir," said the old gentleman; "you don't often win twice running by that system."

°°°°Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once more.

°°°°"You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own," the old gentleman said in his ear. "Take my advice and go away with your winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable, you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck."

°°°°Rastignac's head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the white-haired man's possession, and went down-stairs with his seven thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his luck.

°°°°"So, that is over; and now where will you take me?" he asked, as soon as the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild embrace.

°°°°"You have saved me!" she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

°°°°"I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then," she went on, "I wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over disgracefully. If, at a woman's utmost need, SOMEBODY heaps gold upon her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever! But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept money in such a way? MON DIEU! is it not natural to share everything with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how, then, can our interests be separate?

°°°°"You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I longed to escape, to run away . . . where, I did not know. Half the women in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture. Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think of me as a woman whom he has paid." She tried to conceal her tears from him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

°°°°"It is hideous, is it not," she cried, "to speak in a breath of money and affection. You cannot love me after this," she added.

°°°°The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great, and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution of society, had thrown Eugene's thoughts into confusion; he uttered soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

°°°°"You will not remember this against me?" she asked; "promise me that you will not."

°°°°"Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so," he said. She took his hand and held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep gratitude.

°°°°"I am free and happy once more, thanks to you," she said. "Oh! I have felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this," she went on, as she took only six of the banknotes. "In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns, for I really ought to go halves with you."

°°°°Eugene's maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, "I am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy," he took the money.

°°°°"It shall be a last stake in reserve," he said, "in case of misfortune."

°°°°"That was what I was dreading to hear," she cried, turning pale. "Oh, if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you! I should die of sorrow!"

°°°°They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin's cynical words began to ring in his ears.

°°°°"Seat yourself there," said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside the fire. "I have a difficult letter to write," she added. "Tell me what to say."

°°°°"Say nothing," Eugene answered her. "Put the bills in an envelope, direct it, and send it by your maid."

°°°°"Why, you are a love of a man," she said. "Ah! see what it is to have been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through," she went on, smiling at him.

°°°°"She is charming," thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

°°°°"Do you like it?" she asked, as she rang for the maid.

°°°°"Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me."

°°°°Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

°°°°Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of the table which he had admired in his cousin's house.

°°°°"Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens afterwards," she said.

°°°°"I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am a poor student, and I have my way to make."

°°°°"Oh! you will succeed," she said laughing. "You will see. All that you wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy."

°°°°It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris, believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

°°°°Eugene took the Baroness' hand in his, and by some light pressure of the fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

°°°°"That was gratitude," she said, "for devotion that I did not dare to hope for, but now it would be a promise."

°°°°"And will you give me no promise, ingrate?"

°°°°He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a discontented air that delighted her.

°°°°"I shall see you at the ball on Monday," she said.

°°°°As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections. He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible excuses for appropriating it.

°°°°He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the stairhead he saw a light in Goriot's room; the old man had lighted a candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and go to his room without "telling him all about his daughter," to use his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without reserve.

°°°°"Then they think that I am ruined!" cried Father Goriot, in an agony of jealousy and desperation. "Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a year! MON DIEU! Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why did not YOU come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I had hold of them, I would wring their necks. MON DIEU! CRYING! Did you say she was crying?"

°°°°"With her head on my waistcoat," said Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! give it to me," said Father Goriot. "What! my daughter's tears have fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me have it. By the terms of her marriage- contract, she ought to have the use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth."

°°°°"Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the waistcoat."

°°°°Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student's hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

°°°°"You will succeed," the old man said. "God is just, you see. I know an honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to save one tear to either of them."

°°°°"An honest man!" said Eugene to himself as he lay down. "Upon my word, I think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey the voice of conscience." Perhaps none but believers in God do good in secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

°°°°The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant, who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball. The Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there. Delphine's dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene's eyes; she was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who can guess all that passes in a woman's mind. Who has not refrained from giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure; he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room; all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

°°°°Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

°°°°The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in a diabolical fashion.

°°°°"And do you suppose," cried that cold-blooded logician, "that a young man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, in the Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way, I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but, after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be out of place here, where we only aim at the purely patriarchalorama. If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend," Vautrin continued, with half-paternal jocularity, "you must have three horses, a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further. Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good- bye to your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe going to carry your billets-doux for you? Do you mean to employ the stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom of your elders!" he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each syllable. "Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously, and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way."

°°°°Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by which he had sought to corrupt the student's mind.

°°°°Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve in the small hours. He rose at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew. He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money, and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

°°°°One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in their youth and in the almost frantic eagerness with which youth grasps at pleasure. They are reckless with anything obtained on credit, while everything for which they must pay in ready money is made to last as long as possible; if they cannot have all that they want, they make up for it, it would seem, by squandering what they have. To state the matter simply--a student is far more careful of his hat than of his coat, because the latter being a comparatively costly article of dress, it is in the nature of things that a tailor should be a creditor; but it is otherwise with the hatter; the sums of money spent with him are so modest, that he is the most independent and unmanageable of his tribe, and it is almost impossible to bring him to terms. The young man in the balcony of a theatre who displays a gorgeous waistcoat for the benefit of the fair owners of opera glasses, has very probably no socks in his wardrobe, for the hosier is another of the genus of weevils that nibble at the purse. This was Rastignac's condition. His purse was always empty for Mme. Vauquer, always full at the demand of vanity; there was a periodical ebb and flow in his fortunes, which was seldom favorable to the payment of just debts. If he was to leave that unsavory and mean abode, where from time to time his pretensions met with humiliation, the first step was to pay his hostess for a month's board and lodging, and the second to purchase furniture worthy of the new lodgings he must take in his quality of dandy, a course that remained impossible. Rastignac, out of his winnings at cards, would pay his jeweler exorbitant prices for gold watches and chains, and then, to meet the exigencies of play, would carry them to the pawnbroker, that discreet and forbidding- looking friend of youth; but when it was a question of paying for board or lodging, or for the necessary implements for the cultivation of his Elysian fields, his imagination and pluck alike deserted him. There was no inspiration to be found in vulgar necessity, in debts contracted for past requirements. Like most of those who trust to their luck, he put off till the last moment the payment of debts that among the bourgeoisie are regarded as sacred engagements, acting on the plan of Mirabeau, who never settled his baker's bill until it underwent a formidable transformation into a bill of exchange.

°°°°It was about this time when Rastignac was down on his luck and fell into debt, that it became clear to the law student's mind that he must have some more certain source of income if he meant to live as he had been doing. But while he groaned over the thorny problems of his precarious situation, he felt that he could not bring himself to renounce the pleasures of this extravagant life, and decided that he must continue it at all costs. His dreams of obtaining a fortune appeared more and more chimerical, and the real obstacles grew more formidable. His initiation into the secrets of the Nucingen household had revealed to him that if he were to attempt to use this love affair as a means of mending his fortunes, he must swallow down all sense of decency, and renounce all the generous ideas which redeem the sins of youth. He had chosen this life of apparent splendor, but secretly gnawed by the canker worm of remorse, a life of fleeting pleasure dearly paid for by persistent pain; like Le Distrait of La Bruyere, he had descended so far as to make his bed in a ditch; but (also like Le Distrait) he himself was uncontaminated as yet by the mire that stained his garments.

°°°°"So we have killed our mandarin, have we?" said Bianchon one day as they left the dinner table.

°°°°"Not yet," he answered, "but he is at his last gasp."

°°°°The medical student took this for a joke, but it was not a jest. Eugene had dined in the house that night for the first time for a long while, and had looked thoughtful during the meal. He had taken his place beside Mlle. Taillefer, and stayed through the dessert, giving his neighbor an expressive glance from time to time. A few of the boarders discussed the walnuts at the table, and others walked about the room, still taking part in the conversation which had begun among them. People usually went when they chose; the amount of time that they lingered being determined by the amount of interest that the conversation possessed for them, or by the difficulty of the process of digestion. In winter-time the room was seldom empty before eight o'clock, when the four women had it all to themselves, and made up for the silence previously imposed upon them by the preponderating masculine element. This evening Vautrin had noticed Eugene's abstractedness, and stayed in the room, though he had seemed to be in a hurry to finish his dinner and go. All through the talk afterwards he had kept out of the sight of the law student, who quite believed that Vautrin had left the room. He now took up his position cunningly in the sitting-room instead of going when the last boarders went. He had fathomed the young man's thoughts, and felt that a crisis was at hand. Rastignac was, in fact, in a dilemma, which many another young man must have known.

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen might love him, or might merely be playing with him, but in either case Rastignac had been made to experience all the alternations of hope and despair of genuine passion, and all the diplomatic arts of a Parisienne had been employed on him. After compromising herself by continually appearing in public with Mme. de Beauseant's cousin she still hesitated, and would not give him the lover's privileges which he appeared to enjoy. For a whole month she had so wrought on his senses, that at last she had made an impression on his heart. If in the earliest days the student had fancied himself to be master, Mme. de Nucingen had since become the stronger of the two, for she had skilfully roused and played upon every instinct, good or bad, in the two or three men comprised in a young student in Paris. This was not the result of deep design on her part, nor was she playing a part, for women are in a manner true to themselves even through their grossest deceit, because their actions are prompted by a natural impulse. It may have been that Delphine, who had allowed this young man to gain such an ascendency over her, conscious that she had been too demonstrative, was obeying a sentiment of dignity, and either repented of her concessions, or it pleased her to suspend them. It is so natural to a Parisienne, even when passion has almost mastered her, to hesitate and pause before taking the plunge; to probe the heart of him to whom she intrusts her future. And once already Mme. de Nucingen's hopes had been betrayed, and her loyalty to a selfish young lover had been despised. She had good reason to be suspicious. Or it may have been that something in Eugene's manner (for his rapid success was making a coxcomb of him) had warned her that the grotesque nature of their position had lowered her somewhat in his eyes. She doubtless wished to assert her dignity; he was young, and she would be great in his eyes; for the lover who had forsaken her had held her so cheap that she was determined that Eugene should not think her an easy conquest, and for this very reason--he knew that de Marsay had been his predecessor. Finally, after the degradation of submission to the pleasure of a heartless young rake, it was so sweet to her to wander in the flower-strewn realms of love, that it was not wonderful that she should wish to dwell a while on the prospect, to tremble with the vibrations of love, to feel the freshness of the breath of its dawn. The true lover was suffering for the sins of the false. This inconsistency is unfortunately only to be expected so long as men do not know how many flowers are mown down in a young woman's soul by the first stroke of treachery.

°°°°Whatever her reasons may have been, Delphine was playing with Rastignac, and took pleasure in playing with him, doubtless because she felt sure of his love, and confident that she could put an end to the torture as soon as it was her royal pleasure to do so. Eugene's self-love was engaged; he could not suffer his first passage of love to end in a defeat, and persisted in his suit like a sportsman determined to bring down at least one partridge to celebrate his first Feast of Saint-Hubert. The pressure of anxiety, his wounded self-love, his despair, real or feigned, drew him nearer and nearer to this woman. All Paris credited him with this conquest, and yet he was conscious that he had made no progress since the day when he saw Mme. de Nucingen for the first time. He did not know as yet that a woman's coquetry is sometimes more delightful than the pleasure of secure possession of her love, and was possessed with helpless rage. If, at this time, while she denied herself to love, Eugene gathered the springtide spoils of his life, the fruit, somewhat sharp and green, and dearly bought, was no less delicious to the taste. There were moments when he had not a sou in his pockets, and at such times he thought in spite of his conscience of Vautrin's offer and the possibility of fortune by a marriage with Mlle. Taillefer. Poverty would clamor so loudly that more than once he was on the point of yielding to the cunning temptations of the terrible sphinx, whose glance had so often exerted a strange spell over him.

°°°°Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau went up to their rooms; and Rastignac, thinking that he was alone with the women in the dining-room, sat between Mme. Vauquer and Mme. Couture, who was nodding over the woolen cuffs that she was knitting by the stove, and looked at Mlle. Taillefer so tenderly that she lowered her eyes.

°°°°"Can you be in trouble, M. Eugene?" Victorine said after a pause.

°°°°"Who has not his troubles?" answered Rastignac. "If we men were sure of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should have no troubles."

°°°°For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible to mistake its meaning.

°°°°"You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to- day, but are you sure that it will never change?"

°°°°A smile flitted over the poor girl's lips; it seemed as if a ray of light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

°°°°"Ah! but suppose," he said, "that you should be rich and happy to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of poverty?"

°°°°A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

°°°°"Even if he were very poor?"

°°°°Again the same mute answer.

°°°°"What nonsense are you talking, you two?" exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Never mind," answered Eugene; "we understand each other."

°°°°"So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?" The words were uttered in Vautrin's deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door as he spoke.

°°°°"Oh! how you startled me!" Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed together.

°°°°"I might make a worse choice," said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin's voice had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

°°°°"No bad jokes, gentlemen!" said Mme. Couture. "My dear, let us go upstairs."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene and Vautrin were left alone.

°°°°"I felt sure you would come round to it," said the elder man with the coolness that nothing seemed to shake. "But stay a moment! I have as much delicacy as anybody else. Don't make up your mind on the spur of the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like."

°°°°The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes, which he fluttered before the student's eyes. Eugene was in a most painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis to the Marquis d'Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud's house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

°°°°"You must see," said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor, "that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself under any obligation to you."

°°°°"Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise," answered the tempter. "You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion, and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women. Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you? Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account," Vautrin went on, and a smile stole over his lips. "Take these bits of paper and write across this," he added, producing a piece of stamped paper, "Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day twelvemonth, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful. In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of strength, my boy."

°°°°"What manner of man are you?" cried Eugene. "Were you created to torment me?"

°°°°"Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes, and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your first fright will go off like a conscript's terror on the battlefield. You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, 'Here are a hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,' and you could sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won't compromise you in any way, and you hesitate. 'Tis an effeminate age."

°°°°Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for it.

°°°°"Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally," Vautrin continued. "I mean to leave this country in a few months' time for America, and set about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do; I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look at. What is a man's life to me? Not THAT," he said, and he snapped his thumb-nail against his teeth. "A man, in short, is everything to me, or just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret; you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin, but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A sentiment-- what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part, I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is my passion. I knew Venice Preserved by heart. Have you met many men plucky enough when a comrade says, 'Let us bury a dead body!' to go and do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!"

°°°°Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student's repudiation, he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying their blameworthy actions to themselves.

°°°°"He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is certain," said Eugene to himself.

°°°°He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of Vautrin's ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for his own ends, raised him in the student's eyes; but the thought of a compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de Restaud's.

°°°°For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid Messieurs de Trailles and d'Ajuda, played at whist for part of the evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to consider that his luck was heaven's reward for his perseverance in the right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin whether the bill he had given was still in the other's possession; and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand francs with a not unnatural relief.

°°°°"Everything is going on well," said Vautrin.

°°°°"But I am not your accomplice," said Eugene.

°°°°"I know, I know," Vautrin broke in. "You are still acting like a child. You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset."

°°°°Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not without good reason, his own suspicions.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," this M. Gondureau was saying, "I do not see any cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of Police----"

°°°°"Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter," said Gondureau.

°°°°Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by that word "police," and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers, confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where the BONUS flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature (an illegible scrawl) and by his title--"His Excellency Monseigneur le Ministre," five words which produce as much effect as the il Bondo Cani of the Calife de Bagdad, five words which in the eyes of this low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a moment? Pronounce the words "His Excellency," and these poor folk will forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests. Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences, annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the deus ex machina, the magical words "His Excellency," so as to dazzle Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

°°°°"If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister . . . Ah! that is quite another thing," said Poiret.

°°°°"You seem to be guided by this gentleman's opinion, and you hear what he says," said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau. "Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the nickname Trompe-la-Mort."

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort?" said Pioret. "Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves that nickname."

°°°°"Well, yes," said the detective. "They call him so because he has been so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----"

°°°°"Then is he a man of honor?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man's crime upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler, who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been unexceptionable."

°°°°"But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, why should he want me?" asked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Oh yes," said Poiret, "if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as to tell us, really knows for a certainty----"

°°°°"Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed Trompe-la- Mort, is in the confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing their affairs, which want a MAN OF MARK to see about them."

°°°°"Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?" asked Poiret. "This gentleman calls himself a MAN OF MARK because he is a MARKED MAN-- branded, you know."

°°°°"This so-called Vautrin," said the detective, "receives the money belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for their benefit."

°°°°"Their mistresses! You mean their wives," remarked Poiret.

°°°°"No, sir. A convict's wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We call them concubines."

°°°°"Then they all live in a state of concubinage?"

°°°°"Naturally."

°°°°"Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow. Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society."

°°°°"But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues, my dear sir----"

°°°°"Of course not, sir; but still----"

°°°°"Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie," said Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"You see how it is, mademoiselle," Gondureau continued. "The Government may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the Society of the Ten Thousand----"

°°°°"Ten Thousand Thieves!" cried Pioret in alarm.

°°°°"No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they won't touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society. If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds, we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again; they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, "What is there to hinder Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?"

°°°°"Oh!" said the detective, "a man is told off to follow him everywhere he goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions."

°°°°"You are quite right, sir," said Poiret, "utterly disgraced he would be."

°°°°"But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without more ado," remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but," he added in her ear, "keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.-- Trompe-la-Mort, when he came back here," he went on aloud "slipped into the skin of an honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning, that he is! You don't catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of consequence, who transacts a good deal of business."

°°°°"Naturally," said Poiret to himself.

°°°°"And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of the real Vautrin, he would put every one's back up among the business men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about."

°°°°"Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman," said Mlle. Michonneau briskly.

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him," said the detective. "I will tell you a secret--he does not like them."

°°°°"Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to identify him for two thousand francs."

°°°°"Nothing simpler," said the stranger. "I will send you a little bottle containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder, and PRESTO! the letters will appear."

°°°°"Why, that is just nothing at all," said Poiret.

°°°°"Well, do you agree?" said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

°°°°"But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all," said Mlle. Michonneau; "am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"What will you give me then?"

°°°°"Five hundred francs."

°°°°"It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir."

°°°°"I assure you," said Poiret, "that mademoiselle has a great deal of conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very intelligent."

°°°°"Well, now," Mlle. Michonneau went on, "make it three thousand francs if he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man."

°°°°"Done!" said Gondureau, "but on the condition that the thing is settled to-morrow."

°°°°"Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first."

°°°°"You are a sly one," said the detective as he rose to his feet. "Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M. Gondureau."

°°°°Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier's lecture, overheard the sufficiently striking nickname of Trompe-la-Mort, and caught the celebrated chief detective's "Done!"

°°°°"Why didn't you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a year," said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Why didn't I?" she asked. "Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without paying, and that would be an abominable sell."

°°°°"And suppose you did warn him," Poiret went on, "didn't that gentleman say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything."

°°°°"Anyhow," thought Mlle. Michonneau, "I can't abide him. He says nothing but disagreeable things to me."

°°°°"But you can do better than that," Poiret resumed. "As that gentleman said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief. Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into the bargain!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau's musings did not permit her to listen very closely to the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret's lips like water dripping from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

°°°°By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau versus Dame Morin, when he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

°°°°As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"I knew how it would end," remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. "They have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week past."

°°°°"Yes," he answered. "So she was found guilty."

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. Morin."

°°°°"I am talking about Mlle. Victorine," said Mlle, Michonneau, as she entered Poiret's room with an absent air, "and you answer, 'Mme. Morin.' Who may Mme. Morin be?"

°°°°"What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?" demanded Poiret.

°°°°"Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!"

°°°°That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel's voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac's face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately; he had said to himself that a woman's happiness should atone for this venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face; the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice broke in upon their bliss.

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity,"

°°°°he sang mockingly.

°°°°Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand, the light touch of Rastignac's hair against her cheek, a word whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student's warm breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love's sake in the most famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

°°°°"The thing is arranged," Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. "Our two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half- past eight in the morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father's fortune and affections. A funny way of putting it, isn't it? Taillefer's youngster is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know."

°°°°Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders likewise appeared.

°°°°"That is just as I intended." Vautrin said. "You know quite well what you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you."

°°°°He made as though he would take Eugene's hand, but Rastignac hastily withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

°°°°"Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes of virtue about us!" murmured Vautrin. "But Papa Doliban has three millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride's white dress, even in your own eyes."

°°°°Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, "You look melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me."

°°°°The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

°°°°"Let us go up to your room," the worthy soul remarked, when he had asked Sylvie for the law student's key. "This morning," he resumed, "you thought that SHE did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting ME! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move into it in three days' time. Don't split upon me. She wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn't bear to keep the secret from you. You will be in the Rue d'Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that won't run away."

°°°°Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student's back was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney- piece and set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac's arms stamped in gold on the leather.

°°°°"My dear boy," said the kind soul, "I have been up to the eyes in this business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?"

°°°°"What is it?"

°°°°"There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn't that so? I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say to myself, 'He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.' If I were ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs- Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my little girl again, so light- hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, 'I am very happy, papa!' When they say 'father' stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me 'papa,' it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else."

°°°°The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

°°°°"It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!" he said, raising his head after a pause. "All the time we were going about together she chatted away about you. 'He is so nice-looking, papa; isn't he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?' Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no sign, and he was dying of impatience.

°°°°Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were written:

°°°°"I want you to think of me every hour, BECAUSE . . .   "DELPHINE."

°°°°That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as well as for his daughter's sake.

°°°°"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera- dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me with you, will you not?"

°°°°"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

°°°°"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you! Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

°°°°"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to her this evening, will you not?"

°°°°"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

°°°°"Can I be of any use?"

°°°°"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening; it is a matter of life and death."

°°°°"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance; "are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were saying down below? . . . TONNERRE DE DIEU! you have no notion what a tap A LA GORIOT is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh! the thing is impossible!"

°°°°"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

°°°°"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

°°°°"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to- morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

°°°°"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

°°°°"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting in an appearance----"

°°°°Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing at the threshold of his door and singing:

°°°°"Oh! Richard, oh my king!   All the world abandons thee!   Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

°°°°The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a . . . tra la la."

°°°°"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is waiting for you."

°°°°"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my Bordeaux."

°°°°"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste, hasn't she? Eh?"

°°°°Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and, all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

°°°°Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with consternation.

°°°°"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as merry as a skylark."

°°°°"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

°°°°"Bargain?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on, seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.

°°°°"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules," said the young painter.

°°°°"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

°°°°"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

°°°°"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

°°°°"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and the cheese."

°°°°"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach besides."

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme. Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

°°°°"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

°°°°Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

°°°°"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this, Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right- hand side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

°°°°"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a hundred chestnuts."

°°°°"Oh! oh!"

°°°°"Booououh!"

°°°°"Prrr!"

°°°°These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a set firework.

°°°°"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called Vautrin.

°°°°"Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for it, I have some currant cordial."

°°°°"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered the medical student.

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for it," he added.

°°°°"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little cakes."

°°°°"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out the biscuits."

°°°°The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously struck up with the following variations:

°°°°"Scissors to grind!"

°°°°"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

°°°°"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

°°°°"China to mend!"

°°°°"Boat ahoy!"

°°°°"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

°°°°"Old clo'!"

°°°°"Cherries all ripe!"

°°°°But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

°°°°A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

°°°°"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs. When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer, telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the bread is ready for the oven; to- morrow we will eat it up and whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? . . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

°°°°Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

°°°°"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the widow.

°°°°These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

°°°°"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

°°°°"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two ladies----"

°°°°"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your young lady."

°°°°"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

°°°°"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

°°°°He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead, and began to sing:

°°°°"Sleep, little darlings;   I watch while you slumber."

°°°°"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

°°°°"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. " 'Tis your duty as a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "the young fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife-- there's your fortune for you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I go out and call a cab--all my own self."

°°°°And he started out, singing as he went:

°°°°"Oh! sun! divine sun!   Ripening the pumpkins every one."

°°°°"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over. HE never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't lose what he hadn't got-- Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

°°°°Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just as he was, like a package, across the bed.

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know what dissipation is."

°°°°"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

°°°°"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such things----"

°°°°"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

°°°°"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer. It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

°°°°"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

°°°°"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

°°°°"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

°°°°"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress as she spoke.

°°°°Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.

°°°°"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

°°°°The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face, so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet, austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught something of the golden glory of heaven.

°°°°"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing her fingers through Eugene's hair.

°°°°"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

°°°°There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

°°°°"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though you had nothing on."

°°°°"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

°°°°"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint- Pierre (good soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme. Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now, don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will idolize you."

°°°°The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady; "we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments with all the care of an antiquary."

°°°°"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine. "Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them."

°°°°"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M. Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

°°°°"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

°°°°"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two women were alone together.

°°°°"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady; "just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

°°°°"Oh! mamma."

°°°°"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in for."

°°°°"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life," said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

°°°°"MON DIEU! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

°°°°With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room, Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned, and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

°°°°That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

°°°°But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the scent.

°°°°"A delusion," he said. "Collin's sorbonne is the most dangerous that has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the Place de Greve."

°°°°As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible expressions borrowed from thieves' Latin, thieves, of all people, being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking-- his council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth after the axe has done its work.

°°°°"Collin is playing us off," he continued. "When we come across a man like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la- Mort's paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent crime than to punish it."

°°°°"And you do a service to our country," said Poiret.

°°°°"Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you are," said the head of the department. "Yes, of course, we are serving our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle. I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get it back for you."

°°°°"Well, now," Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, "there are idiots who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as saying 'Good-day.' "

°°°°The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like apparition of the sham Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her boarders so long as she lived.

°°°°In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till close upon eleven o'clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin's first bottle of wine), was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme. Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o'clock, and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested, therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup belonging to Vautrin--it was standing with the others in the bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business. The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen. It ran thus:--

°°°°"I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my friend. Till two o'clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity's sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line will be enough. Say, 'I will hasten to you,' or else, 'I am ill.' But if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have happened? . . ."

°°°°"Yes, indeed, what has happened?" exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any more. "What time is it?"

°°°°"Half-past eleven," said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his coffee.

°°°°The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M. Taillefer's servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," he cried, "your father is asking for you-- something terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious."

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" exclaimed Vautrin. "How can people brawl when they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people have bad manners, and that is a fact."

°°°°"Sir!" cried Eugene.

°°°°"Well, what then, you big baby!" said Vautrin, swallowing down his coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. "Are there not duels every morning in Paris?" added Vautrin.

°°°°"I will go with you, Victorine," said Mme. Couture, and the two women hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance that said--"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me tears!"

°°°°"Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"I am all sorts of things," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Queer, isn't it?" said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession of commonplaces suited to the occasion. "Death takes us off without asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have other complaints that men don't suffer from. We bear children, and it takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her father will have to acknowledge her now!"

°°°°"There!" said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, "yesterday she had not a penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune."

°°°°"I say, M. Eugene!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "you have landed on your feet!"

°°°°At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the crumpled letter still in his hand.

°°°°"You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to be like the rest of them?" he asked.

°°°°"Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine," said Eugene, turning to Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised the onlookers at this scene.

°°°°Father Goriot caught the student's hand and grasped it warmly. He could have kissed it.

°°°°"Oh, ho!" said Vautrin, "the Italians have a good proverb--Col tempo."

°°°°"Is there any answer?" said Mme. de Nucingen's messenger, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Say that I will come directly."

°°°°The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he could not be prudent.

°°°°"What is to be done?" he exclaimed aloud. "There are no proofs!"

°°°°Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, "Luck comes to us while we sleep, young man," and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck dead.

°°°°"So there is a Divine Justice!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?"

°°°°"A stroke!" cried Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor," called the widow. "Oh, M. Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel."

°°°°Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.

°°°°"Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist's and ask for something that's good for the apoplexy."

°°°°Christophe likewise went.

°°°°"Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs."

°°°°Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow staircase, and laid upon his bed.

°°°°"I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter," said M. Goriot.

°°°°"Selfish old thing!" cried Mme. Vauquer. "Yes, go; I wish you may die like a dog."

°°°°"Just go and see if you can find some ether," said Mlle. Michonneau to Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the sick man's clothes.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress of the situation.

°°°°"Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be of some use in sparing my modesty," she said to Poiret, "instead of standing there like a stock."

°°°°Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

°°°°"There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily," exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on the shirt again.--"Ouf! How heavy he is," he added, as he laid the convict down.

°°°°"Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!" said the old maid briskly; her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of the furniture with greedy eyes. "Could we find some excuse for opening that desk?"

°°°°"It mightn't be quite right," responded Poiret to this.

°°°°"Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it doesn't belong to any one now. But we haven't time, there is the Vauquer."

°°°°"Here is the ether," said that lady. "I must say that this is an eventful day. Lord! that man can't have had a stroke; he is as white as curds."

°°°°"White as curds?" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"And his pulse is steady," said the widow, laying her hand on his breast.

°°°°"Steady?" said the astonished Poiret.

°°°°"He is all right."

°°°°"Do you think so?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look, mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears a wig. They say that red- haired people are either the worst or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?"

°°°°"Good to hang," said Poiret.

°°°°"Round a pretty woman's neck, you mean," said Mlle Michonneau, hastily. "Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman's duty to nurse you men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take yourself off," she added. "Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of dear M. Vautrin.

°°°°Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the room by his master.

°°°°Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself might be implicated. Vautrin's coolness still further dismayed him.

°°°°"Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?" Rastignac asked himself.

°°°°He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

°°°°"Well?" shouted Bianchon, "you have seen the Pilote?"

°°°°The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local journals.

°°°°"There is a wonderful history in it," said the house student of the Hopital Cochin. "Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?"

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----"

°°°°"You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master Taillefer's money!"

°°°°"Are all the devils of hell at my heels?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand," said Bianchon, "and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish."

°°°°"Just go to Mother Vauquer's," said Rastignac; "that scoundrel Vautrin has dropped down like one dead."

°°°°"Aha!" said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, "you confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself."

°°°°The law student's long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot's confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue d'Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.

°°°°"Such a love is my anchor of safety," he said to himself. "How the old man's heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!"

°°°°He took out his watch and admired it.

°°°°"I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?"

°°°°Rastignac's battle with himself went on for a long while; and though the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison Vauquer through the gathering dusk.

°°°°Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau's officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer's duel. They were anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the probable change in Victorine's prospects. Father Goriot alone was absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the same look that had read his thoughts before--the look that had such power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.

°°°°"Well, dear boy," said the escaped convict, "I am likely to cheat death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors."

°°°°"A bull you might say," cried the widow.

°°°°"You really might be sorry to see me still alive," said Vautrin in Rastignac's ear, thinking that he guessed the student's thoughts. "You must be mighty sure of yourself."

°°°°"Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort," said Bianchon; "and, upon my word, that name would do very well for you."

°°°°Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle. Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature had dropped from the convict's face; from the unmistakable ferocity of that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the sitting-room.

°°°°"In the name of the King and the Law!" said an officer, but the words were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.

°°°°Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men, who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden, and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin's face was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair, the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines, his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor. Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.

°°°°"You are not in the politest of humors to-day," he remarked to the chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his head.

°°°°"Gentlemen," he said, "put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call on those present to witness that I make no resistance."

°°°°A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally sudden cessation.

°°°°"There's a sell for you, master crusher," the convict added, looking at the famous director of police.

°°°°"Come, strip!" said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.

°°°°"Why?" asked Collin. "There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and surrender."

°°°°He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to overwhelm his audience.

°°°°"Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle," he went on, addressing a little, white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table; and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to draw up a document. "I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin, otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years' penal servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my nickname.--If I had as much as raised my hand," he went on, addressing the other lodgers, "those three sneaking wretches yonder would have drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer's domestic hearth. The rogues have laid their heads together to set a trap for me."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.

°°°°"Good Lord!" she cried, "this does give one a turn; and me at the Gaite with him only last night!" she said to Sylvie.

°°°°"Summon your philosophy, mamma," Collin resumed. "Is it a misfortune to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me." His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his eyes.--"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept any time you like! Do you understand?" And he sang:

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity."

°°°°"Don't you trouble yourself," he went on; "I can get in my money. They are too much afraid of me to swindle me."

°°°°The convicts' prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur, its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the speaker's discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno, wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own evil thoughts.

°°°°"Who betrayed me?" said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"It was you, old cat!" he said. "That sham stroke of apoplexy was your doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs," he shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession of his effects. "The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here," he said tapping his forehead. "Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?" he said, turning to the chief. "It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?" he asked of the police officers. "A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money," he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. "These folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?" he asked proudly. "There is some good there," he said tapping his heart; "I have never betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut," he said to the old maid, "they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them sick. Rake in your gains."

°°°°He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers' faces.

°°°°"What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before? A convict of Collin's stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and I am a match for them all."

°°°°"Ye gods!" cried the painter, "what a magnificent sketch one might make of him!"

°°°°"Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master of ceremonies to the widow" (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given by prisoners to the guillotine), "be a good fellow, and tell me if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don't want him to suffer for some one else, that would not be fair."

°°°°But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Collin, addressing the lodgers, "they will take me away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me to send you figs from Provence."

°°°°He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at Rastignac.

°°°°"Good-bye, Eugene," he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange transition from his previous rough and stern manner. "If you should be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend," and, in spite of his shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, "One, two!" like a fencing-master, and lunged. "If anything goes wrong, apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service."

°°°°The strange speaker's manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the pantomime.

°°°°As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house, Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress' temples with vinegar, looked round at the bewildered lodgers.

°°°°"Well," said she, "he was a man, he was, for all that."

°°°°Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead- alive, mummy-like figure, crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, "If that creature is going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out."

°°°°In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save Poiret, was of the medical student's opinion, so that the latter, strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

°°°°"You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us," he said; "speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at once."

°°°°"At once!" echoed Poiret in amazement.

°°°°Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in her ear.

°°°°"I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here as any one else," she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

°°°°"Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Monsieur is taking Collin's part" she said, with a questioning, malignant glance at the law student; "it is not difficult to guess why."

°°°°Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

°°°°"Let her alone!" cried the boarders.

°°°°Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

°°°°"Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas," said the painter, turning to Mme. Vauquer. "If you don't show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are."

°°°°At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in them.

°°°°"Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness," she cried, interrupting herself, "I can't help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is moving----"

°°°°"Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux's in the Place Sorbonne," cried Bianchon.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Come, now," she said; "you would not be the ruin of my establishment, would you, eh? There's a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening."

°°°°"Never a bit of it!" cried the boarders. "She must go, and go this minute!"

°°°°"But the poor lady has had no dinner," said Poiret, with piteous entreaty.

°°°°"She can go and dine where she likes," shouted several voices.

°°°°"Turn her out, the spy!"

°°°°"Turn them both out! Spies!"

°°°°"Gentlemen," cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love gives to the ovine male, "respect the weaker sex."

°°°°"Spies are of no sex!" said the painter.

°°°°"A precious sexorama!"

°°°°"Turn her into the streetorama!"

°°°°"Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house, it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We have paid our money, and we are not going," said Poiret, putting on his cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer was remonstrating.

°°°°"Naughty boy!" said the painter, with a comical look; "run away, naughty little boy!"

°°°°"Look here," said Bianchon; "if you do not go, all the rest of us will," and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room- door.

°°°°"Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?" cried Mme. Vauquer. "I am a ruined woman. You can't stay here; they will go further, do something violent."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

°°°°"She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn't."

°°°°These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions, borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low voice in her hostess' ear, and then--"I shall go to Mme. Buneaud's," she said, with a threatening look.

°°°°"Go where you please, mademoiselle," said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. "Go and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the food is cheap and nasty."

°°°°The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out laughing at the sight of him.

°°°°"Hist!--st!--st! Poiret," shouted the painter. "Hallo! I say, Poiret, hallo!" The employe from the Museum began to sing:

°°°°"Partant pour la Syrie,   Le jeune et beau Dunois . . ."

°°°°"Get along with you; you must be dying to go, trahit sua quemque voluptas!" said Bianchon.

°°°°"Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil," said the tutor.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret's arm, with an appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together, the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause, followed by peals of laughter.

°°°°"Bravo, Poiret!"

°°°°"Who would have thought it of old Poiret!"

°°°°"Apollo Poiret!"

°°°°"Mars Poiret!"

°°°°"Intrepid Poiret!"

°°°°A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

°°°°"The house might as well be burned down at once," cried she, "if there are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three o'clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those ladies at that poor man's expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me to send their things, because they are going to live with her father. M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone! . . ."

°°°°She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

°°°°"Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think," she cried.

°°°°Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

°°°°"What! another windfall for somebody!" was Sylvie's comment.

°°°°But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

°°°°"Goriot in a cab!" cried the boarders; "the world is coming to an end."

°°°°The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man's arm.

°°°°"Come," he said, with gladness in his eyes.

°°°°"Then you haven't heard the news?" said Eugene. "Vautrin was an escaped convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead."

°°°°"Very well, but what business is it of ours?" replied Father Goriot. "I am going to dine with my daughter in YOUR HOUSE, do you understand? She is expecting you. Come!"

°°°°He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

°°°°"Now, let us have dinner," cried the painter, and every one drew his chair to the table.

°°°°"Well, I never," said the portly Sylvie. "Nothing goes right to- day! The haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it is, more's the pity!"

°°°°Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day's events; but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels, jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day. Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope was the portly Sylvie.

°°°°That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in the cab. The old man's voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears like words spoken in a dream.

°°°°"It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don't know what pretty ways she has; at table she will look after me, 'Here, papa, just try this, it is nice.' And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her."

°°°°"It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down."

°°°°"Upside down?" repeated Father Goriot. "Why, the world has never been so right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood would be as sweet as honey."

°°°°"I feel as if I were coming back to life again," said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, hurry up there!" cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in front. "Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the place I told you of in ten minutes time."

°°°°With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous celerity.

°°°°"How that fellow crawls!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"But where are you taking me?" Eugene asked him.

°°°°"To your own house," said Goriot.

°°°°The cab stopped in the Rue d'Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning to bachelor ways.

°°°°"Come along upstairs," he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard, and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen's maid. Eugene found himself in a charming set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description, the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

°°°°"So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to understand!"

°°°°Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just witnessed was too much for Rastignac's over- wrought nerves, after the day's strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was almost overcome by it.

°°°°"I felt sure myself that he loved you," murmured Father Goriot, while Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring about this final transformation scene.

°°°°"But you must see your rooms," said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed, down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of Delphine's apartment.

°°°°"There is no bed," said Rastignac.

°°°°"No, monsieur," she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene, looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

°°°°"You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for ever," he said in her ear. "Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret."

°°°°"Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose," growled the father.

°°°°"You know quite well that 'we' means you."

°°°°"Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a good idea of mine to say to you, 'There are some nice rooms to let in the Rue d'Artois; let us furnish them for him?' And she would not hear of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers else."

°°°°"Was that how it happened?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----"

°°°°Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low though the sound was.

°°°°The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was wanting there.

°°°°"Have we guessed your wishes rightly?" she asked, as they returned to the drawing-room for dinner.

°°°°"Yes," he said, "only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----"

°°°°"Ah! ah! you say me nay already," she said with arch imperiousness, and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman's way of laughing away scruples.

°°°°But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self- questioning, and Vautrin's arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into abandoning his high- minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled his mind.

°°°°"Do you really mean to refuse?" said Mme. de Nucingen. "And do you know what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying my affection? If you love me, if I-- love you, why should you shrink back from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment, you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this. . . . Ah!" she cried, as Eugene's passionate glance was turned on her, "and you are making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you. Speak!-- Father," she said after a pause, "make him listen to reason. Can he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?"

°°°°Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

°°°°"Child that you are!" she cried again, catching Eugene's hand. "You are just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man finds insurmountable; a woman's hand opens the way and you shrink back! Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to repay me my loan of today? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your garret must be if it is like papa's room! See, dinner is waiting all this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don't you answer?" she said, shaking his hand. "MON DIEU! papa, make up his mind for him, or I will go away and never see him any more."

°°°°"I will make up your mind," said Goriot, coming down from the clouds. "Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews, isn't it?"

°°°°"There is positively no help for it," said Eugene.

°°°°"All right, I will give you credit," said the other, drawing out a cheap leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. "I have turned Jew myself; I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you can return it some time or other."

°°°°Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot's warmly.

°°°°"Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?"

°°°°"Oh! my poor father," said Mme. de Nucingen, "how did you do it?"

°°°°"Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you, and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to myself, 'She will never be able to pay for them.' The attorney says that those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year, and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, 'How happy they are going to be!' and--well, now, are you not happy?"

°°°°"Oh papa! papa!" cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright and radiant.

°°°°"Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel for you now?"

°°°°"Why, children, why Delphinette!" cried Goriot, who had not felt his daughter's heart beat against his breast for ten years, "do you want me to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are quits already." And the old man strained her to his breast with such fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

°°°°"Oh! you are hurting me!" she said.

°°°°"I am hurting you!" He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men. Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his fingers had grasped too roughly.

°°°°"Oh! no, no," he cried. "I have not hurt you, have I?" and his smile seemed to repeat the question. "YOU have hurt me with that cry just now.--The things cost rather more than that," he said in her ear, with another gentle kiss, "but I had to deceive him about it, or he would have been angry."

°°°°Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration which shapes the beliefs of youth.

°°°°"I will be worthy of all this," he cried.

°°°°"Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said," and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law student on the forehead.

°°°°"He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you," said Father Goriot. "Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus."

°°°°"Oh! why did you tell her?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"Eugene," Delphine said in his ear, "I have one regret now this evening. Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!"

°°°°"This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!" cried Goriot. "God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer through you, and I can still say, 'In this short month of February I had more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.'--Look at me, Fifine!" he said to his daughter. "She is very beautiful, is she not? Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell instead. Come, let us have dinner," he added, scarcely knowing what he said, "everything is ours."

°°°°"Poor dear father!"

°°°°He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a kiss on the plaits of hair. "If you only knew, little one, how happy you can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me, say that you will!"

°°°°"Yes, dear father."

°°°°"Say it again."

°°°°"Yes, I will, my kind father."

°°°°"Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed my own wishes. Let us have dinner."

°°°°The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot's spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter's feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more tender.

°°°°"You see!" Delphine said with a look at Eugene, "so long as my father is with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes."

°°°°Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

°°°°"And when will the rooms be ready?" asked Eugene, looking round. "We must all leave them this evening, I suppose."

°°°°"Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me," she answered, with an eloquent glance. "It is our night at the Italiens."

°°°°"I shall go to the pit," said her father.

°°°°It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen's carriage was waiting for her, and Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing that the father's self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her father's adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future of love.

°°°°They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso's lamentations as recorded in Byron's poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force of truth they fall far short of the widow's cry from the depths.

°°°°"Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life, now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people! The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and Christophe will have to go!"

°°°°The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said, "Madame," questioningly.

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Sylvie, "he is like a dog."

°°°°"In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a little dog."

°°°°"Lord!" said Sylvie, flinging up her head, "those old maids are up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"There's that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict," the widow went on. "Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I can't bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny on the nail too."

°°°°"And open-handed he was!" said Christophe.

°°°°"There is some mistake," said Sylvie.

°°°°"Why, no there isn't! he said so himself!" said Mme. Vauquer. "And to think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it's like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap; we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again; there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred, will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that is just what it is!"

°°°°"And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear," cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Don't speak of her, she is a wicked woman!" said Mme. Vauquer. "She is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed and murdered people in her time. SHE ought to be put in jail for life instead of that poor dear----"

°°°°Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

°°°°"Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers," said the widow, sighing.

°°°°But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d'Antin.

°°°°"Sylvie!" cried the widow, "this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There's a weight on my chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow, Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen," and she went.

°°°°"What is the matter now?" Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

°°°°"Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a bit. It's the first time she has cried since I've been with her."

°°°°By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had "made up her mind to it." True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A lover's farewell glance at his lady-love's window is not more mournful than Mme. Vauquer's survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take his (Rastignac's) place; that the official from the Museum had often expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture's rooms; and that in a very few days her household would be on the old footing.

°°°°"God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here. There'll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you'll see," and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining- room. "Whose turn will it be, I wonder?"

°°°°"It is just as well that we are moving out," said Eugene to Father Goriot in a low voice.

°°°°"Madame," said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, "I have not seen Mistigris these three days."

°°°°"Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if HE has gone and left us, I----"

°°°°The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this dreadful portent.

°°°°By twelve o'clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse's great ball, which had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was slipped in with the card.

°°°°"I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to   interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the   card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make   the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud's sister. Pray introduce that   charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your   affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.   "VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT."

°°°°"Well," said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, "Mme. de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de Nucingen."

°°°°He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of Paris--will never have a rival.

°°°°Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country, it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love exist there without that wealth?

°°°°If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water, without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls, waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look with pity upon those of earth.

°°°°Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it. In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one man, but of a whole nation.

°°°°But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a brilliant future.

°°°°So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

°°°°"Madame is in her room," Therese came to tell him. The woman's voice made him start.

°°°°He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid the blossom.

°°°°"Well," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "here you are."

°°°°"Guess what I bring for you," said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He took possession of her arm to kiss her hand

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

°°°°"And I owe this happiness to you--to THEE" (she whispered the more intimate word in his ear); "but Therese is in my dressing- room, let us be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes to me through YOU--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint- Germain, it is because I shall meet you there."

°°°°"Mme. de Beauseant's note seems to say very plainly that she does not expect to see the BARON de Nucingen at her ball; don't you think so?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, yes," said the Baroness as she returned the letter. "Those women have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go. My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully dressed.--Eugene," she went on, lowering her voice, "she will go to dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a woman's character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband's mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant's ball in tissue of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I mean to be perfectly happy."

°°°°At one o'clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In the midst of their lovers' farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to come, she said in a troubled voice, "I am very fearful, superstitious. Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe."

°°°°"Child!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?" she asked, laughingly.

°°°°Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left its sweetness on the lips.

°°°°"Well?" cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene; "I will tell you everything to-morrow."

°°°°"Everything, will you not?" cried the old man. "Go to bed. To- morrow our happy life will begin."

°°°°Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging- house, and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it; but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran lightly upstairs.

°°°°It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d'Artois at four o'clock; but Rastignac's name had been called early on the list at the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this, Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin's signature lying in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot's room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him; but after the first few words, the conversation between the father and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his attention.

°°°°"Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe to talk?" she added.

°°°°"Yes, there is no one in the house," said her father faintly.

°°°°"What is the matter with you?" asked Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!" said the old man. "You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d'Artois."

°°°°"Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the subject with him. Wasn't that what you told me to tell him?"

°°°°"Yes, quite right," answered Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then," Delphine continued, "he told me all about his affairs. He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations; they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes, on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy (in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him."

°°°°"Do you really believe that silly rubbish?" . . . cried her father. "It was all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No, no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them, and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that's holiest in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked! and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers. If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don't give way, don't make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he can't do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once; I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know for certain that your fortune is secure."

°°°°"Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile, it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we drive him to despair, I am lost."

°°°°"Why, then, the man is a rogue?"

°°°°"Well, yes, father," she said, flinging herself into a chair, "I wanted to keep it from you to spare your feelings," and she burst into tears; "I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his stalking- horse."

°°°°"But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons- in-law of that sort," cried her father; "why, I would guillotine him myself if there was no headsman to do it."

°°°°"No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says, stripped of all his circumlocutions--'Take your choice, you and no one else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through myself.' Is that plain speaking? He MUST have my assistance. He is assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to be Eugene's wife in all but name. 'I connive at your errors, and you allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!' Is that sufficiently explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get possession of those bills?"

°°°°Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on his knees.

°°°°"Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child! forgive me!" cried the old man.

°°°°"Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame," said Delphine. "We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us! Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa," she said, kissing him.

°°°°"Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your husband's winding."

°°°°"No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me, well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters. No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant's ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene! . . . Come, let us see his room."

°°°°But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve, and the sound of Mme. de Restaud's voice came from the staircase. "Is my father in?" she asked of Sylvie.

°°°°This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

°°°°"Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?" said Delphine, when she heard her sister speak. "It looks as though some strange things had happened in that family."

°°°°"What sort of things?" asked Goriot. "This is like to be the death of me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune."

°°°°"Good-morning, father," said the Countess from the threshold. "Oh! Delphine, are you here?"

°°°°Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister's presence.

°°°°"Good-morning, Nasie," said the Baroness. "What is there so extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day."

°°°°"Since when?"

°°°°"If you came yourself you would know."

°°°°"Don't tease, Delphine," said the Countess fretfully. "I am very miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!"

°°°°"What is it, Nasie?" cried Goriot. "Tell us all about it, child! How white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will love you even better, if that were possible."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. "We are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see."

°°°°The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

°°°°"This will kill me!" said their father. "There," he went on, stirring the smouldering fire, "come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it, Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----"

°°°°"Well, then, my husband knows everything," said the Countess. "Just imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime's some time ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that. About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled. He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively. Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard; for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I had eaten up all that you had----"

°°°°"No," said Goriot; "I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet."

°°°°The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when the father's love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice, revealed the depths of his despair.

°°°°"I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell," and the Countess burst into tears.

°°°°Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister's shoulder, and cried too.

°°°°"Then it is all true," she said.

°°°°Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her, kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

°°°°"I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie," she said.

°°°°"My angels," murmured Goriot faintly. "Oh, why should it be trouble that draws you together?"

°°°°This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

°°°°"To save Maxime's life," she said, "to save all my own happiness, I went to the money-lender you know of, a man of iron forged in hell-fire; nothing can melt him; I took all the family diamonds that M. de Restaud is so proud of--his and mine too--and sold them to that M. Gobseck. SOLD THEM! Do you understand? I saved Maxime, but I am lost. Restaud found it all out."

°°°°"How? Who told him? I will kill him," cried Goriot.

°°°°"Yesterday he sent to tell me to come to his room. I went. . . . 'Anastasie,' he said in a voice--oh! such a voice; that was enough, it told me everything--'where are your diamonds?'--'In my room----'--'No,' he said, looking straight at me, 'there they are on that chest of drawers----' and he lifted his handkerchief and showed me the casket. 'Do you know where they came from?' he said. I fell at his feet. . . . I cried; I besought him to tell me the death he wished to see me die."

°°°°"You said that!" cried Goriot. "By God in heaven, whoever lays a hand on either of you so long as I am alive may reckon on being roasted by slow fires! Yes, I will cut him in pieces like . . ."

°°°°Goriot stopped; the words died away in his throat.

°°°°"And then, dear, he asked something worse than death of me. Oh! heaven preserve all other women from hearing such words as I heard then!"

°°°°"I will murder that man," said Goriot quietly. "But he has only one life, and he deserves to die twice.--And then, what next?" he added, looking at Anastasie.

°°°°"Then," the Countess resumed, "there was a pause, and he looked at me. 'Anastasie,' he said, 'I will bury this in silence; there shall be no separation; there are the children. I will not kill M. de Trailles. I might miss him if we fought, and as for other ways of getting rid of him, I should come into collision with the law. If I killed him in your arms, it would bring dishonor on THOSE children. But if you do not want to see your children perish, nor their father nor me, you must first of all submit to two conditions. Answer me. Have I a child of my own?' I answered, 'Yes,'--'Which?'--'Ernest, our eldest boy.'--'Very well,' he said, 'and now swear to obey me in this particular from this time forward.' I swore. 'You will make over your property to me when I require you to do so.' "

°°°°"Do nothing of the kind!" cried Goriot. "Aha! M. de Restaud, you could not make your wife happy; she has looked for happiness and found it elsewhere, and you make her suffer for your own ineptitude? He will have to reckon with me. Make yourself easy, Nasie. Aha! he cares about his heir! Good, very good. I will get hold of the boy; isn't he my grandson? What the blazes! I can surely go to see the brat! I will stow him away somewhere; I will take care of him, you may be quite easy. I will bring Restaud to terms, the monster! I shall say to him, 'A word or two with you! If you want your son back again, give my daughter her property, and leave her to do as she pleases.' "

°°°°"Father!"

°°°°"Yes. I am your father, Nasie, a father indeed! That rogue of a great lord had better not ill-treat my daughter. Tonnerre! What is it in my veins? There is the blood of a tiger in me; I could tear those two men to pieces! Oh! children, children! so this is what your lives are! Why, it is death! . . . What will become of you when I shall be here no longer? Fathers ought to live as long as their children. Ah! Lord God in heaven! how ill Thy world is ordered! Thou hast a Son, if what they tell us is true, and yet Thou leavest us to suffer so through our children. My darlings, my darlings! to think that trouble only should bring you to me, that I should only see you with tears on your faces! Ah! yes, yes, you love me, I see that you love me. Come to me and pour out your griefs to me; my heart is large enough to hold them all. Oh! you might rend my heart in pieces, and every fragment would make a father's heart. If only I could bear all your sorrows for you! . . . Ah! you were so happy when you were little and still with me. . . ."

°°°°"We have never been happy since," said Delphine. "Where are the old days when we slid down the sacks in the great granary?"

°°°°"That is not all, father," said Anastasie in Goriot's ear. The old man gave a startled shudder. "The diamonds only sold for a hundred thousand francs. Maxime is hard pressed. There are twelve thousand francs still to pay. He has given me his word that he will be steady and give up play in future. His love is all that I have left in the world. I have paid such a fearful price for it that I should die if I lose him now. I have sacrificed my fortune, my honor, my peace of mind, and my children for him. Oh! do something, so that at the least Maxime may be at large and live undisgraced in the world, where he will assuredly make a career for himself. Something more than my happiness is at stake; the children have nothing, and if he is sent to Sainte-Pelagie all his prospects will be ruined."

°°°°"I haven't the money, Nasie. I have NOTHING--nothing left. This is the end of everything. Yes, the world is crumbling into ruin, I am sure. Fly! Save yourselves! Ah!--I have still my silver buckles left, and half-a-dozen silver spoons and forks, the first I ever had in my life. But I have nothing else except my life annuity, twelve hundred francs . . ."

°°°°"Then what has become of your money in the funds?"

°°°°"I sold out, and only kept a trifle for my wants. I wanted twelve thousand francs to furnish some rooms for Delphine."

°°°°"In your own house?" asked Mme. de Restaud, looking at her sister.

°°°°"What does it matter where they were?" asked Goriot. "The money is spent now."

°°°°"I see how it is," said the Countess. "Rooms for M. de Rastignac. Poor Delphine, take warning by me!"

°°°°"M. de Rastignac is incapable of ruining the woman he loves, dear."

°°°°"Thanks! Delphine. I thought you would have been kinder to me in my troubles, but you never did love me."

°°°°"Yes, yes, she loves you, Nasie," cried Goriot; "she was saying so only just now. We were talking about you, and she insisted that you were beautiful, and that she herself was only pretty!"

°°°°"Pretty!" said the Countess. "She is as hard as a marble statue."

°°°°"And if I am?" cried Delphine, flushing up, "how have you treated me? You would not recognize me; you closed the doors of every house against me; you have never let an opportunity of mortifying me slip by. And when did I come, as you were always doing, to drain our poor father, a thousand francs at a time, till he is left as you see him now? That is all your doing, sister! I myself have seen my father as often as I could. I have not turned him out of the house, and then come and fawned upon him when I wanted money. I did not so much as know that he had spent those twelve thousand francs on me. I am economical, as you know; and when papa has made me presents, it has never been because I came and begged for them."

°°°°"You were better off than I. M. de Marsay was rich, as you have reason to know. You always were as slippery as gold. Good-bye; I have neither sister nor----"

°°°°"Oh! hush, hush, Nasie!" cried her father.

°°°°"Nobody else would repeat what everybody has ceased to believe. You are an unnatural sister!" cried Delphine.

°°°°"Oh, children, children! hush! hush! or I will kill myself before your eyes."

°°°°"There, Nasie, I forgive you," said Mme. de Nucingen; "you are very unhappy. But I am kinder than you are. How could you say THAT just when I was ready to do anything in the world to help you, even to be reconciled with my husband, which for my own sake I---- Oh! it is just like you; you have behaved cruelly to me all through these nine years."

°°°°"Children, children, kiss each other!" cried the father. "You are angels, both of you."

°°°°"No. Let me alone," cried the Countess shaking off the hand that her father had laid on her arm. "She is more merciless than my husband. Any one might think she was a model of all the virtues herself!"

°°°°"I would rather have people think that I owed money to M. de Marsay than own that M. de Trailles had cost me more than two hundred thousand francs," retorted Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"DELPHINE!" cried the Countess, stepping towards her sister.

°°°°"I shall tell you the truth about yourself if you begin to slander me," said the Baroness coldly.

°°°°"Delphine! you are a ----"

°°°°Father Goriot sprang between them, grasped the Countess' hand, and laid his own over her mouth.

°°°°"Good heavens, father! What have you been handling this morning?" said Anastasie.

°°°°"Ah! well, yes, I ought not to have touched you," said the poor father, wiping his hands on his trousers, "but I have been packing up my things; I did not know that you were coming to see me."

°°°°He was glad that he had drawn down her wrath upon himself.

°°°°"Ah!" he sighed, as he sat down, "you children have broken my heart between you. This is killing me. My head feels as if it were on fire. Be good to each other and love each other! This will be the death of me! Delphine! Nasie! come, be sensible; you are both in the wrong. Come, Dedel," he added, looking through his tears at the Baroness, "she must have twelve thousand francs, you see; let us see if we can find them for her. Oh, my girls, do not look at each other like that!" and he sank on his knees beside Delphine. "Ask her to forgive you--just to please me," he said in her ear. "She is more miserable than you are. Come now, Dedel."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Delphine, alarmed at the wild extravagant grief in her father's face, "I was in the wrong, kiss me----"

°°°°"Ah! that is like balm to my heart," cried Father Goriot. "But how are we to find twelve thousand francs? I might offer myself as a substitute in the army----"

°°°°"Oh! father dear!" they both cried, flinging their arms about him. "No, no!"

°°°°"God reward you for the thought. We are not worth it, are we, Nasie?" asked Delphine.

°°°°"And besides, father dear, it would only be a drop in the bucket," observed the Countess.

°°°°"But is flesh and blood worth nothing?" cried the old man in his despair. "I would give body and soul to save you, Nasie. I would do a murder for the man who would rescue you. I would do, as Vautrin did, go to the hulks, go----" he stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and put both hands to his head. "Nothing left!" he cried, tearing his hair. "If I only knew of a way to steal money, but it is so hard to do it, and then you can't set to work by yourself, and it takes time to rob a bank. Yes, it is time I was dead; there is nothing left me to do but to die. I am no good in the world; I am no longer a father! No. She has come to me in her extremity, and, wretch that I am, I have nothing to give her. Ah! you put your money into a life annuity, old scoundrel; and had you not daughters? You did not love them. Die, die in a ditch, like the dog that you are! Yes, I am worse than a dog; a beast would not have done as I have done! Oh! my head . . . it throbs as if it would burst."

°°°°"Papa!" cried both the young women at once, "do, pray, be reasonable!" and they clung to him to prevent him from dashing his head against the wall. There was a sound of sobbing.

°°°°Eugene, greatly alarmed, took the bill that bore Vautrin's signature, saw that the stamp would suffice for a larger sum, altered the figures, made it into a regular bill for twelve thousand francs, payable to Goriot's order, and went to his neighbor's room.

°°°°"Here is the money, madame," he said, handing the piece of paper to her. "I was asleep; your conversation awoke me, and by this means I learned all that I owed to M. Goriot. This bill can be discounted, and I shall meet it punctually at the due date."

°°°°The Countess stood motionless and speechless, but she held the bill in her fingers.

°°°°"Delphine," she said, with a white face, and her whole frame quivering with indignation, anger, and rage, "I forgave you everything; God is my witness that I forgave you, but I cannot forgive this! So this gentleman was there all the time, and you knew it! Your petty spite has let you to wreak your vengeance on me by betraying my secrets, my life, my children's lives, my shame, my honor! There, you are nothing to me any longer. I hate you. I will do all that I can to injure you. I will . . ."

°°°°Anger paralyzed her; the words died in her dry parched throat.

°°°°"Why, he is my son, my child; he is your brother, your preserver!" cried Goriot. "Kiss his hand, Nasie! Stay, I will embrace him myself," he said, straining Eugene to his breast in a frenzied clasp. "Oh my boy! I will be more than a father to you; if I had God's power, I would fling worlds at your feet. Why don't you kiss him, Nasie? He is not a man, but an angel, a angel out of heaven."

°°°°"Never mind her, father; she is mad just now."

°°°°"Mad! am I? And what are you?" cried Mme. de Restaud.

°°°°"Children, children, I shall die if you go on like this," cried the old man, and he staggered and fell on the bed as if a bullet had struck him.--"They are killing me between them," he said to himself.

°°°°The Countess fixed her eyes on Eugene, who stood stock still; all his faculties were numbed by this violent scene.

°°°°"Sir? . . ." she said, doubt and inquiry in her face, tone, and bearing; she took no notice now of her father nor of Delphine, who was hastily unfastening his waistcoat.

°°°°"Madame," said Eugene, answering the question before it was asked, "I will meet the bill, and keep silence about it."

°°°°"You have killed our father, Nasie!" said Delphine, pointing to Goriot, who lay unconscious on the bed. The Countess fled.

°°°°"I freely forgive her," said the old man, opening his eyes; "her position is horrible; it would turn an older head than hers. Comfort Nasie, and be nice to her, Delphine; promise it to your poor father before he dies," he asked, holding Delphine's hand in a convulsive clasp.

°°°°"Oh! what ails you, father?" she cried in real alarm.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing," said Goriot; "it will go off. There is something heavy pressing on my forehead, a little headache. . . . Ah! poor Nasie, what a life lies before her!"

°°°°Just as he spoke, the Countess came back again and flung herself on her knees before him. "Forgive me!" she cried.

°°°°"Come," said her father, "you are hurting me still more."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Countess said, turning to Rastignac, "misery made me unjust to you. You will be a brother to me, will you not?" and she held out her hand. Her eyes were full of tears as she spoke.

°°°°"Nasie," cried Delphine, flinging her arms round her sister, "my little Nasie, let us forget and forgive."

°°°°"No, no," cried Nasie; "I shall never forget!"

°°°°"Dear angels," cried Goriot, "it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won't it?"

°°°°"I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?"

°°°°"There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No, after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in future."

°°°°Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

°°°°"Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper," said Mme. de Nucingen, "but she has a good heart."

°°°°"She came back for the endorsement," said Eugene in Delphine's ear.

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her," he answered, raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did not venture to express.

°°°°"Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent."

°°°°"How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"I should like to go to sleep," he replied.

°°°°Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

°°°°"This evening at the Italiens," she said to Eugene, "and you can let me know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go into your room.--Oh! how frightful!" she cried on the threshold. "Why, you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps of gold."

°°°°A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot's bedside; to all appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, "They are not happy!" Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they were spoken went to his daughter's heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

°°°°"Ah! Delphine!" he said.

°°°°"How are you now?" she asked.

°°°°"Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently. Don't stay with me, children; go, go and be happy."

°°°°Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room, and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

°°°°"Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin," said Eugene.

°°°°Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him next to the old lodger.

°°°°"What is wrong with him?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning."

°°°°"Is there any cure for it?"

°°°°"None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on? There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way."

°°°°"Yes, there was," said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had struck blow on blow at their father's heart.

°°°°"But Delphine at any rate loves her father," he said to himself.

°°°°That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

°°°°"Do not be anxious about him," she said, however, as soon as Eugene began, "our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear. At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake. To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me; what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh! no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in life when everything turns to bitterness."

°°°°Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression on him.

°°°°Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love, they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme. de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

°°°°"What are you thinking about?" she asked.

°°°°"I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me."

°°°°She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more words, and she feared for her self- control.

°°°°"Eugene," she said, changing the conversation, "I wonder whether you know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant's to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d'Ajuda have agreed to keep the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be there. People are wondering what will happen?"

°°°°"The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill Mme. de Beauseant."

°°°°"Oh, no," said Delphine, smiling, "you do not know that kind of woman. Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for your sake."

°°°°"Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set in circulation here."

°°°°"We shall know the truth to-morrow."

°°°°Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d'Artois. Yesterday evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o'clock in the morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot's existence. The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four o'clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

°°°°"Aha!" said the painter as Eugene came in, "Father Goriot has broken down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of its brightest ornaments."

°°°°Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

°°°°"Hey! Monsieur Eugene!"

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you," shouted Sylvie.

°°°°"It is this, sir," said the widow. "You and M. Goriot should by rights have moved out on the 15th of February. That was three days ago; to-day is the 18th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied."

°°°°"Why can't you trust him?"

°°°°"Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died, those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won't fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and forks he has left, I don't know why. He had got himself up to look quite young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks; he looked quite young again."

°°°°"I will be responsible," said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he foresaw the end.

°°°°He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot's room. The old man was tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

°°°°"Good-evening, father," said Eugene.

°°°°The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

°°°°"How is SHE?"

°°°°"She is quite well. But how are you?"

°°°°"There is nothing much the matter."

°°°°"Don't tire him," said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the room.

°°°°"Well?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in; I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are acting."

°°°°"Is it possible to move him?"

°°°°"Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as quiet as possible----"

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," said Eugene, "we will nurse him between us."

°°°°"I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him."

°°°°"And what did he say?"

°°°°"He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went, and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his strength. One of his daughters has been here."

°°°°"Was it the Countess?" asked Eugene. "A tall, dark-haired woman, with large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Leave him to me for a bit," said Rastignac. "I will make him confess; he will tell me all about it."

°°°°"And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is still some hope left."

°°°°"All right."

°°°°"How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow," said Father Goriot when they were alone. "They are going to a grand ball."

°°°°"What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this evening that you have to stop in bed?"

°°°°"Nothing."

°°°°"Did not Anastasie come to see you?" demanded Rastignac.

°°°°"Yes," said Father Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then, don't keep anything from me. What more did she want of you?"

°°°°"Oh, she was very miserable," he answered, gathering up all his strength to speak. "It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds, Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie's waiting-woman advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie's maid saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair. She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that heartless scoundrel and say, 'I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker; pay her for me!' She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there too in a superb toilette, and Anastasie ought not to be outshone by her younger sister. And then--she was drowned in tears, poor girl! I felt so humbled yesterday when I had not the twelve thousand francs, that I would have given the rest of my miserable life to wipe out that wrong. You see, I could have borne anything once, but latterly this want of money has broken my heart. Oh! I did not do it by halves; I titivated myself up a bit, and went out and sold my spoons and forks and buckles for six hundred francs; then I went to old Daddy Gobseck, and sold a year's interest on my annuity for four hundred francs down. Pshaw! I can live on dry bread, as I did when I was a young man; if I have done it before, I can do it again. My Nasie shall have one happy evening, at any rate. She shall be smart. The banknote for a thousand francs is under my pillow; it warms me to have it lying there under my head, for it is going to make my poor Nasie happy. She can turn that bad girl Victoire out of the house. A servant that cannot trust her mistress, did any one ever hear the like! I shall be quite well to-morrow. Nasie is coming at ten o'clock. They must not think that I am ill, or they will not go to the ball; they will stop and take care of me. To-morrow Nasie will come and hold me in her arms as if I were one of her children; her kisses will make me well again. After all, I might have spent the thousand francs on physic; I would far rather give them to my little Nasie, who can charm all the pain away. At any rate, I am some comfort to her in her misery; and that makes up for my unkindness in buying an annuity. She is in the depths, and I cannot draw her out of them now. Oh! I will go into business again, I will buy wheat in Odessa; out there, wheat fetches a quarter of the price it sells for here. There is a law against the importation of grain, but the good folk who made the law forgot to prohibit the introduction of wheat products and food stuffs made from corn. Hey! hey! . . . That struck me this morning. There is a fine trade to be done in starch."

°°°°Eugene, watching the old man's face, thought that his friend was light-headed.

°°°°"Come," he said, "do not talk any more, you must rest----" Just then Bianchon came up, and Eugene went down to dinner.

°°°°The two students sat up with him that night, relieving each other in turn. Bianchon brought up his medical books and studied; Eugene wrote letters home to his mother and sisters. Next morning Bianchon thought the symptoms more hopeful, but the patient's condition demanded continual attention, which the two students alone were willing to give--a task impossible to describe in the squeamish phraseology of the epoch. Leeches must be applied to the wasted body, the poultices and hot foot-baths, and other details of the treatment required the physical strength and devotion of the two young men. Mme. de Restaud did not come; but she sent a messenger for the money.

°°°°"I expected she would come herself; but it would have been a pity for her to come, she would have been anxious about me," said the father, and to all appearances he was well content.

°°°°At seven o'clock that evening Therese came with a letter from Delphine.

°°°°"What are you doing, dear friend? I have been loved for a very   little while, and I am neglected already? In the confidences of   heart and heart, I have learned to know your soul--you are too   noble not to be faithful for ever, for you know that love with   all its infinite subtle changes of feeling is never the same.   Once you said, as we were listening to the Prayer in Mose in   Egitto, 'For some it is the monotony of a single note; for   others, it is the infinite of sound.' Remember that I am   expecting you this evening to take me to Mme. de Beauseant's   ball. Every one knows now that the King signed M. d'Ajuda's   marriage-contract this morning, and the poor Vicomtesse knew   nothing of it until two o'clock this afternoon. All Paris will   flock to her house, of course, just as a crowd fills the Place de   Greve to see an execution. It is horrible, is it not, to go out   of curiosity to see if she will hide her anguish, and whether she   will die courageously? I certainly should not go, my friend, if I   had been at her house before; but, of course, she will not   receive society any more after this, and all my efforts would be   in vain. My position is a very unusual one, and besides, I am   going there partly on your account. I am waiting for you. If you   are not beside me in less than two hours, I do not know whether I   could forgive such treason."

°°°°Rastignac took up a pen and wrote:

°°°°"I am waiting till the doctor comes to know if there is any hope   of your father's life. He is lying dangerously ill. I will come   and bring you the news, but I am afraid it may be a sentence of   death. When I come you can decide whether you can go to the   ball.--Yours a thousand times."

°°°°At half-past eight the doctor arrived. He did not take a very hopeful view of the case, but thought that there was no immediate danger. Improvements and relapses might be expected, and the good man's life and reason hung in the balance.

°°°°"It would be better for him to die at once," the doctor said as he took leave.

°°°°Eugene left Goriot to Bianchon's care, and went to carry the sad news to Mme. de Nucingen. Family feeling lingered in her, and this must put an end for the present to her plans of amusement.

°°°°"Tell her to enjoy her evening as if nothing had happened," cried Goriot. He had been lying in a sort of stupor, but he suddenly sat upright as Eugene went out.

°°°°Eugene, half heartbroken, entered Delphine's. Her hair had been dressed; she wore her dancing slippers; she had only to put on her ball-dress; but when the artist is giving the finishing stroke to his creation, the last touches require more time than the whole groundwork of the picture.

°°°°"Why, you are not dressed!" she cried.

°°°°"Madame, your father----"

°°°°"My father again!" she exclaimed, breaking in upon him. "You need not teach me what is due to my father, I have known my father this long while. Not a word, Eugene. I will hear what you have to say when you are dressed. My carriage is waiting, take it, go round to your rooms and dress, Therese has put out everything in readiness for you. Come back as soon as you can; we will talk about my father on the way to Mme. de Beauseant's. We must go early; if we have to wait our turn in a row of carriages, we shall be lucky if we get there by eleven o'clock."

°°°°"Madame----"

°°°°"Quick! not a word!" she cried, darting into her dressing-room for a necklace.

°°°°"Do go, Monsieur Eugene, or you will vex madame," said Therese, hurrying him away; and Eugene was too horror-stricken by this elegant parricide to resist.

°°°°He went to his rooms and dressed, sad, thoughtful, and dispirited. The world of Paris was like an ocean of mud for him just then; and it seemed that whoever set foot in that black mire must needs sink into it up to the chin.

°°°°"Their crimes are paltry," said Eugene to himself. "Vautrin was greater."

°°°°He had seen society in its three great phases--Obedience, Struggle, and Revolt; the Family, the World, and Vautrin; and he hesitated in his choice. Obedience was dull, Revolt impossible, Struggle hazardous. His thoughts wandered back to the home circle. He thought of the quiet uneventful life, the pure happiness of the days spent among those who loved him there. Those loving and beloved beings passed their lives in obedience to the natural laws of the hearth, and in that obedience found a deep and constant serenity, unvexed by torments such as these. Yet, for all his good impulses, he could not bring himself to make profession of the religion of pure souls to Delphine, nor to prescribe the duties of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was capable of stepping over her father's corpse to go to the ball; and within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the courage to leave her to go alone.

°°°°"She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it," he said to himself. Then he turned the doctor's dictum over in his mind; he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of traitorous excuses for Delphine's conduct. She did not know how ill her father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations; and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family life that excuse the apparent offence.

°°°°Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his, and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, "how is my father?"

°°°°"Very dangerously ill," he answered; "if you will grant me a proof of your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way."

°°°°"Very well," she said. "Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice, and don't preach to me. Come."

°°°°They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

°°°°"What is it now?" she asked.

°°°°"I can hear the death-rattle in your father's throat," he said almost angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of Mme. de Restaud's vanity and cruelty, of her father's final act of self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie's golden embroideries. Delphine cried.

°°°°"I shall look frightful," she thought. She dried her tears.

°°°°"I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside," she said aloud.

°°°°"Ah! now you are as I would have you," exclaimed Rastignac.

°°°°The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the Vicomtesse.

°°°°The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

°°°°Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a last audience of one of its sovereigns.

°°°°"I was afraid that you would not come," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°"Madame," he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a reproach, "I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here."

°°°°"Good," she said, and she took his hand. "You are perhaps the only one I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a woman."

°°°°She took Rastignac's arm, and went towards a sofa in the card- room.

°°°°"I want you to go to the Marquis," she said. "Jacques, my footman, will go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one shall bring me word."

°°°°She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

°°°°Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d'Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide, feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave a casket to the student, saying as he did so, "They are all there."

°°°°He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes, and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

°°°°"Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene." He grasped Rastignac's hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him. Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the Vicomtesse's room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey. He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

°°°°"Ah! my friend! . . ." said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid her hand on Rastignac's shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin's uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it in the fire, and watched it burn.

°°°°"They are dancing," she said. "They all came very early; but death will be long in coming. Hush! my friend," and she laid a finger on Rastignac's lips, seeing that he was about to speak. "I shall never see Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o'clock this morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my arrangements; since three o'clock this afternoon I have been busy signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I could send to . . ."

°°°°She broke off.

°°°°"He was sure to be . . ."

°°°°Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are impossible to utter.

°°°°"And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service this evening," she said. "I should like to give you some pledge of friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay," she said, glancing about her, "there is this box that has held my gloves. Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer. Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to you in the Rue d'Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my tears. One last look round first."

°°°°She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and took the student's arm.

°°°°"Let us go!" she said.

°°°°This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene's arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her husband's eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten Rastignac's sad thougths; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

°°°°"Come," she said, "I must not deprive you of a pleasure."

°°°°Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover's feet the homage she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move henceforth.

°°°°"What do you think of Nasie?" she asked him.

°°°°"She has discounted everything, even her own father's death," said Rastignac.

°°°°Towards four o'clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M. de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, "It is a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among us."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an exclamation broke from her.

°°°°"I saw how it was, Clara," said Mme. de Langeais. "You are going from among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you have heard me, until we have understood each other."

°°°°She took her friend's arm, and they went together into the next room. There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

°°°°"I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself. You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words. One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night; do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night, Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail, I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?"

°°°°"Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!" called the Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was waiting there.

°°°°The student knelt to kiss his cousin's hand.

°°°°"Good-bye, Antoinette!" said Mme. de Beauseant. "May you be happy."--She turned to the student. "You are young," she said; "you have some beliefs still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of this world."

°°°°It was nearly five o'clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

°°°°"There is no hope for poor Father Goriot," said Bianchon, as Rastignac came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then he turned to his friend. "Dear fellow, you are content with the modest career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world, nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden away under the covering of gems and gold."

°°°°At two o'clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

°°°°"Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours," he said; "but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result, nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he had not a farthing of his own. What have you?"

°°°°"I have twenty francs left," said Rastignac; "but I will take them to the roulette table, I shall be sure to win."

°°°°"And if you lose?"

°°°°"Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for money."

°°°°"And suppose they refuse?" Bianchon retorted. "The most pressing thing just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides, Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him till I come back."

°°°°The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying. Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot's face, so livid, distorted, and feeble.

°°°°"How are you, papa?" he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came into his eyes.

°°°°"Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?"

°°°°"No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the smell was something horrible.

°°°°"MON DIEU!" said Rastignac. "To think of those daughters of his."

°°°°"One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this," said the house student, pointing to a large white jar. "If he begins to groan, and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon, a pupil of Gall's came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised; whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here," said Bianchon, touching the back of the head, "very strange things have been known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives."

°°°°"Did they enjoy themselves?" It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had recognized Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters," said Bianchon. "Scores of times last night he said to me, 'They are dancing now! She has her dress.' He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take it, calling with that tone in his voice, for 'Delphine! my little Delphine! and Nasie!' Upon my word," said the medical student, "it was enough to make any one burst out crying."

°°°°"Delphine," said the old man, "she is there, isn't she? I knew she was there," and his eyes sought the door.

°°°°"I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready," said Bianchon. "They ought to go on at once."

°°°°Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was shocking to see.

°°°°"Noble natures cannot dwell in this world," he said; "Mme de Beauseant has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and feelings?"

°°°°Pictures of yesterday's ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

°°°°"I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to the base of the spine, and send round for us."

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," exclaimed Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view," said the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

°°°°"So!" said Eugene. "Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old man for his own sake?"

°°°°"You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning," returned Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. "Doctors who have seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my dear fellow, I can see the patient still."

°°°°He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

°°°°"Ah! dear boy, is that you?" said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

°°°°"Do you feel better?" asked the law student, taking his hand.

°°°°"Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man here, who has burned up all my bark fuel."

°°°°"I can hear Christophe coming upstairs," Eugene answered. "He is bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you."

°°°°"Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!) Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left now."

°°°°Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man's ear, "I will pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble."

°°°°"My daughters told you that they were coming, didn't they, Christophe? Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once again before I die. Tell them that, but don't alarm them more than you can help."

°°°°Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

°°°°"They will come before long," the old man went on. "I know them so well. My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die; and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning. 'Good-morning, papa!' they used to say, and I would take them on my knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they loved me with all their hearts. MON DIEU! why could they not always be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah! forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for you have used me to endure pain. MON DIEU! if only I held their hands in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. HE will see them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked. They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this is! what pain this is! . . . ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they MUST have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make millions. (Oh! this is agony!)"

°°°°Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength to endure the pain.

°°°°"If they were here, I should not complain," he said. "So why should I complain now?"

°°°°He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

°°°°"First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse," he said; "but she and her husband were so busy that I couldn't get to speak to her. When I insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and went on like this: 'M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important business, when it is all finished she can go.' The gentleman looked angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said, 'Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.' As for Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, 'Ah yes, but madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It will be time enough then to tell her bad news!' I begged and I prayed, but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was out."

°°°°"To think that neither of his daughters should come!" exclaimed Rastignac. "I will write to them both."

°°°°"Neither of them!" cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. "They are busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not. Not until you are dying do you know your children. . . . Oh! my friend, do not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it. No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it."

°°°°The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

°°°°"Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and THEY would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money? If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God! who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh! this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was 'My kind father' here, 'My dear father' there. There was always a place for me at their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought. How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening parties. In fact, they acknowleged me their father; publicly they owned that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see, and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence, but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law's ear, 'Who may that gentleman be?'--'The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very rich.'--'The devil, e is!' they would say, and look again at me with the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one thing I did learn thoroughly --I knew that I was not wanted here on earth.

°°°°"The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that was how they both turned me out of the house.

°°°°"Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured; Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to- day? Have I not more than expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

°°°°"Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see, my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! MON DIEU! These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie! Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to ruin if a father's rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see. The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them, my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know what it means to trample on a father's corpse? There is a God in heaven who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

°°°°"Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss; one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault. I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so. It is no one's affair but mine; man's justice and God's justice have nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly; I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch, I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through love.

°°°°"My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should be present at their father's deathbed; the law is on my side. It would only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit, as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine, mine!" and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak spoke of menace.

°°°°"There, there, dear father," said Eugene, "lie down again; I will write to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them myself, if they do not come before."

°°°°"If they do not come?" repeated the old man, sobbing. "Why, I shall be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life; they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one. . . . Go to them; just tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud as I do now, 'Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who has been so kind to you is lying ill!'--Not a sound; no one comes! Then am I do die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them. I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all, my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh? . . . What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister. . . . Eugene, you are my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me nothing but my heart."

°°°°"Christophe!" shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man moaned, and by his cries, "go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to you."

°°°°"Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military, anything and everything, but make them come!" He looked at Eugene, and a last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. "Go to the authorities, to the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!"

°°°°"But you have cursed them."

°°°°"Who said that!" said the old man in dull amazement. "You know quite well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I can see them. . . . Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay their hands there, I think I should get better. . . . MON DIEU! who will recover their money for them when I am gone? . . . I will manufacture vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes."

°°°°"Here is something to drink," said Eugene, supporting the dying man on his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot's lips.

°°°°"How you must love your own father and mother!" said the old man, and grasped the student's hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling grasp. "I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that has been my life for the last ten years. . . . I have no daughters, my sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl's mind and contaminates her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid them! . . . Kill them! . . . Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They have murdered me between them! . . . Death or my daughters! . . . Ah! it is too late, I am dying, and they are not here! . . . Dying without them! . . . Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----"

°°°°"Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest; don't worry yourself, don't think."

°°°°"I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!"

°°°°"You SHALL see them."

°°°°"Really?" cried the old man, still wandering. "Oh! shall I see them; I shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my fingers . . . their hair . . ."

°°°°His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his daughters' hair.

°°°°"My blessing on them . . ." he said, making an effort, "my blessing . . ."

°°°°His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

°°°°"I met Christophe," he said; "he is gone for your cab."

°°°°Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath had grown.

°°°°"He will not get over this, I am sure," said Bianchon. He felt the old man's pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

°°°°"The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be better for him to die."

°°°°"Ah! my word, it would!"

°°°°"What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death."

°°°°"Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard. . . . There is a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

°°°°"We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come from?"

°°°°Rastignac took out his watch.

°°°°"There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall have to pay the cabman when I get home again."

°°°°Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder. The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de Restaud's house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could see no one.

°°°°"But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying," Rastignac told the man.

°°°°"The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----"

°°°°"If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at once."

°°°°The man went out.

°°°°Eugene waited for a long while. "Perhaps her father is dying at this moment," he thought.

°°°°Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte," said Rastignac, "M. Goriot, your father-in- law, is lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter. He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----"

°°°°"I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are aware," the Count answered coolly. "His character has been compromised in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much more important matters to think about than the things that fools and chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a few seconds; it lies entirely with her----"

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct; you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her, and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I ask."

°°°°"You can tell her yourself," the Count answered, impressed by the thrill of indignation in Eugene's voice.

°°°°The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her. Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to speak.

°°°°"I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all he would forgive me. . . . I did not think there was such torture in the world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not give way as long as I live," she said, turning to her husband. "I am a mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of appearances!" she cried aloud in her despair.

°°°°Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess' life. M. de Restaud's manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in bed.

°°°°"Poor dear Eugene, I am ill," she said. "I caught cold after the ball, and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come."

°°°°"If you were at death's door," Eugene broke in, "you must be carried somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer."

°°°°"Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just as you wish. As for HIM, he would die of grief I know if I went out to see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as I have seen the doctor.--Ah!" she cried out, "you are not wearing your watch, how is that?"

°°°°Eugene reddened.

°°°°"Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it. . . . Oh! it would be very wrong of you!"

°°°°The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, "Do you want to know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch has been pawned, for I had nothing either."

°°°°Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

°°°°"I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why, I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before you.--Therese," she called to the waiting-woman, "ask M. de Nucingen to come upstairs at once and speak to me."

°°°°Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve; he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine's purse for money, so as to dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse. He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient's back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of science, and it was tried in vain.

°°°°"Can you feel them?" asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of Rastignac, and answered, "They are coming, are they not?"

°°°°"There is hope yet," said the surgeon; "he can speak."

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene, "Delphine is coming."

°°°°"Oh! that is nothing!" said Bianchon; "he has been talking about his daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for water, they say----"

°°°°"We may as well give up," said the physician, addressing the surgeon. "Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless."

°°°°Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his loathsome bed.

°°°°"But the sheets ought to be changed," added the physician. "Even if there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come back again, Bianchon," he said, turning to the medical student. "If he complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm."

°°°°He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

°°°°"Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy," said Bianchon, as soon as they were alone; "we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help us to make the bed."

°°°°Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a customer.

°°°°"My dear Monsieur Eugene," she said, when he had spoken, "you know quite as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes, you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you; altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make."

°°°°Eugene hurried up to Goriot's room.

°°°°"Bianchon," he cried, "the money or the watch?"

°°°°"There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money."

°°°°Rastignac hurried downstairs.

°°°°"Here, madame" he said in disgust, "let us square accounts. M. Goriot will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----"

°°°°"Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman," she said, counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

°°°°"Let us get this over," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen."

°°°°"You won't forget Sylvie," said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene's ear; "she has been sitting up these two nights."

°°°°As soon as Eugene's back was turned, the old woman hurried after her handmaid.

°°°°"Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number 7. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse," she said in Sylvie's ear.

°°°°Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear the elderly economist.

°°°°"Quick," said Bianchon, "let us change his shirt. Hold him upright."

°°°°Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

°°°°"Ah! yes!" cried Bianchon. "It is the little locket and the chain made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on the chimney-piece."

°°°°Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded golden hair--Mme. Goriot's hair, no doubt. He read the name on the little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other. It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes, the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students, that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a shrill cry of delight.

°°°°"Nasie! Fifine!"

°°°°"There is life in him yet," said Bianchon.

°°°°"What does he go on living for?" said Sylvie.

°°°°"To suffer," answered Rastignac.

°°°°Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the students' heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair, they heard a faint whisper:

°°°°"Ah! my angels!"

°°°°Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which fled forth with them as they left his lips.

°°°°"Poor dear!" cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most ghastly and involuntary of lies.

°°°°The father's last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

°°°°"He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last, that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the throat. The brain must be completely suffused."

°°°°As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman hastened up, panting for breath.

°°°°"She has come too late," said Rastignac.

°°°°But it was not Delphine; it was Therese, her waiting-woman, who stood in the doorway.

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene," she said, "monsieur and madame have had a terrible scene about some money that Madame (poor thing!) wanted for her father. She fainted, and the doctor came, and she had to be bled, calling out all the while, 'My father is dying; I want to see papa!' It was heartbreaking to hear her----"

°°°°"That will do, Therese. If she came now, it would be trouble thrown away. M. Goriot cannot recognize any one now."

°°°°"Poor, dear gentleman, is he as bad at that?" said Therese.

°°°°"You don't want me now, I must go and look after my dinner; it is half-past four," remarked Sylvie. The next instant she all but collided with Mme. de Restaud on the landing outside.

°°°°There was something awful and appalling in the sudden apparition of the Countess. She saw the bed of death by the dim light of the single candle, and her tears flowed at the sight of her father's passive features, from which the life had almost ebbed. Bianchon with thoughtful tact left the room.

°°°°"I could not escape soon enough," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°The student bowed sadly in reply. Mme. de Restaud took her father's hand and kissed it.

°°°°"Forgive me, father! You used to say that my voice would call you back from the grave; ah! come back for one moment to bless your penitent daughter. Do you hear me? Oh! this is fearful! No one on earth will ever bless me henceforth; every one hates me; no one loves me but you in all the world. My own children will hate me. Take me with you, father; I will love you, I will take care of you. He does not hear me . . . I am mad . . ."

°°°°She fell on her knees, and gazed wildly at the human wreck before her.

°°°°"My cup of misery is full," she said, turning her eyes upon Eugene. "M. de Trailles has fled, leaving enormous debts behind him, and I have found out that he was deceiving me. My husband will never forgive me, and I have left my fortune in his hands. I have lost all my illusions. Alas! I have forsaken the one heart that loved me (she pointed to her father as she spoke), and for whom? I have held his kindness cheap, and slighted his affection; many and many a time I have given him pain, ungrateful wretch that I am!"

°°°°"He knew it," said Rastignac.

°°°°Just then Goriot's eyelids unclosed; it was only a muscular contraction, but the Countess' sudden start of reviving hope was no less dreadful than the dying eyes.

°°°°"Is it possible that he can hear me?" cried the Countess. "No," she answered herself, and sat down beside the bed. As Mme. de Restaud seemed to wish to sit by her father, Eugene went down to take a little food. The boarders were already assembled.

°°°°"Well," remarked the painter, as he joined them, "it seems that there is to be a death-orama upstairs."

°°°°"Charles, I think you might find something less painful to joke about," said Eugene.

°°°°"So we may not laugh here?" returned the painter. "What harm does it do? Bianchon said that the old man was quite insensible."

°°°°"Well, then," said the employe from the Museum, "he will die as he has lived."

°°°°"My father is dead!" shrieked the Countess.

°°°°The terrible cry brought Sylvie, Rastignac, and Bianchon; Mme. de Restaud had fainted away. When she recovered they carried her downstairs, and put her into the cab that stood waiting at the door. Eugene sent Therese with her, and bade the maid take the Countess to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Bianchon came down to them.

°°°°"Yes, he is dead," he said.

°°°°"Come, sit down to dinner, gentlemen," said Mme. Vauquer, "or the soup will be cold."

°°°°The two students sat down together.

°°°°"What is the next thing to be done?" Eugene asked of Bianchon.

°°°°"I have closed his eyes and composed his limbs," said Bianchon. "When the certificate has been officially registered at the Mayor's office, we will sew him in his winding sheet and bury him somewhere. What do you think we ought to do?"

°°°°"He will not smell at his bread like this any more," said the painter, mimicking the old man's little trick.

°°°°"Oh, hang it all!" cried the tutor, "let Father Goriot drop, and let us have something else for a change. He is a standing dish, and we have had him with every sauce this hour or more. It is one of the privileges of the good city of Paris that anybody may be born, or live, or die there without attracting any attention whatsoever. Let us profit by the advantages of civilization. There are fifty or sixty deaths every day; if you have a mind to do it, you can sit down at any time and wail over whole hecatombs of dead in Paris. Father Goriot has gone off the hooks, has he? So much the better for him. If you venerate his memory, keep it to yourselves, and let the rest of us feed in peace."

°°°°"Oh, to be sure," said the widow, "it is all the better for him that he is dead. It looks as though he had had trouble enough, poor soul, while he was alive."

°°°°And this was all the funeral oration delivered over him who had been for Eugene the type and embodiment of Fatherhood.

°°°°The fifteen lodgers began to talk as usual. When Bianchon and Eugene had satisfied their hunger, the rattle of spoons and forks, the boisterous conversation, the expressions on the faces that bespoke various degrees of want of feeling, gluttony, or indifference, everything about them made them shiver with loathing. They went out to find a priest to watch that night with the dead. It was necessary to measure their last pious cares by the scanty sum of money that remained. Before nine o'clock that evening the body was laid out on the bare sacking of the bedstead in the desolate room; a lighted candle stood on either side, and the priest watched at the foot. Rastignac made inquiries of this latter as to the expenses of the funeral, and wrote to the Baron de Nucingen and the Comte de Restaud, entreating both gentlemen to authorize their man of business to defray the charges of laying their father-in-law in the grave. He sent Christophe with the letters; then he went to bed, tired out, and slept.

°°°°Next day Bianchon and Rastignac were obliged to take the certificate to the registrar themselves, and by twelve o'clock the formalities were completed. Two hours went by, no word came from the Count nor from the Baron; nobody appeared to act for them, and Rastignac had already been obliged to pay the priest. Sylvie asked ten francs for sewing the old man in his winding- sheet and making him ready for the grave, and Eugene and Bianchon calculated that they had scarcely sufficient to pay for the funeral, if nothing was forthcoming from the dead man's family. So it was the medical student who laid him in a pauper's coffin, despatched from Bianchon's hospital, whence he obtained it at a cheaper rate.

°°°°"Let us play those wretches a trick," said he. "Go to the cemetery, buy a grave for five years at Pere-Lachaise, and arrange with the Church and the undertaker to have a third-class funeral. If the daughters and their husbands decline to repay you, you can carve this on the headstone--'HERE LIES M. GORIOT, FATHER OF THE COMTESSE DE RESTAUD AND THE BARONNE DE NUCINGEN, INTERRED AT THE EXPENSE OF TWO STUDENTS.' "

°°°°Eugene took part of his friend's advice, but only after he had gone in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

°°°°"Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their father, and are in deep grief over their loss."

°°°°Eugene's Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was impossible to reach Delphine.

°°°°"Sell some of your ornaments," he wrote hastily in the porter's room, "so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place."

°°°°He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the lodging-house about three o'clock. In spite of himself, the tears came into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth, was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs. A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

°°°°Bianchon's duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he had made for the burial service. The house student's note told Rastignac that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading Bianchon's scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot's two daughters in Mme. Vauquer's hands.

°°°°"How dared you take it?" he asked.

°°°°"Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?" retorted Sylvie. "It is gold."

°°°°"Of course it shall!" Eugene answered indignantly; "he shall at any rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with him."

°°°°When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man's breast the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were innocent little maidens, before they began "to think for themselves," as he had moaned out in his agony.

°°°°Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker's men were the only followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. When the coffin had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked round in vain for Goriot's two daughters or their husbands. Christophe was his only fellow- mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe's hand. He could not utter a word just then.

°°°°"Yes, Monsieur Eugene," said Christophe, "he was a good and worthy man, who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any harm, and gave nobody any trouble."

°°°°The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

°°°°The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the Libera nos and the De profundis. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with Eugene and Christophe.

°°°°"There is no one else to follow us," remarked the priest, "so we may as well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five."

°°°°But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen, arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o'clock Goriot's coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters' servants standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that fell on Father Goriot's grave, Eugene Rastignac's youth ended. He folded his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

°°°°He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste of its honey, and said magniloquently:

°°°°"Henceforth there is war between us."

°°°°And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine with Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°ADDENDUM

°°°°The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

°°°°Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d'   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Secrets of a Princess   Beatrix

°°°°Beauseant, Marquis   An Episode under the Terror

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomte de   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomtesse de   The Deserted Woman   Albert Savarus

°°°°Bianchon, Horace   The Atheist's Mass   Cesar Birotteau   The Commission in Lunacy   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   A Bachelor's Establishment   The Secrets of a Princess   The Government Clerks   Pierrette   A Study of Woman   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Honorine   The Seamy Side of History   The Magic Skin   A Second Home   A Prince of Bohemia   Letters of Two Brides   The Muse of the Department   The Imaginary Mistress   The Middle Classes   Cousin Betty   The Country Parson In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:   Another Study of Woman   La Grande Breteche

°°°°Bibi-Lupin (chief of secret police, called himself Gondureau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de   Sarrasine

°°°°Collin, Jacques   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Derville   Gobseck   A Start in Life   The Gondreville Mystery   Colonel Chabert   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Franchessini, Colonel   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Galathionne, Princess   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van   Gobseck   Cesar Birotteau   The Government Clerks   The Unconscious Humoriists

°°°°Jacques (M. de Beauseant's butler)   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Langeais, Duchesse Antoinette de   The Thirteen

°°°°Marsay, Henri de   The Thirteen   The Unconscious Humorists   Another Study of Woman   The Lily of the Valley   Jealousies of a Country Town   Ursule Mirouet   A Marriage Settlement   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Letters of Two Brides   The Ball at Sceaux   Modest Mignon   The Secrets of a Princess   The Gondreville Mystery   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Maurice (de Restaud's valet)   Gobseck

°°°°Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de   The Thirteen   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Another Study of Woman   Pierrette   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Nucingen, Baron Frederic de   The Firm of Nucingen   Pierrette   Cesar Birotteau   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Another Study of Woman   The Secrets of a Princess   A Man of Business   Cousin Betty   The Muse of the Department   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de   The Thirteen   Eugenie Grandet   Cesar Birotteau   Melmoth Reconciled   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   The Commission in Lunacy   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Modeste Mignon   The Firm of Nucingen   Another Study of Woman   A Daughter of Eve   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Poiret   The Government Clerks   A Start in Life   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Poiret, Madame (nee Christine-Michelle Michonneau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de (Eugene's parents)   Lost Illusions

°°°°Rastignac, Eugene de   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Ball at Sceaux   The Interdiction   A Study of Woman   Another Study of Woman   The Magic Skin   The Secrets of a Princess   A Daughter of Eve   The Gondreville Mystery   The Firm of Nucingen   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Rastignac, Laure-Rose and Agathe de   Lost Illusions   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Rastignac, Monseigneur Gabriel de   The Country Parson   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Restaud, Comte de   Gobseck

°°°°Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de   Gobseck

°°°°Selerier   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Taillefer, Jean-Frederic   The Firm of Nucingen   The Magic Skin   The Red Inn

°°°°Taillefer, Victorine   The Red Inn

°°°°Therese   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Tissot, Pierre-Francois   A Prince of Bohemia

°°°°Trailles, Comte Maxime de   Cesar Birotteau   Gobseck   Ursule Mirouet   A Man of Business   The Member for Arcis   The Secrets of a Princess   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   Beatrix   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°End

°°°°Eugenie Grandet

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Maria.

°°°°May your name, that of one whose portrait is the noblest ornament

°°°°of this work, lie on its opening pages like a branch of sacred

°°°°box, taken from an unknown tree, but sanctified by religion, and

°°°°kept ever fresh and green by pious hands to bless the house.De Balzac.

°°°°EUGENIE GRANDET

°°°°I

°°°°There are houses in certain provincial towns whose aspect inspiresmelancholy, akin to that called forth by sombre cloisters, drearymoorlands, or the desolation of ruins. Within these houses there is,perhaps, the silence of the cloister, the barrenness of moors, theskeleton of ruins; life and movement are so stagnant there that astranger might think them uninhabited, were it not that he encounterssuddenly the pale, cold glance of a motionless person, whose half-monastic face peers beyond the window-casing at the sound of anunaccustomed step.

°°°°Such elements of sadness formed the physiognomy, as it were, of adwelling-house in Saumur which stands at the end of the steep streetleading to the chateau in the upper part of the town. This street--nowlittle frequented, hot in summer, cold in winter, dark in certainsections--is remarkable for the resonance of its little pebblypavement, always clean and dry, for the narrowness of its tortuousroad-way, for the peaceful stillness of its houses, which belong tothe Old town and are over-topped by the ramparts. Houses threecenturies old are still solid, though built of wood, and their diversaspects add to the originality which commends this portion of Saumurto the attention of artists and antiquaries.

°°°°It is difficult to pass these houses without admiring the enormousoaken beams, their ends carved into fantastic figures, which crownwith a black bas-relief the lower floor of most of them. In one placethese transverse timbers are covered with slate and mark a bluish linealong the frail wall of a dwelling covered by a roof /en colombage/which bends beneath the weight of years, and whose rotting shinglesare twisted by the alternate action of sun and rain. In another placeblackened, worn-out window-sills, with delicate sculptures nowscarcely discernible, seem too weak to bear the brown clay pots fromwhich springs the heart's-ease or the rose-bush of some poor working-woman. Farther on are doors studded with enormous nails, where thegenius of our forefathers has traced domestic hieroglyphics, of whichthe meaning is now lost forever. Here a Protestant attested hisbelief; there a Leaguer cursed Henry IV.; elsewhere some bourgeois hascarved the insignia of his /noblesse de cloches/, symbols of his long-forgotten magisterial glory. The whole history of France is there.Next to a tottering house with roughly plastered walls, where anartisan enshrines his tools, rises the mansion of a country gentleman,on the stone arch of which above the door vestiges of armorialbearings may still be seen, battered by the many revolutions that haveshaken France since 1789. In this hilly street the ground-floors ofthe merchants are neither shops nor warehouses; lovers of the MiddleAges will here find the /ouvrouere/ of our forefathers in all itsnaive simplicity. These low rooms, which have no shop-frontage, noshow-windows, in fact no glass at all, are deep and dark and withoutinterior or exterior decoration. Their doors open in two parts, eachroughly iron-bound; the upper half is fastened back within the room,the lower half, fitted with a spring-bell, swings continually to andfro. Air and light reach the damp den within, either through the upperhalf of the door, or through an open space between the ceiling and alow front wall, breast-high, which is closed by solid shutters thatare taken down every morning, put up every evening, and held in placeby heavy iron bars.

°°°°This wall serves as a counter for the merchandise. No delusive displayis there; only samples of the business, whatever it may chance to be,--such, for instance, as three or four tubs full of codfish and salt,a few bundles of sail-cloth, cordage, copper wire hanging from thejoists above, iron hoops for casks ranged along the wall, or a fewpieces of cloth upon the shelves. Enter. A neat girl, glowing withyouth, wearing a white kerchief, her arms red and bare, drops herknitting and calls her father or her mother, one of whom comes forwardand sells you what you want, phlegmatically, civilly, or arrogantly,according to his or her individual character, whether it be a matterof two sous' or twenty thousand francs' worth of merchandise. You maysee a cooper, for instance, sitting in his doorway and twirling histhumbs as he talks with a neighbor. To all appearance he owns nothingmore than a few miserable boat-ribs and two or three bundles of laths;but below in the port his teeming wood-yard supplies all the cooperagetrade of Anjou. He knows to a plank how many casks are needed if thevintage is good. A hot season makes him rich, a rainy season ruinshim; in a single morning puncheons worth eleven francs have been knownto drop to six. In this country, as in Touraine, atmosphericvicissitudes control commercial life. Wine-growers, proprietors, wood-merchants, coopers, inn-keepers, mariners, all keep watch of the sun.They tremble when they go to bed lest they should hear in the morningof a frost in the night; they dread rain, wind, drought, and wantwater, heat, and clouds to suit their fancy. A perpetual duel goes onbetween the heavens and their terrestrial interests. The barometersmooths, saddens, or makes merry their countenances, turn and turnabout. From end to end of this street, formerly the Grand'Rue deSaumur, the words: "Here's golden weather," are passed from door todoor; or each man calls to his neighbor: "It rains louis," knowingwell what a sunbeam or the opportune rainfall is bringing him.On Saturdays after midday, in the fine season, not one sou's worth ofmerchandise can be bought from these worthy traders. Each has hisvineyard, his enclosure of fields, and all spend two days in thecountry. This being foreseen, and purchases, sales, and profitsprovided for, the merchants have ten or twelve hours to spend inparties of pleasure, in making observations, in criticisms, and incontinual spying. A housewife cannot buy a partridge without theneighbors asking the husband if it were cooked to a turn. A young girlnever puts her head near a window that she is not seen by idlinggroups in the street. Consciences are held in the light; and thehouses, dark, silent, impenetrable as they seem, hide no mysteries.Life is almost wholly in the open air; every household sits at its ownthreshold, breakfasts, dines, and quarrels there. No one can passalong the street without being examined; in fact formerly, when astranger entered a provincial town he was bantered and made game offrom door to door. From this came many good stories, and the nickname/copieux/, which was applied to the inhabitants of Angers, whoexcelled in such urban sarcasms.

°°°°The ancient mansions of the old town of Saumur are at the top of thishilly street, and were formerly occupied by the nobility of theneighborhood. The melancholy dwelling where the events of thefollowing history took place is one of these mansions,--venerablerelics of a century in which men and things bore the characteristicsof simplicity which French manners and customs are losing day by day.Follow the windings of the picturesque thoroughfare, whoseirregularities awaken recollections that plunge the mind mechanicallyinto reverie, and you will see a somewhat dark recess, in the centreof which is hidden the door of the house of Monsieur Grandet. It isimpossible to understand the force of this provincial expression--thehouse of Monsieur Grandet--without giving the biography of MonsieurGrandet himself.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet enjoyed a reputation in Saumur whose causes andeffects can never be fully understood by those who have not, at onetime or another, lived in the provinces. In 1789 Monsieur Grandet--still called by certain persons le Pere Grandet, though the number ofsuch old persons has perceptibly diminished--was a master-cooper, ableto read, write, and cipher. At the period when the French Republicoffered for sale the church property in the arrondissement of Saumur,the cooper, then forty years of age, had just married the daughter ofa rich wood-merchant. Supplied with the ready money of his own fortuneand his wife's /dot/, in all about two thousand louis-d'or, Grandetwent to the newly established "district," where, with the help of twohundred double louis given by his father-in-law to the surlyrepublican who presided over the sales of the national domain, heobtained for a song, legally if not legitimately, one of the finestvineyards in the arrondissement, an old abbey, and several farms. Theinhabitants of Saumur were so little revolutionary that they thoughtPere Grandet a bold man, a republican, and a patriot with a mind opento all the new ideas; though in point of fact it was open only tovineyards. He was appointed a member of the administration of Saumur,and his pacific influence made itself felt politically andcommercially. Politically, he protected the ci-devant nobles, andprevented, to the extent of his power, the sale of the lands andproperty of the /emigres/; commercially, he furnished the Republicanarmies with two or three thousand puncheons of white wine, and tookhis pay in splendid fields belonging to a community of women whoselands had been reserved for the last lot.

°°°°Under the Consulate Grandet became mayor, governed wisely, andharvested still better pickings. Under the Empire he was calledMonsieur Grandet. Napoleon, however, did not like republicans, andsuperseded Monsieur Grandet (who was supposed to have worn thePhrygian cap) by a man of his own surroundings, a future baron of theEmpire. Monsieur Grandet quitted office without regret. He hadconstructed in the interests of the town certain fine roads which ledto his own property; his house and lands, very advantageouslyassessed, paid moderate taxes; and since the registration of hisvarious estates, the vineyards, thanks to his constant care, hadbecome the "head of the country,"--a local term used to denote thosethat produced the finest quality of wine. He might have asked for thecross of the Legion of honor.

°°°°This event occurred in 1806. Monsieur Grandet was then fifty-sevenyears of age, his wife thirty-six, and an only daughter, the fruit oftheir legitimate love, was ten years old. Monsieur Grandet, whomProvidence no doubt desired to compensate for the loss of hismunicipal honors, inherited three fortunes in the course of this year,--that of Madame de la Gaudiniere, born de la Bertelliere, the motherof Madame Grandet; that of old Monsieur de la Bertelliere, hergrandfather; and, lastly, that of Madame Gentillet, her grandmother onthe mother's side: three inheritances, whose amount was not known toany one. The avarice of the deceased persons was so keen that for along time they had hoarded their money for the pleasure of secretlylooking at it. Old Monsieur de la Bertelliere called an investment anextravagance, and thought he got better interest from the sight of hisgold than from the profits of usury. The inhabitants of Saumurconsequently estimated his savings according to "the revenues of thesun's wealth," as they said.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet thus obtained that modern title of nobility which ourmania for equality can never rub out. He became the most imposingpersonage in the arrondissement. He worked a hundred acres ofvineyard, which in fruitful years yielded seven or eight hundredhogsheads of wine. He owned thirteen farms, an old abbey, whosewindows and arches he had walled up for the sake of economy,--ameasure which preserved them,--also a hundred and twenty-seven acresof meadow-land, where three thousand poplars, planted in 1793, grewand flourished; and finally, the house in which he lived. Such was hisvisible estate; as to his other property, only two persons could giveeven a vague guess at its value: one was Monsieur Cruchot, a notaryemployed in the usurious investments of Monsieur Grandet; the otherwas Monsieur des Grassins, the richest banker in Saumur, in whoseprofits Grandet had a certain covenanted and secret share.Although old Cruchot and Monsieur des Grassins were both gifted withthe deep discretion which wealth and trust beget in the provinces,they publicly testified so much respect to Monsieur Grandet thatobservers estimated the amount of his property by the obsequiousattention which they bestowed upon him. In all Saumur there was no onenot persuaded that Monsieur Grandet had a private treasure, somehiding-place full of louis, where he nightly took ineffable delight ingazing upon great masses of gold. Avaricious people gathered proof ofthis when they looked at the eyes of the good man, to which the yellowmetal seemed to have conveyed its tints. The glance of a manaccustomed to draw enormous interest from his capital acquires, likethat of the libertine, the gambler, or the sycophant, certainindefinable habits,--furtive, eager, mysterious movements, which neverescape the notice of his co-religionists. This secret language is in acertain way the freemasonry of the passions. Monsieur Grandet inspiredthe respectful esteem due to one who owed no man anything, who,skilful cooper and experienced wine-grower that he was, guessed withthe precision of an astronomer whether he ought to manufacture athousand puncheons for his vintage, or only five hundred, who neverfailed in any speculation, and always had casks for sale when caskswere worth more than the commodity that filled them, who could storehis whole vintage in his cellars and bide his time to put thepuncheons on the market at two hundred francs, when the littleproprietors had been forced to sell theirs for five louis. His famousvintage of 1811, judiciously stored and slowly disposed of, broughthim in more than two hundred and forty thousand francs.

°°°°Financially speaking, Monsieur Grandet was something between a tigerand a boa-constrictor. He could crouch and lie low, watch his prey along while, spring upon it, open his jaws, swallow a mass of louis,and then rest tranquilly like a snake in process of digestion,impassible, methodical, and cold. No one saw him pass without afeeling of admiration mingled with respect and fear; had not every manin Saumur felt the rending of those polished steel claws? For thisone, Maitre Cruchot had procured the money required for the purchaseof a domain, but at eleven per cent. For that one, Monsieur desGrassins discounted bills of exchange, but at a frightful deduction ofinterest. Few days ever passed that Monsieur Grandet's name was notmentioned either in the markets or in social conversations at theevening gatherings. To some the fortune of the old wine-grower was anobject of patriotic pride. More than one merchant, more than oneinnkeeper, said to strangers with a certain complacency: "Monsieur, wehave two or three millionaire establishments; but as for MonsieurGrandet, he does not himself know how much he is worth."

°°°°In 1816 the best reckoners in Saumur estimated the landed property ofthe worthy man at nearly four millions; but as, on an average, he hadmade yearly, from 1793 to 1817, a hundred thousand francs out of thatproperty, it was fair to presume that he possessed in actual money asum nearly equal to the value of his estate. So that when, after agame of boston or an evening discussion on the matter of vines, thetalk fell upon Monsieur Grandet, knowing people said: "Le PereGrandet? le Pere Grandet must have at least five or six millions.""You are cleverer than I am; I have never been able to find out theamount," answered Monsieur Cruchot or Monsieur des Grassins, wheneither chanced to overhear the remark.

°°°°If some Parisian mentioned Rothschild or Monsieur Lafitte, the peopleof Saumur asked if he were as rich as Monsieur Grandet. When theParisian, with a smile, tossed them a disdainful affirmative, theylooked at each other and shook their heads with an incredulous air. Solarge a fortune covered with a golden mantle all the actions of thisman. If in early days some peculiarities of his life gave occasion forlaughter or ridicule, laughter and ridicule had long since died away.His least important actions had the authority of results repeatedlyshown. His speech, his clothing, his gestures, the blinking of hiseyes, were law to the country-side, where every one, after studyinghim as a naturalist studies the result of instinct in the loweranimals, had come to understand the deep mute wisdom of his slightestactions.

°°°°"It will be a hard winter," said one; "Pere Grandet has put on his furgloves."

°°°°"Pere Grandet is buying quantities of staves; there will be plenty ofwine this year."

°°°°Monsieur Grandet never bought either bread or meat. His farmerssupplied him weekly with a sufficiency of capons, chickens, eggs,butter, and his tithe of wheat. He owned a mill; and the tenant wasbound, over and above his rent, to take a certain quantity of grainand return him the flour and bran. La Grande Nanon, his only servant,though she was no longer young, baked the bread of the householdherself every Saturday. Monsieur Grandet arranged with kitchen-gardeners who were his tenants to supply him with vegetables. As tofruits, he gathered such quantities that he sold the greater part inthe market. His fire-wood was cut from his own hedgerows or taken fromthe half-rotten old sheds which he built at the corners of his fields,and whose planks the farmers carted into town for him, all cut up, andobligingly stacked in his wood-house, receiving in return his thanks.His only known expenditures were for the consecrated bread, theclothing of his wife and daughter, the hire of their chairs in church,the wages of la Grand Nanon, the tinning of the saucepans, lights,taxes, repairs on his buildings, and the costs of his variousindustries. He had six hundred acres of woodland, lately purchased,which he induced a neighbor's keeper to watch, under the promise of anindemnity. After the acquisition of this property he ate game for thefirst time.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet's manners were very simple. He spoke little. Heusually expressed his meaning by short sententious phrases uttered ina soft voice. After the Revolution, the epoch at which he first cameinto notice, the good man stuttered in a wearisome way as soon as hewas required to speak at length or to maintain an argument. Thisstammering, the incoherence of his language, the flux of words inwhich he drowned his thought, his apparent lack of logic, attributedto defects of education, were in reality assumed, and will besufficiently explained by certain events in the following history.Four sentences, precise as algebraic formulas, sufficed him usually tograsp and solve all difficulties of life and commerce: "I don't know;I cannot; I will not; I will see about it." He never said yes, or no,and never committed himself to writing. If people talked to him helistened coldly, holding his chin in his right hand and resting hisright elbow in the back of his left hand, forming in his own mindopinions on all matters, from which he never receded. He reflectedlong before making any business agreement. When his opponent, aftercareful conversation, avowed the secret of his own purposes, confidentthat he had secured his listener's assent, Grandet answered: "I candecide nothing without consulting my wife." His wife, whom he hadreduced to a state of helpless slavery, was a useful screen to him inbusiness. He went nowhere among friends; he neither gave nor accepteddinners; he made no stir or noise, seeming to economize in everything,even movement. He never disturbed or disarranged the things of otherpeople, out of respect for the rights of property. Nevertheless, inspite of his soft voice, in spite of his circumspect bearing, thelanguage and habits of a coarse nature came to the surface, especiallyin his own home, where he controlled himself less than elsewhere.Physically, Grandet was a man five feet high, thick-set, square-built,with calves twelve inches in circumference, knotted knee-joints, andbroad shoulders; his face was round, tanned, and pitted by the small-pox; his chin was straight, his lips had no curves, his teeth werewhite; his eyes had that calm, devouring expression which peopleattribute to the basilisk; his forehead, full of transverse wrinkles,was not without certain significant protuberances; his yellow-grayishhair was said to be silver and gold by certain young people who didnot realize the impropriety of making a jest about Monsieur Grandet.His nose, thick at the end, bore a veined wen, which the common peoplesaid, not without reason, was full of malice. The whole countenanceshowed a dangerous cunning, an integrity without warmth, the egotismof a man long used to concentrate every feeling upon the enjoyments ofavarice and upon the only human being who was anything whatever tohim,--his daughter and sole heiress, Eugenie. Attitude, manners,bearing, everything about him, in short, testified to that belief inhimself which the habit of succeeding in all enterprises never failsto give to a man.

°°°°Thus, though his manners were unctuous and soft outwardly, MonsieurGrandet's nature was of iron. His dress never varied; and those whosaw him to-day saw him such as he had been since 1791. His stout shoeswere tied with leathern thongs; he wore, in all weathers, thickwoollen stockings, short breeches of coarse maroon cloth with silverbuckles, a velvet waistcoat, in alternate stripes of yellow and puce,buttoned squarely, a large maroon coat with wide flaps, a blackcravat, and a quaker's hat. His gloves, thick as those of a gendarme,lasted him twenty months; to preserve them, he always laid themmethodically on the brim of his hat in one particular spot. Saumurknew nothing further about this personage.

°°°°Only six individuals had a right of entrance to Monsieur Grandet'shouse. The most important of the first three was a nephew of MonsieurCruchot. Since his appointment as president of the Civil courts ofSaumur this young man had added the name of Bonfons to that ofCruchot. He now signed himself C. de Bonfons. Any litigant so ill-advised as to call him Monsieur Cruchot would soon be made to feel hisfolly in court. The magistrate protected those who called him Monsieurle president, but he favored with gracious smiles those who addressedhim as Monsieur de Bonfons. Monsieur le president was thirty-threeyears old, and possessed the estate of Bonfons (Boni Fontis), worthseven thousand francs a year; he expected to inherit the property ofhis uncle the notary and that of another uncle, the Abbe Cruchot, adignitary of the chapter of Saint-Martin de Tours, both of whom werethought to be very rich. These three Cruchots, backed by a goodlynumber of cousins, and allied to twenty families in the town, formed aparty, like the Medici in Florence; like the Medici, the Cruchots hadtheir Pazzi.

°°°°Madame des Grassins, mother of a son twenty-three years of age, cameassiduously to play cards with Madame Grandet, hoping to marry herdear Adolphe to Mademoiselle Eugenie. Monsieur des Grassins, thebanker, vigorously promoted the schemes of his wife by means of secretservices constantly rendered to the old miser, and always arrived intime upon the field of battle. The three des Grassins likewise hadtheir adherents, their cousins, their faithful allies. On the Cruchotside the abbe, the Talleyrand of the family, well backed-up by hisbrother the notary, sharply contested every inch of ground with hisfemale adversary, and tried to obtain the rich heiress for his nephewthe president.

°°°°This secret warfare between the Cruchots and des Grassins, the prizethereof being the hand in marriage of Eugenie Grandet, kept thevarious social circles of Saumur in violent agitation. WouldMademoiselle Grandet marry Monsieur le president or Monsieur Adolphedes Grassins? To this problem some replied that Monsieur Grandet wouldnever give his daughter to the one or to the other. The old cooper,eaten up with ambition, was looking, they said, for a peer of France,to whom an income of three hundred thousand francs would make all thepast, present, and future casks of the Grandets acceptable. Othersreplied that Monsieur and Madame des Grassins were nobles, andexceedingly rich; that Adolphe was a personable young fellow; and thatunless the old man had a nephew of the pope at his beck and call, sucha suitable alliance ought to satisfy a man who came from nothing,--aman whom Saumur remembered with an adze in his hand, and who had,moreover, worn the /bonnet rouge/. Certain wise heads called attentionto the fact that Monsieur Cruchot de Bonfons had the right of entry tothe house at all times, whereas his rival was received only onSundays. Others, however, maintained that Madame des Grassins was moreintimate with the women of the house of Grandet than the Cruchotswere, and could put into their minds certain ideas which would lead,sooner or later, to success. To this the former retorted that the AbbeCruchot was the most insinuating man in the world: pit a woman againsta monk, and the struggle was even. "It is diamond cut diamond," said aSaumur wit.

°°°°The oldest inhabitants, wiser than their fellows, declared that theGrandets knew better than to let the property go out of the family,and that Mademoiselle Eugenie Grandet of Saumur would be married tothe son of Monsieur Grandet of Paris, a wealthy wholesale wine-merchant. To this the Cruchotines and the Grassinists replied: "In thefirst place, the two brothers have seen each other only twice inthirty years; and next, Monsieur Grandet of Paris has ambitiousdesigns for his son. He is mayor of an arrondissement, a deputy,colonel of the National Guard, judge in the commercial courts; hedisowns the Grandets of Saumur, and means to ally himself with someducal family,--ducal under favor of Napoleon." In short, was thereanything not said of an heiress who was talked of through acircumference of fifty miles, and even in the public conveyances fromAngers to Blois, inclusively!

°°°°At the beginning of 1811, the Cruchotines won a signal advantage overthe Grassinists. The estate of Froidfond, remarkable for its park, itsmansion, its farms, streams, ponds, forests, and worth about threemillions, was put up for sale by the young Marquis de Froidfond, whowas obliged to liquidate his possessions. Maitre Cruchot, thepresident, and the abbe, aided by their adherents, were able toprevent the sale of the estate in little lots. The notary concluded abargain with the young man for the whole property, payable in gold,persuading him that suits without number would have to be broughtagainst the purchasers of small lots before he could get the money forthem; it was better, therefore, to sell the whole to Monsieur Grandet,who was solvent and able to pay for the estate in ready money. Thefine marquisate of Froidfond was accordingly conveyed down the gulletof Monsieur Grandet, who, to the great astonishment of Saumur, paidfor it, under proper discount, with the usual formalities.This affair echoed from Nantes to Orleans. Monsieur Grandet tookadvantage of a cart returning by way of Froidfond to go and see hischateau. Having cast a master's eye over the whole property, hereturned to Saumur, satisfied that he had invested his money at fiveper cent, and seized by the stupendous thought of extending andincreasing the marquisate of Froidfond by concentrating all hisproperty there. Then, to fill up his coffers, now nearly empty, heresolved to thin out his woods and his forests, and to sell off thepoplars in the meadows.

°°°°II

°°°°It is now easy to understand the full meaning of the term, "the houseof Monsieur Grandet,"--that cold, silent, pallid dwelling, standingabove the town and sheltered by the ruins of the ramparts. The twopillars and the arch, which made the porte-cochere on which the dooropened, were built, like the house itself, of tufa,--a white stonepeculiar to the shores of the Loire, and so soft that it lasts hardlymore than two centuries. Numberless irregular holes, capriciouslybored or eaten out by the inclemency of the weather, gave anappearance of the vermiculated stonework of French architecture to thearch and the side walls of this entrance, which bore some resemblanceto the gateway of a jail. Above the arch was a long bas-relief, inhard stone, representing the four seasons, the faces already crumblingaway and blackened. This bas-relief was surmounted by a projectingplinth, upon which a variety of chance growths had sprung up,--yellowpellitory, bindweed, convolvuli, nettles, plantain, and even a littlecherry-tree, already grown to some height.

°°°°The door of the archway was made of solid oak, brown, shrunken, andsplit in many places; though frail in appearance, it was firmly heldin place by a system of iron bolts arranged in symmetrical patterns. Asmall square grating, with close bars red with rust, filled up themiddle panel and made, as it were, a motive for the knocker, fastenedto it by a ring, which struck upon the grinning head of a huge nail.This knocker, of the oblong shape and kind which our ancestors called/jaquemart/, looked like a huge note of exclamation; an antiquary whoexamined it attentively might have found indications of the figure,essentially burlesque, which it once represented, and which long usagehad now effaced. Through this little grating--intended in olden timesfor the recognition of friends in times of civil war--inquisitivepersons could perceive, at the farther end of the dark and slimyvault, a few broken steps which led to a garden, picturesquely shut inby walls that were thick and damp, and through which oozed a moisturethat nourished tufts of sickly herbage. These walls were the ruins ofthe ramparts, under which ranged the gardens of several neighboringhouses.

°°°°The most important room on the ground-floor of the house was a largehall, entered directly from beneath the vault of the porte-cochere.Few people know the importance of a hall in the little towns of Anjou,Touraine, and Berry. The hall is at one and the same time antechamber,salon, office, boudoir, and dining-room; it is the theatre of domesticlife, the common living-room. There the barber of the neighborhoodcame, twice a year, to cut Monsieur Grandet's hair; there the farmers,the cure, the under-prefect, and the miller's boy came on business.This room, with two windows looking on the street, was entirely ofwood. Gray panels with ancient mouldings covered the walls from top tobottom; the ceiling showed all its beams, which were likewise paintedgray, while the space between them had been washed over in white, nowyellow with age. An old brass clock, inlaid with arabesques, adornedthe mantel of the ill-cut white stone chimney-piece, above which was agreenish mirror, whose edges, bevelled to show the thickness of theglass, reflected a thread of light the whole length of a gothic framein damascened steel-work. The two copper-gilt candelabra whichdecorated the corners of the chimney-piece served a double purpose: bytaking off the side-branches, each of which held a socket, the mainstem--which was fastened to a pedestal of bluish marble tipped withcopper--made a candlestick for one candle, which was sufficient forordinary occasions. The chairs, antique in shape, were covered withtapestry representing the fables of La Fontaine; it was necessary,however, to know that writer well to guess at the subjects, for thefaded colors and the figures, blurred by much darning, were difficultto distinguish.

°°°°At the four corners of the hall were closets, or rather buffets,surmounted by dirty shelves. An old card-table in marquetry, of whichthe upper part was a chess-board, stood in the space between the twowindows. Above this table was an oval barometer with a black borderenlivened with gilt bands, on which the flies had so licentiouslydisported themselves that the gilding had become problematical. On thepanel opposite to the chimney-piece were two portraits in pastel,supposed to represent the grandfather of Madame Grandet, old Monsieurde la Bertelliere, as a lieutenant in the French guard, and thedeceased Madame Gentillet in the guise of a shepherdess. The windowswere draped with curtains of red /gros de Tours/ held back by silkencords with ecclesiastical tassels. This luxurious decoration, littlein keeping with the habits of Monsieur Grandet, had been, togetherwith the steel pier-glass, the tapestries, and the buffets, which wereof rose-wood, included in the purchase of the house.

°°°°By the window nearest to the door stood a straw chair, whose legs wereraised on castors to lift its occupant, Madame Grandet, to a heightfrom which she could see the passers-by. A work-table of stainedcherry-wood filled up the embrasure, and the little armchair ofEugenie Grandet stood beside it. In this spot the lives had flowedpeacefully onward for fifteen years, in a round of constant work fromthe month of April to the month of November. On the first day of thelatter month they took their winter station by the chimney. Not untilthat day did Grandet permit a fire to be lighted; and on the thirty-first of March it was extinguished, without regard either to thechills of the early spring or to those of a wintry autumn. A foot-warmer, filled with embers from the kitchen fire, which la GrandeNanon contrived to save for them, enabled Madame and MademoiselleGrandet to bear the chilly mornings and evenings of April and October.Mother and daughter took charge of the family linen, and spent theirdays so conscientiously upon a labor properly that of working-women,that if Eugenie wished to embroider a collar for her mother she wasforced to take the time from sleep, and deceive her father to obtainthe necessary light. For a long time the miser had given out thetallow candle to his daughter and la Grande Nanon just as he gave outevery morning the bread and other necessaries for the dailyconsumption.

°°°°La Grande Nanon was perhaps the only human being capable of acceptingwillingly the despotism of her master. The whole town envied Monsieurand Madame Grandet the possession of her. La Grande Nanon, so calledon account of her height, which was five feet eight inches, had livedwith Monsieur Grandet for thirty-five years. Though she received onlysixty francs a year in wages, she was supposed to be one of therichest serving-women in Saumur. Those sixty francs, accumulatingthrough thirty-five years, had recently enabled her to invest fourthousand francs in an annuity with Maitre Cruchot. This result of herlong and persistent economy seemed gigantic. Every servant in thetown, seeing that the poor sexagenarian was sure of bread for her oldage, was jealous of her, and never thought of the hard slavery throughwhich it had been won.

°°°°At twenty-two years of age the poor girl had been unable to find asituation, so repulsive was her face to almost every one. Yet thefeeling was certainly unjust: the face would have been much admired onthe shoulders of a grenadier of the guard; but all things, so theysay, should be in keeping. Forced to leave a farm where she kept thecows, because the dwelling-house was burned down, she came to Saumurto find a place, full of the robust courage that shrinks from nolabor. Le Pere Grandet was at that time thinking of marriage and aboutto set up his household. He espied the girl, rejected as she was fromdoor to door. A good judge of corporeal strength in his trade as acooper, he guessed the work that might be got out of a female creatureshaped like a Hercules, as firm on her feet as an oak sixty years oldon its roots, strong in the hips, square in the back, with the handsof a cartman and an honesty as sound as her unblemished virtue.Neither the warts which adorned her martial visage, nor the red-bricktints of her skin, nor the sinewy arms, nor the ragged garments of laGrande Nanon, dismayed the cooper, who was at that time still of anage when the heart shudders. He fed, shod, and clothed the poor girl,gave her wages, and put her to work without treating her too roughly.Seeing herself thus welcomed, la Grande Nanon wept secretly tears ofjoy, and attached herself in all sincerity to her master, who fromthat day ruled her and worked her with feudal authority. Nanon dideverything. She cooked, she made the lye, she washed the linen in theLoire and brought it home on her shoulders; she got up early, she wentto bed late; she prepared the food of the vine-dressers during theharvest, kept watch upon the market-people, protected the property ofher master like a faithful dog, and even, full of blind confidence,obeyed without a murmur his most absurd exactions.

°°°°In the famous year of 1811, when the grapes were gathered withunheard-of difficulty, Grandet resolved to give Nanon his old watch,--the first present he had made her during twenty years of service.Though he turned over to her his old shoes (which fitted her), it isimpossible to consider that quarterly benefit as a gift, for the shoeswere always thoroughly worn-out. Necessity had made the poor girl soniggardly that Grandet had grown to love her as we love a dog, andNanon had let him fasten a spiked collar round her throat, whosespikes no longer pricked her. If Grandet cut the bread with rather toomuch parsimony, she made no complaint; she gaily shared the hygienicbenefits derived from the severe regime of the household, in which noone was ever ill. Nanon was, in fact, one of the family; she laughedwhen Grandet laughed, felt gloomy or chilly, warmed herself, andtoiled as he did. What pleasant compensations there were in suchequality! Never did the master have occasion to find fault with theservant for pilfering the grapes, nor for the plums and nectarineseaten under the trees. "Come, fall-to, Nanon!" he would say in yearswhen the branches bent under the fruit and the farmers were obliged togive it to the pigs.

°°°°To the poor peasant who in her youth had earned nothing but harshtreatment, to the pauper girl picked up by charity, Grandet'sambiguous laugh was like a sunbeam. Moreover, Nanon's simple heart andnarrow head could hold only one feeling and one idea. For thirty-fiveyears she had never ceased to see herself standing before the wood-yard of Monsieur Grandet, ragged and barefooted, and to hear him say:"What do you want, young one?" Her gratitude was ever new. SometimesGrandet, reflecting that the poor creature had never heard aflattering word, that she was ignorant of all the tender sentimentsinspired by women, that she might some day appear before the throne ofGod even more chaste than the Virgin Mary herself,--Grandet, struckwith pity, would say as he looked at her, "Poor Nanon!" Theexclamation was always followed by an undefinable look cast upon himin return by the old servant. The words, uttered from time to time,formed a chain of friendship that nothing ever parted, and to whicheach exclamation added a link. Such compassion arising in the heart ofthe miser, and accepted gratefully by the old spinster, had somethinginconceivably horrible about it. This cruel pity, recalling, as itdid, a thousand pleasures to the heart of the old cooper, was forNanon the sum total of happiness. Who does not likewise say, "PoorNanon!" God will recognize his angels by the inflexions of theirvoices and by their secret sighs.

°°°°There were very many households in Saumur where the servants werebetter treated, but where the masters received far less satisfactionin return. Thus it was often said: "What have the Grandets ever doneto make their Grande Nanon so attached to them? She would go throughfire and water for their sake!" Her kitchen, whose barred windowslooked into the court, was always clean, neat, cold,--a true miser'skitchen, where nothing went to waste. When Nanon had washed herdishes, locked up the remains of the dinner, and put out her fire, sheleft the kitchen, which was separated by a passage from the living-room, and went to spin hemp beside her masters. One tallow candlesufficed the family for the evening. The servant slept at the end ofthe passage in a species of closet lighted only by a fan-light. Herrobust health enabled her to live in this hole with impunity; thereshe could hear the slightest noise through the deep silence whichreigned night and day in that dreary house. Like a watch-dog, sheslept with one ear open, and took her rest with a mind alert.A description of the other parts of the dwelling will be foundconnected with the events of this history, though the foregoing sketchof the hall, where the whole luxury of the household appears, mayenable the reader to surmise the nakedness of the upper floors.In 1819, at the beginning of an evening in the middle of November, laGrande Nanon lighted the fire for the first time. The autumn had beenvery fine. This particular day was a fete-day well known to theCruchotines and the Grassinists. The six antagonists, armed at allpoints, were making ready to meet at the Grandets and surpass eachother in testimonials of friendship. That morning all Saumur had seenMadame and Mademoiselle Grandet, accompanied by Nanon, on their way tohear Mass at the parish church, and every one remembered that the daywas the anniversary of Mademoiselle Eugenie's birth. Calculating thehour at which the family dinner would be over, Maitre Cruchot, theAbbe Cruchot, and Monsieur C. de Bonfons hastened to arrive before thedes Grassins, and be the first to pay their compliments toMademoiselle Eugenie. All three brought enormous bouquets, gathered intheir little green-houses. The stalks of the flowers which thepresident intended to present were ingeniously wound round with awhite satin ribbon adorned with gold fringe. In the morning MonsieurGrandet, following his usual custom on the days that commemorated thebirth and the fete of Eugenie, went to her bedside and solemnlypresented her with his paternal gift,--which for the last thirteenyears had consisted regularly of a curious gold-piece. Madame Grandetgave her daughter a winter dress or a summer dress, as the case mightbe. These two dresses and the gold-pieces, of which she received twoothers on New Year's day and on her father's fete-day, gave Eugenie alittle revenue of a hundred crowns or thereabouts, which Grandet lovedto see her amass. Was it not putting his money from one strong-box toanother, and, as it were, training the parsimony of his heiress? fromwhom he sometimes demanded an account of her treasure (formerlyincreased by the gifts of the Bertellieres), saying: "It is to be yourmarriage dozen."

°°°°The "marriage dozen" is an old custom sacredly preserved and still inforce in many parts of central France. In Berry and in Anjou, when ayoung girl marries, her family, or that of the husband, must give hera purse, in which they place, according to their means, twelve pieces,or twelve dozen pieces, or twelve hundred pieces of gold. The poorestshepherd-girl never marries without her dozen, be it only a dozencoppers. They still tell in Issoudun of a certain "dozen" presented toa rich heiress, which contained a hundred and forty-four /portugaisesd'or/. Pope Clement VII., uncle of Catherine de' Medici, gave her whenhe married her to Henri II. a dozen antique gold medals of pricelessvalue.

°°°°During dinner the father, delighted to see his Eugenie looking well ina new gown, exclaimed: "As it is Eugenie's birthday let us have afire; it will be a good omen."

°°°°"Mademoiselle will be married this year, that's certain," said laGrande Nanon, carrying away the remains of the goose,--the pheasant oftradesmen.

°°°°"I don't see any one suitable for her in Saumur," said Madame Grandet,glancing at her husband with a timid look which, considering heryears, revealed the conjugal slavery under which the poor womanlanguished.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter and exclaimed gaily,--

°°°°"She is twenty-three years old to-day, the child; we must soon beginto think of it."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother silently exchanged a glance of intelligence.Madame Grandet was a dry, thin woman, as yellow as a quince, awkward,slow, one of those women who are born to be down-trodden. She had bigbones, a big nose, a big forehead, big eyes, and presented at firstsight a vague resemblance to those mealy fruits that have neithersavor nor succulence. Her teeth were black and few in number, hermouth was wrinkled, her chin long and pointed. She was an excellentwoman, a true la Bertelliere. L'abbe Cruchot found occasionalopportunity to tell her that she had not done ill; and she believedhim. Angelic sweetness, the resignation of an insect tortured bychildren, a rare piety, a good heart, an unalterable equanimity ofsoul, made her universally pitied and respected. Her husband nevergave her more than six francs at a time for her personal expenses.Ridiculous as it may seem, this woman, who by her own fortune and hervarious inheritances brought Pere Grandet more than three hundredthousand francs, had always felt so profoundly humiliated by herdependence and the slavery in which she lived, against which thegentleness of her spirit prevented her from revolting, that she hadnever asked for one penny or made a single remark on the deeds whichMaitre Cruchot brought for her signature. This foolish secret pride,this nobility of soul perpetually misunderstood and wounded byGrandet, ruled the whole conduct of the wife.

°°°°Madame Grandet was attired habitually in a gown of greenish levantinesilk, endeavoring to make it last nearly a year; with it she wore alarge kerchief of white cotton cloth, a bonnet made of plaited strawssewn together, and almost always a black-silk apron. As she seldomleft the house she wore out very few shoes. She never asked anythingfor herself. Grandet, seized with occasional remorse when heremembered how long a time had elapsed since he gave her the last sixfrancs, always stipulated for the "wife's pin-money" when he sold hisyearly vintage. The four or five louis presented by the Belgian or theDutchman who purchased the wine were the chief visible signs of MadameGrandet's annual revenues. But after she had received the five louis,her husband would often say to her, as though their purse were held incommon: "Can you lend me a few sous?" and the poor woman, glad to beable to do something for a man whom her confessor held up to her asher lord and master, returned him in the course of the winter severalcrowns out of the "pin-money." When Grandet drew from his pocket thefive-franc piece which he allowed monthly for the minor expenses,--thread, needles, and toilet,--of his daughter, he never failed to sayas he buttoned his breeches' pocket: "And you, mother, do you wantanything?"

°°°°"My friend," Madame Grandet would answer, moved by a sense of maternaldignity, "we will see about that later."

°°°°Wasted dignity! Grandet thought himself very generous to his wife.Philosophers who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, ofEugenie, have surely a right to say that irony is at the bottom of theways of Providence.

°°°°After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made toEugenie's marriage, Nanon went to fetch a bottle of black-currantratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly fell as shecame down the stairs.

°°°°"You great stupid!" said her master; "are you going to tumble aboutlike other people, hey?"

°°°°"Monsieur, it was that step on your staircase which has given way.""She is right," said Madame Grandet; "it ought to have been mendedlong ago. Yesterday Eugenie nearly twisted her ankle."

°°°°"Here," said Grandet to Nanon, seeing that she looked quite pale, "asit is Eugenie's birthday, and you came near falling, take a littleglass of ratafia to set you right."

°°°°"Faith! I've earned it," said Nanon; "most people would have brokenthe bottle; but I'd sooner have broken my elbow holding it up high.""Poor Nanon!" said Grandet, filling a glass.

°°°°"Did you hurt yourself?" asked Eugenie, looking kindly at her."No, I didn't fall; I threw myself back on my haunches."

°°°°"Well! as it is Eugenie's birthday," said Grandet, "I'll have the stepmended. You people don't know how to set your foot in the corner wherethe wood is still firm."

°°°°Grandet took the candle, leaving his wife, daughter, and servantwithout any other light than that from the hearth, where the flameswere lively, and went into the bakehouse to fetch planks, nails, andtools.

°°°°"Can I help you?" cried Nanon, hearing him hammer on the stairs."No, no! I'm an old hand at it," answered the former cooper.At the moment when Grandet was mending his worm-eaten staircase andwhistling with all his might, in remembrance of the days of his youth,the three Cruchots knocked at the door.

°°°°"Is it you, Monsieur Cruchot?" asked Nanon, peeping through the littlegrating.

°°°°"Yes," answered the president.

°°°°Nanon opened the door, and the light from the hearth, reflected on theceiling, enabled the three Cruchots to find their way into the room."Ha! you've come a-greeting," said Nanon, smelling the flowers."Excuse me, messieurs," cried Grandet, recognizing their voices; "I'llbe with you in a moment. I'm not proud; I am patching up a step on mystaircase."

°°°°"Go on, go on, Monsieur Grandet; a man's house is his castle," saidthe president sententiously.

°°°°Madame and Mademoiselle Grandet rose. The president, profiting by thedarkness, said to Eugenie:

°°°°"Will you permit me, mademoiselle, to wish you, on this the day ofyour birth, a series of happy years and the continuance of the healthwhich you now enjoy?"

°°°°He offered her a huge bouquet of choice flowers which were rare inSaumur; then, taking the heiress by the elbows, he kissed her on eachside of her neck with a complacency that made her blush. Thepresident, who looked like a rusty iron nail, felt that his courtshipwas progressing.

°°°°"Don't stand on ceremony," said Grandet, entering. "How well you dothings on fete-days, Monsieur le president!"

°°°°"When it concerns mademoiselle," said the abbe, armed with his ownbouquet, "every day is a fete-day for my nephew."

°°°°The abbe kissed Eugenie's hand. As for Maitre Cruchot, he boldlykissed her on both cheeks, remarking: "How we sprout up, to be sure!Every year is twelve months."

°°°°As he replaced the candlestick beside the clock, Grandet, who neverforgot his own jokes, and repeated them to satiety when he thoughtthem funny, said,--

°°°°"As this is Eugenie's birthday let us illuminate."

°°°°He carefully took off the branches of the candelabra, put a socket oneach pedestal, took from Nanon a new tallow candle with paper twistedround the end of it, put it into the hollow, made it firm, lit it, andthen sat down beside his wife, looking alternately at his friends, hisdaughter, and the two candles. The Abbe Cruchot, a plump, puffy littleman, with a red wig plastered down and a face like an old femalegambler, said as he stretched out his feet, well shod in stout shoeswith silver buckles: "The des Grassins have not come?"

°°°°"Not yet," said Grandet.

°°°°"But are they coming?" asked the old notary, twisting his face, whichhad as many holes as a collander, into a queer grimace.

°°°°"I think so," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Are your vintages all finished?" said Monsieur de Bonfons to Grandet."Yes, all of them," said the old man, rising to walk up and down theroom, his chest swelling with pride as he said the words, "all ofthem." Through the door of the passage which led to the kitchen he sawla Grande Nanon sitting beside her fire with a candle and preparing tospin there, so as not to intrude among the guests.

°°°°"Nanon," he said, going into the passage, "put out that fire and thatcandle, and come and sit with us. Pardieu! the hall is big enough forall."

°°°°"But monsieur, you are to have the great people."

°°°°"Are not you as good as they? They are descended from Adam, and so areyou."

°°°°Grandet came back to the president and said,--

°°°°"Have you sold your vintage?"

°°°°"No, not I; I shall keep it. If the wine is good this year, it will bebetter two years hence. The proprietors, you know, have made anagreement to keep up the price; and this year the Belgians won't getthe better of us. Suppose they are sent off empty-handed for once,faith! they'll come back."

°°°°"Yes, but let us mind what we are about," said Grandet in a tone whichmade the president tremble.

°°°°"Is he driving some bargain?" thought Cruchot.

°°°°At this moment the knocker announced the des Grassins family, andtheir arrival interrupted a conversation which had begun betweenMadame Grandet and the abbe.

°°°°Madame des Grassins was one of those lively, plump little women, withpink-and-white skins, who, thanks to the claustral calm of theprovinces and the habits of a virtuous life, keep their youth untilthey are past forty. She was like the last rose of autumn,--pleasantto the eye, though the petals have a certain frostiness, and theirperfume is slight. She dressed well, got her fashions from Paris, setthe tone to Saumur, and gave parties. Her husband, formerly aquartermaster in the Imperial guard, who had been desperately woundedat Austerlitz, and had since retired, still retained, in spite of hisrespect for Grandet, the seeming frankness of an old soldier."Good evening, Grandet," he said, holding out his hand and affecting asort of superiority, with which he always crushed the Cruchots."Mademoiselle," he added, turning to Eugenie, after bowing to MadameGrandet, "you are always beautiful and good, and truly I do not knowwhat to wish you." So saying, he offered her a little box which hisservant had brought and which contained a Cape heather,--a flowerlately imported into Europe and very rare.

°°°°Madame des Grassins kissed Eugenie very affectionately, pressed herhand, and said: "Adolphe wishes to make you my little offering."A tall, blond young man, pale and slight, with tolerable manners andseemingly rather shy, although he had just spent eight or ten thousandfrancs over his allowance in Paris, where he had been sent to studylaw, now came forward and kissed Eugenie on both cheeks, offering hera workbox with utensils in silver-gilt,--mere show-case trumpery, inspite of the monogram E.G. in gothic letters rather well engraved,which belonged properly to something in better taste. As she openedit, Eugenie experienced one of those unexpected and perfect delightswhich make a young girl blush and quiver and tremble with pleasure.She turned her eyes to her father as if to ask permission to acceptit, and Monsieur Grandet replied: "Take it, my daughter," in a tonewhich would have made an actor illustrious.

°°°°The three Cruchots felt crushed as they saw the joyous, animated lookcast upon Adolphe des Grassins by the heiress, to whom such richeswere unheard-of. Monsieur des Grassins offered Grandet a pinch ofsnuff, took one himself, shook off the grains as they fell on theribbon of the Legion of honor which was attached to the button-hole ofhis blue surtout; then he looked at the Cruchots with an air thatseemed to say, "Parry that thrust if you can!" Madame des Grassinscast her eyes on the blue vases which held the Cruchot bouquets,looking at the enemy's gifts with the pretended interest of asatirical woman. At this delicate juncture the Abbe Cruchot left thecompany seated in a circle round the fire and joined Grandet at thelower end of the hall. As the two men reached the embrasure of thefarthest window the priest said in the miser's ear: "Those peoplethrow money out of the windows."

°°°°"What does that matter if it gets into my cellar?" retorted the oldwine-grower.

°°°°"If you want to give gilt scissors to your daughter, you have themeans," said the abbe.

°°°°"I give her something better than scissors," answered Grandet."My nephew is a blockhead," thought the abbe as he looked at thepresident, whose rumpled hair added to the ill grace of his browncountenance. "Couldn't he have found some little trifle which costmoney?"

°°°°"We will join you at cards, Madame Grandet," said Madame des Grassins."We might have two tables, as we are all here."

°°°°"As it is Eugenie's birthday you had better play loto all together,"said Pere Grandet: "the two young ones can join"; and the old cooper,who never played any game, motioned to his daughter and Adolphe."Come, Nanon, set the tables."

°°°°"We will help you, Mademoiselle Nanon," said Madame des Grassinsgaily, quite joyous at the joy she had given Eugenie.

°°°°"I have never in my life been so pleased," the heiress said to her; "Ihave never seen anything so pretty."

°°°°"Adolphe brought it from Paris, and he chose it," Madame des Grassinswhispered in her ear.

°°°°"Go on! go on! damned intriguing thing!" thought the president. "Ifyou ever have a suit in court, you or your husband, it shall go hardwith you."

°°°°The notary, sitting in his corner, looked calmly at the abbe, sayingto himself: "The des Grassins may do what they like; my property andmy brother's and that of my nephew amount in all to eleven hundredthousand francs. The des Grassins, at the most, have not half that;besides, they have a daughter. They may give what presents they like;heiress and presents too will be ours one of these days."At half-past eight in the evening the two card-tables were set out.Madame des Grassins succeeded in putting her son beside Eugenie. Theactors in this scene, so full of interest, commonplace as it seems,were provided with bits of pasteboard striped in many colors andnumbered, and with counters of blue glass, and they appeared to belistening to the jokes of the notary, who never drew a number withoutmaking a remark, while in fact they were all thinking of MonsieurGrandet's millions. The old cooper, with inward self-conceit, wascontemplating the pink feathers and the fresh toilet of Madame desGrassins, the martial head of the banker, the faces of Adolphe, thepresident, the abbe, and the notary, saying to himself:--"They are all after my money. Hey! neither the one nor the other shallhave my daughter; but they are useful--useful as harpoons to fishwith."

°°°°This family gaiety in the old gray room dimly lighted by two tallowcandles; this laughter, accompanied by the whirr of Nanon's spinning-wheel, sincere only upon the lips of Eugenie or her mother; thistriviality mingled with important interests; this young girl, who,like certain birds made victims of the price put upon them, was nowlured and trapped by proofs of friendship of which she was the dupe,--all these things contributed to make the scene a melancholy comedy. Isit not, moreover, a drama of all times and all places, though herebrought down to its simplest expression? The figure of Grandet,playing his own game with the false friendship of the two families andgetting enormous profits from it, dominates the scene and throws lightupon it. The modern god,--the only god in whom faith is preserved,--money, is here, in all its power, manifested in a single countenance.The tender sentiments of life hold here but a secondary place; onlythe three pure, simple hearts of Nanon, of Eugenie, and of her motherwere inspired by them. And how much of ignorance there was in thesimplicity of these poor women! Eugenie and her mother knew nothing ofGrandet's wealth; they could only estimate the things of life by theglimmer of their pale ideas, and they neither valued nor despisedmoney, because they were accustomed to do without it. Their feelings,bruised, though they did not know it, but ever-living, were the secretspring of their existence, and made them curious exceptions in themidst of these other people whose lives were purely material.Frightful condition of the human race! there is no one of its joysthat does not come from some species of ignorance.

°°°°At the moment when Madame Grandet had won a loto of sixteen sous,--thelargest ever pooled in that house,--and while la Grande Nanon waslaughing with delight as she watched madame pocketing her riches, theknocker resounded on the house-door with such a noise that the womenall jumped in their chairs.

°°°°"There is no man in Saumur who would knock like that," said thenotary.

°°°°"How can they bang in that way!" exclaimed Nanon; "do they want tobreak in the door?"

°°°°"Who the devil is it?" cried Grandet.

°°°°III

°°°°Nanon took one of the candles and went to open the door, followed byher master.

°°°°"Grandet! Grandet!" cried his wife, moved by a sudden impulse of fear,and running to the door of the room.

°°°°All the players looked at each other.

°°°°"Suppose we all go?" said Monsieur des Grassins; "that knock strikesme as evil-intentioned."

°°°°Hardly was Monsieur des Grassins allowed to see the figure of a youngman, accompanied by a porter from the coach-office carrying two largetrunks and dragging a carpet-bag after him, than Monsieur Grandetturned roughly on his wife and said,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, go back to your loto; leave me to speak withmonsieur."

°°°°Then he pulled the door quickly to, and the excited players returnedto their seats, but did not continue the game.

°°°°"Is it any one belonging to Saumur, Monsieur des Grassins?" asked hiswife.

°°°°"No, it is a traveller."

°°°°"He must have come from Paris."

°°°°"Just so," said the notary, pulling out his watch, which was twoinches thick and looked like a Dutch man-of-war; "it's nine o'clock;the diligence of the Grand Bureau is never late."

°°°°"Is the gentleman young?" inquired the Abbe Cruchot.

°°°°"Yes," answered Monsieur des Grassins, "and he has brought luggagewhich must weigh nearly three tons."

°°°°"Nanon does not come back," said Eugenie.

°°°°"It must be one of your relations," remarked the president."Let us go on with our game," said Madame Grandet gently. "I know fromMonsieur Grandet's tone of voice that he is annoyed; perhaps he wouldnot like to find us talking of his affairs."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said Adolphe to his neighbor, "it is no doubt yourcousin Grandet,--a very good-looking young man; I met him at the ballof Monsieur de Nucingen." Adolphe did not go on, for his mother trodon his toes; and then, asking him aloud for two sous to put on herstake, she whispered: "Will you hold your tongue, you great goose!"At this moment Grandet returned, without la Grande Nanon, whose steps,together with those of the porter, echoed up the staircase; and he wasfollowed by the traveller who had excited such curiosity and so filledthe lively imaginations of those present that his arrival at thisdwelling, and his sudden fall into the midst of this assembly, canonly be likened to that of a snail into a beehive, or the introductionof a peacock into some village poultry-yard.

°°°°"Sit down near the fire," said Grandet.

°°°°Before seating himself, the young stranger saluted the assembledcompany very gracefully. The men rose to answer by a courteousinclination, and the women made a ceremonious bow.

°°°°"You are cold, no doubt, monsieur," said Madame Grandet; "you have,perhaps, travelled from--"

°°°°"Just like all women!" said the old wine-grower, looking up from aletter he was reading. "Do let monsieur rest himself!"

°°°°"But, father, perhaps monsieur would like to take something," saidEugenie.

°°°°"He has got a tongue," said the old man sternly.

°°°°The stranger was the only person surprised by this scene; all theothers were well-used to the despotic ways of the master. However,after the two questions and the two replies had been exchanged, thenewcomer rose, turned his back towards the fire, lifted one foot so asto warm the sole of its boot, and said to Eugenie,--

°°°°"Thank you, my cousin, but I dined at Tours. And," he added, lookingat Grandet, "I need nothing; I am not even tired."

°°°°"Monsieur has come from the capital?" asked Madame des Grassins.Monsieur Charles,--such was the name of the son of Monsieur Grandet ofParis,--hearing himself addressed, took a little eye-glass, suspendedby a chain from his neck, applied it to his right eye to examine whatwas on the table, and also the persons sitting round it. He ogledMadame des Grassins with much impertinence, and said to her, after hehad observed all he wished,--

°°°°"Yes, madame. You are playing at loto, aunt," he added. "Do not let meinterrupt you, I beg; go on with your game: it is too amusing toleave."

°°°°"I was certain it was the cousin," thought Madame des Grassins,casting repeated glances at him.

°°°°"Forty-seven!" cried the old abbe. "Mark it down, Madame des Grassins.Isn't that your number?"

°°°°Monsieur des Grassins put a counter on his wife's card, who satwatching first the cousin from Paris and then Eugenie, withoutthinking of her loto, a prey to mournful presentiments. From time totime the young the heiress glanced furtively at her cousin, and thebanker's wife easily detected a /crescendo/ of surprise and curiosityin her mind.

°°°°Monsieur Charles Grandet, a handsome young man of twenty-two,presented at this moment a singular contrast to the worthyprovincials, who, considerably disgusted by his aristocratic manners,were all studying him with sarcastic intent. This needs anexplanation. At twenty-two, young people are still so near childhoodthat they often conduct themselves childishly. In all probability, outof every hundred of them fully ninety-nine would have behavedprecisely as Monsieur Charles Grandet was now behaving.

°°°°Some days earlier than this his father had told him to go and spendseveral months with his uncle at Saumur. Perhaps Monsieur Grandet wasthinking of Eugenie. Charles, sent for the first time in his life intothe provinces, took a fancy to make his appearance with thesuperiority of a man of fashion, to reduce the whole arrondissement todespair by his luxury, and to make his visit an epoch, importing intothose country regions all the refinements of Parisian life. In short,to explain it in one word, he mean to pass more time at Saumur inbrushing his nails than he ever thought of doing in Paris, and toassume the extra nicety and elegance of dress which a young man offashion often lays aside for a certain negligence which in itself isnot devoid of grace. Charles therefore brought with him a completehunting-costume, the finest gun, the best hunting-knife in theprettiest sheath to be found in all Paris. He brought his wholecollection of waistcoats. They were of all kinds,--gray, black, white,scarabaeus-colored: some were shot with gold, some spangled, some/chined/; some were double-breasted and crossed like a shawl, otherswere straight in the collar; some had turned-over collars, somebuttoned up to the top with gilt buttons. He brought every variety ofcollar and cravat in fashion at that epoch. He brought two ofBuisson's coats and all his finest linen He brought his pretty goldtoilet-set,--a present from his mother. He brought all his dandyknick-knacks, not forgetting a ravishing little desk presented to himby the most amiable of women,--amiable for him, at least,--a fine ladywhom he called Annette and who at this moment was travelling,matrimonially and wearily, in Scotland, a victim to certain suspicionswhich required a passing sacrifice of happiness; in the desk was muchpretty note-paper on which to write to her once a fortnight.In short, it was as complete a cargo of Parisian frivolities as it waspossible for him to get together,--a collection of all the implementsof husbandry with which the youth of leisure tills his life, from thelittle whip which helps to begin a duel, to the handsomely chasedpistols which end it. His father having told him to travel alone andmodestly, he had taken the coupe of the diligence all to himself,rather pleased at not having to damage a delightful travelling-carriage ordered for a journey on which he was to meet his Annette,the great lady who, etc.,--whom he intended to rejoin at Baden in thefollowing June. Charles expected to meet scores of people at hisuncle's house, to hunt in his uncle's forests,--to live, in short, theusual chateau life; he did not know that his uncle was in Saumur, andhad only inquired about him incidentally when asking the way toFroidfond. Hearing that he was in town, he supposed that he shouldfind him in a suitable mansion.

°°°°In order that he might make a becoming first appearance before hisuncle either at Saumur or at Froidfond, he had put on his most eleganttravelling attire, simple yet exquisite,--"adorable," to use the wordwhich in those days summed up the special perfections of a man or athing. At Tours a hairdresser had re-curled his beautiful chestnutlocks; there he changed his linen and put on a black satin cravat,which, combined with a round shirt-collar, framed his fair and smilingcountenance agreeably. A travelling great-coat, only half buttoned up,nipped in his waist and disclosed a cashmere waistcoat crossed infront, beneath which was another waistcoat of white material. Hiswatch, negligently slipped into a pocket, was fastened by a short goldchain to a buttonhole. His gray trousers, buttoned up at the sides,were set off at the seams with patterns of black silk embroidery. Hegracefully twirled a cane, whose chased gold knob did not mar thefreshness of his gray gloves. And to complete all, his cap was inexcellent taste. None but a Parisian, and a Parisian of the upperspheres, could thus array himself without appearing ridiculous; noneother could give the harmony of self-conceit to all these fopperies,which were carried off, however, with a dashing air,--the air of ayoung man who has fine pistols, a sure aim, and Annette.

°°°°Now if you wish to understand the mutual amazement of the provincialparty and the young Parisian; if you would clearly see the brilliancewhich the traveller's elegance cast among the gray shadows of the roomand upon the faces of this family group,--endeavor to picture to yourminds the Cruchots. All three took snuff, and had long ceased torepress the habit of snivelling or to remove the brown blotches whichstrewed the frills of their dingy shirts and the yellowing creases oftheir crumpled collars. Their flabby cravats were twisted into ropesas soon as they wound them about their throats. The enormous quantityof linen which allowed these people to have their clothing washed onlyonce in six months, and to keep it during that time in the depths oftheir closets, also enabled time to lay its grimy and decaying stainsupon it. There was perfect unison of ill-grace and senility aboutthem; their faces, as faded as their threadbare coats, as creased astheir trousers, were worn-out, shrivelled-up, and puckered. As for theothers, the general negligence of their dress, which was incompleteand wanting in freshness,--like the toilet of all country places,where insensibly people cease to dress for others and come to thinkseriously of the price of a pair of gloves,--was in keeping with thenegligence of the Cruchots. A horror of fashion was the only point onwhich the Grassinists and the Cruchotines agreed.

°°°°When the Parisian took up his eye-glass to examine the strangeaccessories of this dwelling,--the joists of the ceiling, the color ofthe woodwork, and the specks which the flies had left there insufficient number to punctuate the "Moniteur" and the "Encyclopaediaof Sciences,"--the loto-players lifted their noses and looked at himwith as much curiosity as they might have felt about a giraffe.Monsieur des Grassins and his son, to whom the appearance of a man offashion was not wholly unknown, were nevertheless as much astonishedas their neighbors, whether it was that they fell under theindefinable influence of the general feeling, or that they reallyshared it as with satirical glances they seemed to say to theircompatriots,--

°°°°"That is what you see in Paris!"

°°°°They were able to examine Charles at their leisure without fearing todisplease the master of the house. Grandet was absorbed in the longletter which he held in his hand; and to read it he had taken the onlycandle upon the card-table, paying no heed to his guests or theirpleasure. Eugenie, to whom such a type of perfection, whether of dressor of person, was absolutely unknown, thought she beheld in her cousina being descended from seraphic spheres. She inhaled with delight thefragrance wafted from the graceful curls of that brilliant head. Shewould have liked to touch the soft kid of the delicate gloves. Sheenvied Charles his small hands, his complexion, the freshness andrefinement of his features. In short,--if it is possible to sum up theeffect this elegant being produced upon an ignorant young girlperpetually employed in darning stockings or in mending her father'sclothes, and whose life flowed on beneath these unclean rafters,seeing none but occasional passers along the silent street,--thisvision of her cousin roused in her soul an emotion of delicate desirelike that inspired in a young man by the fanciful pictures of womendrawn by Westall for the English "Keepsakes," and that engraved by theFindens with so clever a tool that we fear, as we breathe upon thepaper, that the celestial apparitions may be wafted away. Charles drewfrom his pocket a handkerchief embroidered by the great lady nowtravelling in Scotland. As Eugenie saw this pretty piece of work, donein the vacant hours which were lost to love, she looked at her cousinto see if it were possible that he meant to make use of it. Themanners of the young man, his gestures, the way in which he took uphis eye-glass, his affected superciliousness, his contemptuous glanceat the coffer which had just given so much pleasure to the richheiress, and which he evidently regarded as without value, or even asridiculous,--all these things, which shocked the Cruchots and the desGrassins, pleased Eugenie so deeply that before she slept she dreamedlong dreams of her phoenix cousin.

°°°°The loto-numbers were drawn very slowly, and presently the game camesuddenly to an end. La Grand Nanon entered and said aloud: "Madame, Iwant the sheets for monsieur's bed."

°°°°Madame Grandet followed her out. Madame des Grassins said in a lowvoice: "Let us keep our sous and stop playing." Each took his or hertwo sous from the chipped saucer in which they had been put; then theparty moved in a body toward the fire.

°°°°"Have you finished your game?" said Grandet, without looking up fromhis letter.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" replied Madame des Grassins, taking a seat near Charles.Eugenie, prompted by a thought often born in the heart of a young girlwhen sentiment enters it for the first time, left the room to go andhelp her mother and Nanon. Had an able confessor then questioned hershe would, no doubt, have avowed to him that she thought neither ofher mother nor of Nanon, but was pricked by a poignant desire to lookafter her cousin's room and concern herself with her cousin; to supplywhat might be needed, to remedy any forgetfulness, to see that all wasdone to make it, as far as possible, suitable and elegant; and, infact, she arrived in time to prove to her mother and Nanon thateverything still remained to be done. She put into Nanon's head thenotion of passing a warming-pan between the sheets. She herselfcovered the old table with a cloth and requested Nanon to change itevery morning; she convinced her mother that it was necessary to lighta good fire, and persuaded Nanon to bring up a great pile of wood intothe corridor without saying anything to her father. She ran to get,from one of the corner-shelves of the hall, a tray of old lacquerwhich was part of the inheritance of the late Monsieur de laBertelliere, catching up at the same time a six-sided crystal goblet,a little tarnished gilt spoon, an antique flask engraved with cupids,all of which she put triumphantly on the corner of her cousin'schimney-piece. More ideas surged through her head in one quarter of anhour than she had ever had since she came into the world."Mamma," she said, "my cousin will never bear the smell of a tallowcandle; suppose we buy a wax one?" And she darted, swift as a bird, toget the five-franc piece which she had just received for her monthlyexpenses. "Here, Nanon," she cried, "quick!"

°°°°"What will your father say?" This terrible remonstrance was uttered byMadame Grandet as she beheld her daughter armed with an old Sevressugar-basin which Grandet had brought home from the chateau ofFroidfond. "And where will you get the sugar? Are you crazy?""Mamma, Nanon can buy some sugar as well as the candle."

°°°°"But your father?"

°°°°"Surely his nephew ought not to go without a glass of /eau sucree/?Besides, he will not notice it."

°°°°"Your father sees everything," said Madame Grandet, shaking her head.Nanon hesitated; she knew her master.

°°°°"Come, Nanon, go,--because it is my birthday."

°°°°Nanon gave a loud laugh as she heard the first little jest her youngmistress had ever made, and then obeyed her.

°°°°While Eugenie and her mother were trying to embellish the bedroomassigned by Monsieur Grandet for his nephew, Charles himself was theobject of Madame des Grassins' attentions; to all appearances she wassetting her cap at him.

°°°°"You are very courageous, monsieur," she said to the young dandy, "toleave the pleasures of the capital at this season and take up yourabode in Saumur. But if we do not frighten you away, you will findthere are some amusements even here."

°°°°She threw him the ogling glance of the provinces, where women put somuch prudence and reserve into their eyes that they impart to them theprudish concupiscence peculiar to certain ecclesiastics to whom allpleasure is either a theft or an error. Charles was so completely outof his element in this abode, and so far from the vast chateau and thesumptuous life with which his fancy had endowed his uncle, that as helooked at Madame des Grassins he perceived a dim likeness to Parisianfaces. He gracefully responded to the species of invitation addressedto him, and began very naturally a conversation, in which Madame desGrassins gradually lowered her voice so as to bring it into harmonywith the nature of the confidences she was making. With her, as withCharles, there was the need of conference; so after a few momentsspent in coquettish phrases and a little serious jesting, the cleverprovincial said, thinking herself unheard by the others, who werediscussing the sale of wines which at that season filled the heads ofevery one in Saumur,--

°°°°"Monsieur if you will do us the honor to come and see us, you willgive as much pleasure to my husband as to myself. Our salon is theonly one in Saumur where you will find the higher business circlesmingling with the nobility. We belong to both societies, who meet atour house simply because they find it amusing. My husband--I say itwith pride--is as much valued by the one class as by the other. Wewill try to relieve the monotony of your visit here. If you stay allthe time with Monsieur Grandet, good heavens! what will become of you?Your uncle is a sordid miser who thinks of nothing but his vines; youraunt is a pious soul who can't put two ideas together; and your cousinis a little fool, without education, perfectly common, no fortune, whowill spend her life in darning towels."

°°°°"She is really very nice, this woman," thought Charles Grandet as heduly responded to Madame des Grassins' coquetries.

°°°°"It seems to me, wife, that you are taking possession of monsieur,"said the stout banker, laughing.

°°°°On this remark the notary and the president said a few words that weremore or less significant; but the abbe, looking at them slyly, broughttheir thoughts to a focus by taking a pinch of snuff and saying as hehanded round his snuff-box: "Who can do the honors of Saumur formonsieur so well as madame?"

°°°°"Ah! what do you mean by that, monsieur l'abbe?" demanded Monsieur desGrassins.

°°°°"I mean it in the best possible sense for you, for madame, for thetown of Saumur, and for monsieur," said the wily old man, turning toCharles.

°°°°The Abbe Cruchot had guessed the conversation between Charles andMadame des Grassins without seeming to pay attention to it."Monsieur," said Adolphe to Charles with an air which he tried to makefree and easy, "I don't know whether you remember me, but I had thehonor of dancing as your /vis-a-vis/ at a ball given by the Baron deNucingen, and--"

°°°°"Perfectly; I remember perfectly, monsieur," answered Charles, pleasedto find himself the object of general attention.

°°°°"Monsieur is your son?" he said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°The abbe looked at her maliciously.

°°°°"Yes, monsieur," she answered.

°°°°"Then you were very young when you were in Paris?" said Charles,addressing Adolphe.

°°°°"You must know, monsieur," said the abbe, "that we send them toBabylon as soon as they are weaned."

°°°°Madame des Grassins examined the abbe with a glance of extremepenetration.

°°°°"It is only in the provinces," he continued, "that you will find womenof thirty and more years as fresh as madame, here, with a son about totake his degree. I almost fancy myself back in the days when the youngmen stood on chairs in the ball-room to see you dance, madame," saidthe abbe, turning to his female adversary. "To me, your triumphs arebut of yesterday--"

°°°°"The old rogue!" thought Madame Grassins; "can he have guessed myintentions?"

°°°°"It seems that I shall have a good deal of success in Saumur," thoughtCharles as he unbuttoned his great-coat, put a hand into hiswaistcoat, and cast a glance into the far distance, to imitate theattitude which Chantrey has given to Lord Byron.

°°°°The inattention of Pere Grandet, or, to speak more truly, thepreoccupation of mind into which the reading of the letter had plungedhim, did not escape the vigilance of the notary and the president, whotried to guess the contents of the letter by the almost imperceptiblemotions of the miser's face, which was then under the full light ofthe candle. He maintained the habitual calm of his features withevident difficulty; we may, in fact, picture to ourselves thecountenance such a man endeavored to preserve as he read the fatalletter which here follows:--

°°°°My Brother,--It is almost twenty-three years since we have seen

°°°°each other. My marriage was the occasion of our last interview,

°°°°after which we parted, and both of us were happy. Assuredly I

°°°°could not then foresee that you would one day be the prop of the

°°°°family whose prosperity you then predicted.

°°°°When you hold this letter within your hands I shall be no longer

°°°°living. In the position I now hold I cannot survive the disgrace

°°°°of bankruptcy. I have waited on the edge of the gulf until the

°°°°last moment, hoping to save myself. The end has come, I must sink

°°°°into it. The double bankruptcies of my broker and of Roguin, my

°°°°notary, have carried off my last resources and left me nothing. I

°°°°have the bitterness of owing nearly four millions, with assets not

°°°°more than twenty-five per cent in value to pay them. The wines in

°°°°my warehouses suffer from the fall in prices caused by the

°°°°abundance and quality of your vintage. In three days Paris will

°°°°cry out: "Monsieur Grandet was a knave!" and I, an honest man,

°°°°shall be lying in my winding-sheet of infamy. I deprive my son of

°°°°a good name, which I have stained, and the fortune of his mother,

°°°°which I have lost. He knows nothing of all this,--my unfortunate

°°°°child whom I idolize! We parted tenderly. He was ignorant,

°°°°happily, that the last beatings of my heart were spent in that

°°°°farewell. Will he not some day curse me? My brother, my brother!

°°°°the curses of our children are horrible; they can appeal against

°°°°ours, but theirs are irrevocable. Grandet, you are my elder

°°°°brother, you owe me your protection; act for me so that Charles

°°°°may cast no bitter words upon my grave! My brother, if I were

°°°°writing with my blood, with my tears, no greater anguish could I

°°°°put into this letter,--nor as great, for then I should weep, I

°°°°should bleed, I should die, I should suffer no more, but now I

°°°°suffer and look at death with dry eyes.

°°°°From henceforth you are my son's father; he has no relations, as

°°°°you well know, on his mother's side. Why did I not consider social

°°°°prejudices? Why did I yield to love? Why did I marry the natural

°°°°daughter of a great lord? Charles has no family. Oh, my unhappy

°°°°son! my son! Listen, Grandet! I implore nothing for myself,--

°°°°besides, your property may not be large enough to carry a mortgage

°°°°of three millions,--but for my son! Brother, my suppliant hands

°°°°are clasped as I think of you; behold them! Grandet, I confide my

°°°°son to you in dying, and I look at the means of death with less

°°°°pain as I think that you will be to him a father. He loved me

°°°°well, my Charles; I was good to him, I never thwarted him; he will

°°°°not curse me. Ah, you see! he is gentle, he is like his mother, he

°°°°will cause you no grief. Poor boy! accustomed to all the

°°°°enjoyments of luxury, he knows nothing of the privations to which

°°°°you and I were condemned by the poverty of our youth. And I leave

°°°°him ruined! alone! Yes, all my friends will avoid him, and it is I

°°°°who have brought this humiliation upon him! Would that I had the

°°°°force to send him with one thrust into the heavens to his mother's

°°°°side! Madness! I come back to my disaster--to his. I send him to

°°°°you that you may tell him in some fitting way of my death, of his

°°°°future fate. Be a father to him, but a good father. Do not tear

°°°°him all at once from his idle life, it would kill him. I beg him

°°°°on my knees to renounce all rights that, as his mother's heir, he

°°°°may have on my estate. But the prayer is superfluous; he is

°°°°honorable, and he will feel that he must not appear among my

°°°°creditors. Bring him to see this at the right time; reveal to him

°°°°the hard conditions of the life I have made for him: and if he

°°°°still has tender thoughts of me, tell him in my name that all is

°°°°not lost for him. Yes, work, labor, which saved us both, may give

°°°°him back the fortune of which I have deprived him; and if he

°°°°listens to his father's voice as it reaches him from the grave, he

°°°°will go the Indies. My brother, Charles is an upright and

°°°°courageous young man; give him the wherewithal to make his

°°°°venture; he will die sooner than not repay you the funds which you

°°°°may lend him. Grandet! if you will not do this, you will lay up

°°°°for yourself remorse. Ah, should my child find neither tenderness

°°°°nor succor in you, I would call down the vengeance of God upon

°°°°your cruelty!

°°°°If I had been able to save something from the wreck, I might have

°°°°had the right to leave him at least a portion of his mother's

°°°°property; but my last monthly payments have absorbed everything. I

°°°°did not wish to die uncertain of my child's fate; I hoped to feel

°°°°a sacred promise in a clasp of your hand which might have warmed

°°°°my heart: but time fails me. While Charles is journeying to you I

°°°°shall be preparing my assignment. I shall endeavor to show by the

°°°°order and good faith of my accounts that my disaster comes neither

°°°°from a faulty life nor from dishonesty. It is for my son's sake

°°°°that I strive to do this.

°°°°Farewell, my brother! May the blessing of God be yours for the

°°°°generous guardianship I lay upon you, and which, I doubt not, you

°°°°will accept. A voice will henceforth and forever pray for you in

°°°°that world where we must all go, and where I am now as you read

°°°°these lines.

°°°°Victor-Ange-Guillaume Grandet.

°°°°"So you are talking?" said Pere Grandet as he carefully folded theletter in its original creases and put it into his waistcoat-pocket.He looked at his nephew with a humble, timid air, beneath which he hidhis feelings and his calculations. "Have you warmed yourself?" he saidto him.

°°°°"Thoroughly, my dear uncle."

°°°°"Well, where are the women?" said his uncle, already forgetting thathis nephew was to sleep at the house. At this moment Eugenie andMadame Grandet returned.

°°°°"Is the room all ready?" said Grandet, recovering his composure."Yes, father."

°°°°"Well then, my nephew, if you are tired, Nanon shall show you yourroom. It isn't a dandy's room; but you will excuse a poor wine-growerwho never has a penny to spare. Taxes swallow up everything.""We do not wish to intrude, Grandet," said the banker; "you may wantto talk to your nephew, and therefore we will bid you good-night."At these words the assembly rose, and each made a parting bow inkeeping with his or her own character. The old notary went to the doorto fetch his lantern and came back to light it, offering to accompanythe des Grassins on their way. Madame des Grassins had not foreseenthe incident which brought the evening prematurely to an end, herservant therefore had not arrived.

°°°°"Will you do me the honor to take my arm, madame?" said the abbe."Thank you, monsieur l'abbe, but I have my son," she answered dryly."Ladies cannot compromise themselves with me," said the abbe."Take Monsieur Cruchot's arm," said her husband.

°°°°The abbe walked off with the pretty lady so quickly that they weresoon some distance in advance of the caravan.

°°°°"That is a good-looking young man, madame," he said, pressing her arm."Good-by to the grapes, the vintage is done. It is all over with us.We may as well say adieu to Mademoiselle Grandet. Eugenie will belongto the dandy. Unless this cousin is enamoured of some Parisian woman,your son Adolphe will find another rival in--"

°°°°"Not at all, monsieur l'abbe. This young man cannot fail to see thatEugenie is a little fool,--a girl without the least freshness. Did younotice her to-night? She was as yellow as a quince."

°°°°"Perhaps you made the cousin notice it?"

°°°°"I did not take the trouble--"

°°°°"Place yourself always beside Eugenie, madame, and you need never takethe trouble to say anything to the young man against his cousin; hewill make his own comparisons, which--"

°°°°"Well, he has promised to dine with me the day after to-morrow.""Ah! if you only /would/, madame--" said the abbe.

°°°°"What is it that you wish me to do, monsieur l'abbe? Do you mean tooffer me bad advice? I have not reached the age of thirty-nine,without a stain upon my reputation, thank God! to compromise myselfnow, even for the empire of the Great Mogul. You and I are of an agewhen we both know the meaning of words. For an ecclesiastic, youcertainly have ideas that are very incongruous. Fie! it is worthy ofFaublas!"

°°°°"You have read Faublas?"

°°°°"No, monsieur l'abbe; I meant to say the /Liaisons dangereuses/.""Ah! that book is infinitely more moral," said the abbe, laughing."But you make me out as wicked as a young man of the present day; Ionly meant--"

°°°°"Do you dare to tell me you were not thinking of putting wicked thingsinto my head? Isn't it perfectly clear? If this young man--who I admitis very good-looking--were to make love to me, he would not think ofhis cousin. In Paris, I know, good mothers do devote themselves inthis way to the happiness and welfare of their children; but we livein the provinces, monsieur l'abbe."

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"And," she continued, "I do not want, and Adolphe himself would notwant, a hundred millions brought at such a price."

°°°°"Madame, I said nothing about a hundred millions; that temptationmight be too great for either of us to withstand. Only, I do thinkthat an honest woman may permit herself, in all honor, certainharmless little coquetries, which are, in fact, part of her socialduty and which--"

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"Are we not bound, madame, to make ourselves agreeable to each other?--Permit me to blow my nose.--I assure you, madame," he resumed, "thatthe young gentleman ogled you through his glass in a more flatteringmanner than he put on when he looked at me; but I forgive him fordoing homage to beauty in preference to old age--"

°°°°"It is quite apparent," said the president in his loud voice, "thatMonsieur Grandet of Paris has sent his son to Saumur with extremelymatrimonial intentions."

°°°°"But in that case the cousin wouldn't have fallen among us like acannon-ball," answered the notary.

°°°°"That doesn't prove anything," said Monsieur des Grassins; "the oldmiser is always making mysteries."

°°°°"Des Grassins, my friend, I have invited the young man to dinner. Youmust go and ask Monsieur and Madame de Larsonniere and the du Hautoys,with the beautiful demoiselle du Hautoy, of course. I hope she will beproperly dressed; that jealous mother of hers does make such a frightof her! Gentlemen, I trust that you will all do us the honor to come,"she added, stopping the procession to address the two Cruchots."Here you are at home, madame," said the notary.

°°°°After bowing to the three des Grassins, the three Cruchots returnedhome, applying their provincial genius for analysis to studying, underall its aspects, the great event of the evening, which undoubtedlychanged the respective positions of Grassinists and Cruchotines. Theadmirable common-sense which guided all the actions of these greatmachinators made each side feel the necessity of a momentary allianceagainst a common enemy. Must they not mutually hinder Eugenie fromloving her cousin, and the cousin from thinking of Eugenie? Could theParisian resist the influence of treacherous insinuations, soft-spokencalumnies, slanders full of faint praise and artless denials, whichshould be made to circle incessantly about him and deceive him?IV

°°°°When the four relations were left alone, Monsieur Grandet said to hisnephew,--

°°°°"We must go to bed. It is too late to talk about the matters whichhave brought you here; to-morrow we will take a suitable moment. Webreakfast at eight o'clock; at midday we eat a little fruit or a bitof bread, and drink a glass of white wine; and we dine, like theParisians, at five o'clock. That's the order of the day. If you liketo go and see the town and the environs you are free to do so. Youwill excuse me if my occupations do not permit me to accompany you.You may perhaps hear people say that I am rich,--Monsieur Grandetthis, Monsieur Grandet that. I let them talk; their gossip does nothurt my credit. But I have not a penny; I work in my old age like anapprentice whose worldly goods are a bad plane and two good arms.Perhaps you'll soon know yourself what a franc costs when you have gotto sweat for it. Nanon, where are the candles?"

°°°°"I trust, my nephew, that you will find all you want," said MadameGrandet; "but if you should need anything else, you can call Nanon.""My dear aunt, I shall need nothing; I have, I believe, broughteverything with me. Permit me to bid you good-night, and my youngcousin also."

°°°°Charles took a lighted wax candle from Nanon's hand,--an Anjou candle,very yellow in color, and so shopworn that it looked like tallow anddeceived Monsieur Grandet, who, incapable of suspecting its presenceunder his roof, did not perceive this magnificence.

°°°°"I will show you the way," he said.

°°°°Instead of leaving the hall by the door which opened under thearchway, Grandet ceremoniously went through the passage which dividedthe hall from the kitchen. A swing-door, furnished with a large ovalpane of glass, shut this passage from the staircase, so as to fend offthe cold air which rushed through it. But the north wind whistled nonethe less keenly in winter, and, in spite of the sand-bags at thebottom of the doors of the living-room, the temperature within couldscarcely be kept at a proper height. Nanon went to bolt the outerdoor; then she closed the hall and let loose a wolf-dog, whose barkwas so strangled that he seemed to have laryngitis. This animal, notedfor his ferocity, recognized no one but Nanon; the two untutoredchildren of the fields understood each other.

°°°°When Charles saw the yellow, smoke-stained walls of the well of thestaircase, where each worm-eaten step shook under the heavy foot-fallof his uncle, his expectations began to sober more and more. Hefancied himself in a hen-roost. His aunt and cousin, to whom he turnedan inquiring look, were so used to the staircase that they did notguess the cause of his amazement, and took the glance for anexpression of friendliness, which they answered by a smile that madehim desperate.

°°°°"Why the devil did my father send me to such a place?" he said tohimself.

°°°°When they reached the first landing he saw three doors painted inEtruscan red and without casings,--doors sunk in the dusty walls andprovided with iron bars, which in fact were bolts, each ending withthe pattern of a flame, as did both ends of the long sheath of thelock. The first door at the top of the staircase, which opened into aroom directly above the kitchen, was evidently walled up. In fact, theonly entrance to that room was through Grandet's bedchamber; the roomitself was his office. The single window which lighted it, on the sideof the court, was protected by a lattice of strong iron bars. No one,not even Madame Grandet, had permission to enter it. The old man choseto be alone, like an alchemist in his laboratory. There, no doubt,some hiding-place had been ingeniously constructed; there the title-deeds of property were stored; there hung the scales on which to weighthe louis; there were devised, by night and secretly, the estimates,the profits, the receipts, so that business men, finding Grandetprepared at all points, imagined that he got his cue from fairies ordemons; there, no doubt, while Nanon's loud snoring shook the rafters,while the wolf-dog watched and yawned in the courtyard, while Madameand Mademoiselle Grandet were quietly sleeping, came the old cooper tocuddle, to con over, to caress and clutch and clasp his gold. Thewalls were thick, the screens sure. He alone had the key of thislaboratory, where--so people declared--he studied the maps on whichhis fruit-trees were marked, and calculated his profits to a vine, andalmost to a twig.

°°°°The door of Eugenie's chamber was opposite to the walled-up entranceto this room. At the other end of the landing were the appartements ofthe married pair, which occupied the whole front of the house. MadameGrandet had a room next to that of Eugenie, which was entered througha glass door. The master's chamber was separated from that of his wifeby a partition, and from the mysterious strong-room by a thick wall.Pere Grandet lodged his nephew on the second floor, in the highmansarde attic which was above his own bedroom, so that he might hearhim if the young man took it into his head to go and come. WhenEugenie and her mother reached the middle of the landing they kissedeach other for good-night; then with a few words of adieu to Charles,cold upon the lips, but certainly very warm in the heart of the younggirl, they withdrew into their own chambers.

°°°°"Here you are in your room, my nephew," said Pere Grandet as he openedthe door. "If you need to go out, call Nanon; without her, beware! thedog would eat you up without a word. Sleep well. Good-night. Ha! why,they have made you a fire!" he cried.

°°°°At this moment Nanon appeared with the warming pan.

°°°°"Here's something more!" said Monsieur Grandet. "Do you take my nephewfor a lying-in woman? Carry off your brazier, Nanon!"

°°°°"But, monsieur, the sheets are damp, and this gentleman is as delicateas a woman."

°°°°"Well, go on, as you've taken it into your head," said Grandet,pushing her by the shoulders; "but don't set things on fire." Sosaying, the miser went down-stairs, grumbling indistinct sentences.Charles stood aghast in the midst of his trunks. After casting hiseyes on the attic-walls covered with that yellow paper sprinkled withbouquets so well known in dance-houses, on the fireplace of ribbedstone whose very look was chilling, on the chairs of yellow wood withvarnished cane seats that seemed to have more than the usual fourangles, on the open night-table capacious enough to hold a smallsergeant-at-arms, on the meagre bit of rag-carpet beside the bed, onthe tester whose cloth valance shook as if, devoured by moths, it wasabout to fall, he turned gravely to la Grande Nanon and said,--"Look here! my dear woman, just tell me, am I in the house of MonsieurGrandet, formerly mayor of Saumur, and brother to Monsieur Grandet ofParis?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur; and a very good, a very kind, a very perfectgentleman. Shall I help you to unpack your trunks?"

°°°°"Faith! yes, if you will, my old trooper. Didn't you serve in themarines of the Imperial Guard?"

°°°°"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Nanon. "What's that,--the marines of the guard?Is it salt? Does it go in the water?"

°°°°"Here, get me my dressing-gown out of that valise; there's the key."Nanon was wonder-struck by the sight of a dressing-gown made of greensilk, brocaded with gold flowers of an antique design.

°°°°"Are you going to put that on to go to bed with?" she asked."Yes."

°°°°"Holy Virgin! what a beautiful altar-cloth it would make for theparish church! My dear darling monsieur, give it to the church, andyou'll save your soul; if you don't, you'll lose it. Oh, how nice youlook in it! I must call mademoiselle to see you."

°°°°"Come, Nanon, if Nanon you are, hold your tongue; let me go to bed.I'll arrange my things to-morrow. If my dressing-gown pleases you somuch, you shall save your soul. I'm too good a Christian not to giveit to you when I go away, and you can do what you like with it."Nanon stood rooted to the ground, gazing at Charles and unable to putfaith into his words.

°°°°"Good night, Nanon."

°°°°"What in the world have I come here for?" thought Charles as he wentto sleep. "My father is not a fool; my journey must have some object.Pshaw! put off serious thought till the morrow, as some Greek idiotsaid."

°°°°"Blessed Virgin! how charming he is, my cousin!" Eugenie was saying,interrupting her prayers, which that night at least were neverfinished.

°°°°Madame Grandet had no thoughts at all as she went to bed. She heardthe miser walking up and down his room through the door ofcommunication which was in the middle of the partition. Like all timidwomen, she had studied the character of her lord. Just as the petrelforesees the storm, she knew by imperceptible signs when an inwardtempest shook her husband; and at such times, to use an expression ofher own, she "feigned dead."

°°°°Grandet gazed at the door lined with sheet-iron which he lately put tohis sanctum, and said to himself,--

°°°°"What a crazy idea of my brother to bequeath his son to me! A finelegacy! I have not fifty francs to give him. What are fifty francs toa dandy who looked at my barometer as if he meant to make firewood ofit!"

°°°°In thinking over the consequences of that legacy of anguish Grandetwas perhaps more agitated than his brother had been at the moment ofwriting it.

°°°°"I shall have that golden robe," thought Nanon, who went to sleeptricked out in her altar-cloth, dreaming for the first time in herlife of flowers, embroidery, and damask, just as Eugenie was dreamingof love.

°°°°*****

°°°°In the pure and monotonous life of young girls there comes a delicioushour when the sun sheds its rays into their soul, when the flowersexpress their thoughts, when the throbbings of the heart send upwardto the brain their fertilizing warmth and melt all thoughts into avague desire,--day of innocent melancholy and of dulcet joys! Whenbabes begin to see, they smile; when a young girl first perceives thesentiment of nature, she smiles as she smiled when an infant. If lightis the first love of life, is not love a light to the heart? Themoment to see within the veil of earthly things had come for Eugenie.An early riser, like all provincial girls, she was up betimes and saidher prayers, and then began the business of dressing,--a businesswhich henceforth was to have a meaning. First she brushed and smoothedher chestnut hair and twisted its heavy masses to the top of her headwith the utmost care, preventing the loose tresses from straying, andgiving to her head a symmetry which heightened the timid candor of herface; for the simplicity of these accessories accorded well with theinnocent sincerity of its lines. As she washed her hands again andagain in the cold water which hardened and reddened the skin, shelooked at her handsome round arms and asked herself what her cousindid to make his hands so softly white, his nails so delicately curved.She put on new stockings and her prettiest shoes. She laced her corsetstraight, without skipping a single eyelet. And then, wishing for thefirst time in her life to appear to advantage, she felt the joy ofhaving a new gown, well made, which rendered her attractive.As she finished her toilet the clock of the parish church struck thehour; to her astonishment, it was only seven. The desire of havingplenty of time for dressing carefully had led her to get up too early.Ignorant of the art of retouching every curl and studying everyeffect, Eugenie simply crossed her arms, sat down by the window, andlooked at the court-yard, the narrow garden, and the high terracedwalls that over-topped it: a dismal, hedged-in prospect, yet notwholly devoid of those mysterious beauties which belong to solitary oruncultivated nature. Near the kitchen was a well surrounded by a curb,with a pulley fastened to a bent iron rod clasped by a vine whoseleaves were withered, reddened, and shrivelled by the season. Fromthence the tortuous shoots straggled to the wall, clutched it, and ranthe whole length of the house, ending near the wood-pile, where thelogs were ranged with as much precision as the books in a library. Thepavement of the court-yard showed the black stains produced in time bylichens, herbage, and the absence of all movement or friction. Thethick walls wore a coating of green moss streaked with waving brownlines, and the eight stone steps at the bottom of the court-yard whichled up to the gate of the garden were disjointed and hidden beneathtall plants, like the tomb of a knight buried by his widow in the daysof the Crusades. Above a foundation of moss-grown, crumbling stoneswas a trellis of rotten wood, half fallen from decay; over themclambered and intertwined at will a mass of clustering creepers. Oneach side of the latticed gate stretched the crooked arms of twostunted apple-trees. Three parallel walks, gravelled and separatedfrom each other by square beds, where the earth was held in by box-borders, made the garden, which terminated, beneath a terrace of theold walls, in a group of lindens. At the farther end were raspberry-bushes; at the other, near the house, an immense walnut-tree droopedits branches almost into the window of the miser's sanctum.A clear day and the beautiful autumnal sun common to the banks of theLoire was beginning to melt the hoar-frost which the night had laid onthese picturesque objects, on the walls, and on the plants whichswathed the court-yard. Eugenie found a novel charm in the aspect ofthings lately so insignificant to her. A thousand confused thoughtscame to birth in her mind and grew there, as the sunbeams grew withoutalong the wall. She felt that impulse of delight, vague, inexplicable,which wraps the moral being as a cloud wraps the physical body. Herthoughts were all in keeping with the details of this strangelandscape, and the harmonies of her heart blended with the harmoniesof nature. When the sun reached an angle of the wall where the "Venus-hair" of southern climes drooped its thick leaves, lit with thechanging colors of a pigeon's breast, celestial rays of hope illuminedthe future to her eyes, and thenceforth she loved to gaze upon thatpiece of wall, on its pale flowers, its blue harebells, its wiltingherbage, with which she mingled memories as tender as those ofchildhood. The noise made by each leaf as it fell from its twig in thevoid of that echoing court gave answer to the secret questionings ofthe young girl, who could have stayed there the livelong day withoutperceiving the flight of time. Then came tumultuous heavings of thesoul. She rose often, went to her glass, and looked at herself, as anauthor in good faith looks at his work to criticise it and blame it inhis own mind.

°°°°"I am not beautiful enough for him!" Such was Eugenie's thought,--ahumble thought, fertile in suffering. The poor girl did not do herselfjustice; but modesty, or rather fear, is among the first of love'svirtues. Eugenie belonged to the type of children with sturdyconstitutions, such as we see among the lesser bourgeoisie, whosebeauties always seem a little vulgar; and yet, though she resembledthe Venus of Milo, the lines of her figure were ennobled by the softerChristian sentiment which purifies womanhood and gives it adistinction unknown to the sculptors of antiquity. She had an enormoushead, with the masculine yet delicate forehead of the Jupiter ofPhidias, and gray eyes, to which her chaste life, penetrating fullyinto them, carried a flood of light. The features of her round face,formerly fresh and rosy, were at one time swollen by the small-pox,which destroyed the velvet texture of the skin, though it kindly leftno other traces, and her cheek was still so soft and delicate that hermother's kiss made a momentary red mark upon it. Her nose was somewhattoo thick, but it harmonized well with the vermilion mouth, whoselips, creased in many lines, were full of love and kindness. Thethroat was exquisitely round. The bust, well curved and carefullycovered, attracted the eye and inspired reverie. It lacked, no doubt,the grace which a fitting dress can bestow; but to a connoisseur thenon-flexibility of her figure had its own charm. Eugenie, tall andstrongly made, had none of the prettiness which pleases the masses;but she was beautiful with a beauty which the spirit recognizes, andnone but artists truly love. A painter seeking here below for a typeof Mary's celestial purity, searching womankind for those proud modesteyes which Raphael divined, for those virgin lines, often due tochances of conception, which the modesty of Christian life alone canbestow or keep unchanged,--such a painter, in love with his ideal,would have found in the face of Eugenie the innate nobleness that isignorant of itself; he would have seen beneath the calmness of thatbrow a world of love; he would have felt, in the shape of the eyes, inthe fall of the eyelids, the presence of the nameless something thatwe call divine. Her features, the contour of her head, which noexpression of pleasure had ever altered or wearied, were like thelines of the horizon softly traced in the far distance across thetranquil lakes. That calm and rosy countenance, margined with lightlike a lovely full-blown flower, rested the mind, held the eye, andimparted the charm of the conscience that was there reflected. Eugeniewas standing on the shore of life where young illusions flower, wheredaisies are gathered with delights ere long to be unknown; and thusshe said, looking at her image in the glass, unconscious as yet oflove: "I am too ugly; he will not notice me."

°°°°Then she opened the door of her chamber which led to the staircase,and stretched out her neck to listen for the household noises. "He isnot up," she thought, hearing Nanon's morning cough as the good soulwent and came, sweeping out the halls, lighting her fire, chaining thedog, and speaking to the beasts in the stable. Eugenie at once wentdown and ran to Nanon, who was milking the cow.

°°°°"Nanon, my good Nanon, make a little cream for my cousin's breakfast.""Why, mademoiselle, you should have thought of that yesterday," saidNanon, bursting into a loud peal of laughter. "I can't make cream.Your cousin is a darling, a darling! oh, that he is! You should haveseen him in his dressing-gown, all silk and gold! I saw him, I did! Hewears linen as fine as the surplice of monsieur le cure.""Nanon, please make us a /galette/."

°°°°"And who'll give me wood for the oven, and flour and butter for thecakes?" said Nanon, who in her function of prime-minister to Grandetassumed at times enormous importance in the eyes of Eugenie and hermother. "Mustn't rob the master to feast the cousin. You ask him forbutter and flour and wood: he's your father, perhaps he'll give yousome. See! there he is now, coming to give out the provisions."Eugenie escaped into the garden, quite frightened as she heard thestaircase shaking under her father's step. Already she felt theeffects of that virgin modesty and that special consciousness ofhappiness which lead us to fancy, not perhaps without reason, that ourthoughts are graven on our foreheads and are open to the eyes of all.Perceiving for the first time the cold nakedness of her father'shouse, the poor girl felt a sort of rage that she could not put it inharmony with her cousin's elegance. She felt the need of doingsomething for him,--what, she did not know. Ingenuous and truthful,she followed her angelic nature without mistrusting her impressions orher feelings. The mere sight of her cousin had wakened within her thenatural yearnings of a woman,--yearnings that were the more likely todevelop ardently because, having reached her twenty-third year, shewas in the plenitude of her intelligence and her desires. For thefirst time in her life her heart was full of terror at the sight ofher father; in him she saw the master of the fate, and she fanciedherself guilty of wrong-doing in hiding from his knowledge certainthoughts. She walked with hasty steps, surprised to breathe a purerair, to feel the sun's rays quickening her pulses, to absorb fromtheir heat a moral warmth and a new life. As she turned over in hermind some stratagem by which to get the cake, a quarrel--an event asrare as the sight of swallows in winter--broke out between la GrandeNanon and Grandet. Armed with his keys, the master had come to doleout provisions for the day's consumption.

°°°°"Is there any bread left from yesterday?" he said to Nanon."Not a crumb, monsieur."

°°°°Grandet took a large round loaf, well floured and moulded in one ofthe flat baskets which they use for baking in Anjou, and was about tocut it, when Nanon said to him,--

°°°°"We are five, to-day, monsieur."

°°°°"That's true," said Grandet, "but your loaves weigh six pounds;there'll be some left. Besides, these young fellows from Paris don'teat bread, you'll see."

°°°°"Then they must eat /frippe/?" said Nanon.

°°°°/Frippe/ is a word of the local lexicon of Anjou, and means anyaccompaniment of bread, from butter which is spread upon it, thecommonest kind of /frippe/, to peach preserve, the most distinguishedof all the /frippes/; those who in their childhood have licked the/frippe/ and left the bread, will comprehend the meaning of Nanon'sspeech.

°°°°"No," answered Grandet, "they eat neither bread nor /frippe/; they aresomething like marriageable girls."

°°°°After ordering the meals for the day with his usual parsimony, thegoodman, having locked the closets containing the supplies, was aboutto go towards the fruit-garden, when Nanon stopped him to say,--"Monsieur, give me a little flour and some butter, and I'll make a/galette/ for the young ones."

°°°°"Are you going to pillage the house on account of my nephew?""I wasn't thinking any more of your nephew than I was of your dog,--not more than you think yourself; for, look here, you've only forkedout six bits of sugar. I want eight."

°°°°"What's all this, Nanon? I have never seen you like this before. Whathave you got in your head? Are you the mistress here? You sha'n't havemore than six pieces of sugar."

°°°°"Well, then, how is your nephew to sweeten his coffee?"

°°°°"With two pieces; I'll go without myself."

°°°°"Go without sugar at your age! I'd rather buy you some out of my ownpocket."

°°°°"Mind your own business."

°°°°In spite of the recent fall in prices, sugar was still in Grandet'seyes the most valuable of all the colonial products; to him it wasalways six francs a pound. The necessity of economizing it, acquiredunder the Empire, had grown to be the most inveterate of his habits.All women, even the greatest ninnies, know how to dodge and dodge toget their ends; Nanon abandoned the sugar for the sake of getting the/galette/.

°°°°"Mademoiselle!" she called through the window, "do you want some/galette/?"

°°°°"No, no," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Come, Nanon," said Grandet, hearing his daughter's voice. "See here."He opened the cupboard where the flour was kept, gave her a cupful,and added a few ounces of butter to the piece he had already cut off."I shall want wood for the oven," said the implacable Nanon."Well, take what you want," he answered sadly; "but in that case youmust make us a fruit-tart, and you'll cook the whole dinner in theoven. In that way you won't need two fires."

°°°°"Goodness!" cried Nanon, "you needn't tell me that."

°°°°Grandet cast a look that was well-nigh paternal upon his faithfuldeputy.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she cried, when his back was turned, "we shall havethe /galette/."

°°°°Pere Grandet returned from the garden with the fruit and arranged aplateful on the kitchen-table.

°°°°"Just see, monsieur," said Nanon, "what pretty boots your nephew has.What leather! why it smells good! What does he clean it with, Iwonder? Am I to put your egg-polish on it?"

°°°°"Nanon, I think eggs would injure that kind of leather. Tell him youdon't know how to black morocco; yes, that's morocco. He will get yousomething himself in Saumur to polish those boots with. I have heardthat they put sugar into the blacking to make it shine."

°°°°"They look good to eat," said the cook, putting the boots to her nose."Bless me! if they don't smell like madame's eau-de-cologne. Ah! howfunny!"

°°°°"Funny!" said her master. "Do you call it funny to put more money intoboots than the man who stands in them is worth?"

°°°°"Monsieur," she said, when Grandet returned the second time, afterlocking the fruit-garden, "won't you have the /pot-au-feu/ put on onceor twice a week on account of your nephew?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Am I to go to the butcher's?"

°°°°"Certainly not. We will make the broth of fowls; the farmers willbring them. I shall tell Cornoiller to shoot some crows; they make thebest soup in the world."

°°°°"Isn't it true, monsieur, that crows eat the dead?"

°°°°"You are a fool, Nanon. They eat what they can get, like the rest ofthe world. Don't we all live on the dead? What are legacies?"Monsieur Grandet, having no further orders to give, drew out hiswatch, and seeing that he had half an hour to dispose of beforebreakfast, he took his hat, went and kissed his daughter, and said toher:

°°°°"Do you want to come for a walk in the fields, down by the Loire? Ihave something to do there."

°°°°Eugenie fetched her straw bonnet, lined with pink taffeta; then thefather and daughter went down the winding street to the shore."Where are you going at this early hour?" said Cruchot, the notary,meeting them.

°°°°"To see something," answered Grandet, not duped by the matutinalappearance of his friend.

°°°°When Pere Grandet went to "see something," the notary knew byexperience there was something to be got by going with him; so hewent.

°°°°"Come, Cruchot," said Grandet, "you are one of my friends. I'll showyou what folly it is to plant poplar-trees on good ground.""Do you call the sixty thousand francs that you pocketed for thosethat were in your fields down by the Loire, folly?" said MaitreCruchot, opening his eyes with amazement. "What luck you have had! Tocut down your trees at the very time they ran short of white-wood atNantes, and to sell them at thirty francs!"

°°°°Eugenie listened, without knowing that she approached the most solemnmoment of her whole life, and that the notary was about to bring downupon her head a paternal and supreme sentence. Grandet had now reachedthe magnificent fields which he owned on the banks of the Loire, wherethirty workmen were employed in clearing away, filling up, andlevelling the spots formerly occupied by the poplars.

°°°°"Maitre Cruchot, see how much ground this tree once took up! Jean," hecried to a laborer, "m-m-measure with your r-r-rule, b-both ways.""Four times eight feet," said the man.

°°°°"Thirty-two feet lost," said Grandet to Cruchot. "I had three hundredpoplars in this one line, isn't that so? Well, then, three h-h-hundredtimes thir-thirty-two lost m-m-me five hundred in h-h-hay; add twiceas much for the side rows,--fifteen hundred; the middle rows as muchmore. So we may c-c-call it a th-thousand b-b-bales of h-h-hay--""Very good," said Cruchot, to help out his friend; "a thousand balesare worth about six hundred francs."

°°°°"Say t-t-twelve hundred, be-c-cause there's three or four hundredfrancs on the second crop. Well, then, c-c-calculate that t-twelvethousand francs a year for f-f-forty years with interest c-c-comesto--"

°°°°"Say sixty thousand francs," said the notary.

°°°°"I am willing; c-c-comes t-t-to sixty th-th-thousand. Very good,"continued Grandet, without stuttering: "two thousand poplars fortyyears old will only yield me fifty thousand francs. There's a loss. Ihave found that myself," said Grandet, getting on his high horse."Jean, fill up all the holes except those at the bank of the river;there you are to plant the poplars I have bought. Plant 'em there, andthey'll get nourishment from the government," he said, turning toCruchot, and giving a slight motion to the wen on his nose, whichexpressed more than the most ironical of smiles.

°°°°"True enough; poplars should only be planted on poor soil," saidCruchot, amazed at Grandet's calculations.

°°°°"Y-y-yes, monsieur," answered the old man satirically.

°°°°Eugenie, who was gazing at the sublime scenery of the Loire, andpaying no attention to her father's reckonings, presently turned anear to the remarks of Cruchot when she heard him say,--

°°°°"So you have brought a son-in-law from Paris. All Saumur is talkingabout your nephew. I shall soon have the marriage-contract to draw up,hey! Pere Grandet?"

°°°°"You g-g-got up very early to t-t-tell me that," said Grandet,accompanying the remark with a motion of his wen. "Well, oldc-c-comrade, I'll be frank, and t-t-tell you what you want t-t-toknow. I would rather, do you see, f-f-fling my daughter into the Loirethan g-g-give her to her c-c-cousin. You may t-t-tell that everywhere,--no, never mind; let the world t-t-talk."

°°°°This answer dazzled and blinded the young girl with sudden light. Thedistant hopes upspringing in her heart bloomed suddenly, became real,tangible, like a cluster of flowers, and she saw them cut down andwilting on the earth. Since the previous evening she had attachedherself to Charles by those links of happiness which bind soul tosoul; from henceforth suffering was to rivet them. Is it not the nobledestiny of women to be more moved by the dark solemnities of griefthan by the splendors of fortune? How was it that fatherly feeling haddied out of her father's heart? Of what crime had Charles been guilty?Mysterious questions! Already her dawning love, a mystery so profound,was wrapping itself in mystery. She walked back trembling in all herlimbs; and when she reached the gloomy street, lately so joyous toher, she felt its sadness, she breathed the melancholy which time andevents had printed there. None of love's lessons lacked. A few stepsfrom their own door she went on before her father and waited at thethreshold. But Grandet, who saw a newspaper in the notary's hand,stopped short and asked,--

°°°°"How are the Funds?"

°°°°"You never listen to my advice, Grandet," answered Cruchot. "Buy soon;you will still make twenty per cent in two years, besides getting anexcellent rate of interest,--five thousand a year for eighty thousandfrancs fifty centimes."

°°°°"We'll see about that," answered Grandet, rubbing his chin."Good God!" exclaimed the notary.

°°°°"Well, what?" cried Grandet; and at the same moment Cruchot put thenewspaper under his eyes and said:

°°°°"Read that!"

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, one of the most respected merchants in Paris,

°°°°blew his brains out yesterday, after making his usual appearance

°°°°at the Bourse. He had sent his resignation to the president of the

°°°°Chamber of Deputies, and had also resigned his functions as a

°°°°judge of the commercial courts. The failures of Monsieur Roguin

°°°°and Monsieur Souchet, his broker and his notary, had ruined him.

°°°°The esteem felt for Monsieur Grandet and the credit he enjoyed

°°°°were nevertheless such that he might have obtained the necessary

°°°°assistance from other business houses. It is much to be regretted

°°°°that so honorable a man should have yielded to momentary despair,"

°°°°etc.

°°°°"I knew it," said the old wine-grower to the notary.

°°°°The words sent a chill of horror through Maitre Cruchot, who,notwithstanding his impassibility as a notary, felt the cold runningdown his spine as he thought that Grandet of Paris had possiblyimplored in vain the millions of Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"And his son, so joyous yesterday--"

°°°°"He knows nothing as yet," answered Grandet, with the same composure."Adieu! Monsieur Grandet," said Cruchot, who now understood the stateof the case, and went off to reassure Monsieur de Bonfons.On entering, Grandet found breakfast ready. Madame Grandet, roundwhose neck Eugenie had flung her arms, kissing her with the quickeffusion of feeling often caused by secret grief, was already seatedin her chair on castors, knitting sleeves for the coming winter."You can begin to eat," said Nanon, coming downstairs four steps at atime; "the young one is sleeping like a cherub. Isn't he a darlingwith his eyes shut? I went in and I called him: no answer.""Let him sleep," said Grandet; "he'll wake soon enough to hear ill-tidings."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Eugenie, putting into her coffee the two littlebits of sugar weighing less than half an ounce which the old miseramused himself by cutting up in his leisure hours. Madame Grandet, whodid not dare to put the question, gazed at her husband.

°°°°"His father has blown his brains out."

°°°°"My uncle?" said Eugenie.

°°°°"Poor young man!" exclaimed Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Poor indeed!" said Grandet; "he isn't worth a sou!"

°°°°"Eh! poor boy, and he's sleeping like the king of the world!" saidNanon in a gentle voice.

°°°°Eugenie stopped eating. Her heart was wrung, as the young heart iswrung when pity for the suffering of one she loves overflows, for thefirst time, the whole being of a woman. The poor girl wept."What are you crying about? You didn't know your uncle," said herfather, giving her one of those hungry tigerish looks he doubtlessthrew upon his piles of gold.

°°°°"But, monsieur," said Nanon, "who wouldn't feel pity for the pooryoung man, sleeping there like a wooden shoe, without knowing what'scoming?"

°°°°"I didn't speak to you, Nanon. Hold your tongue!"

°°°°Eugenie learned at that moment that the woman who loves must be ableto hide her feelings. She did not answer.

°°°°"You will say nothing to him about it, Ma'ame Grandet, till I return,"said the old man. "I have to go and straighten the line of my hedgealong the high-road. I shall be back at noon, in time for the secondbreakfast, and then I will talk with my nephew about his affairs. Asfor you, Mademoiselle Eugenie, if it is for that dandy you are crying,that's enough, child. He's going off like a shot to the Indies. Youwill never see him again."

°°°°The father took his gloves from the brim of his hat, put them on withhis usual composure, pushed them in place by shoving the fingers ofboth hands together, and went out.

°°°°"Mamma, I am suffocating!" cried Eugenie when she was alone with hermother; "I have never suffered like this."

°°°°Madame Grandet, seeing that she turned pale, opened the window and lether breathe fresh air.

°°°°"I feel better!" said Eugenie after a moment.

°°°°This nervous excitement in a nature hitherto, to all appearance, calmand cold, reacted on Madame Grandet; she looked at her daughter withthe sympathetic intuition with which mothers are gifted for theobjects of their tenderness, and guessed all. In truth the life of theHungarian sisters, bound together by a freak of nature, could scarcelyhave been more intimate than that of Eugenie and her mother,--alwaystogether in the embrasure of that window, and sleeping together in thesame atmosphere.

°°°°"My poor child!" said Madame Grandet, taking Eugenie's head and layingit upon her bosom.

°°°°At these words the young girl raised her head, questioned her motherby a look, and seemed to search out her inmost thought.

°°°°"Why send him to the Indies?" she said. "If he is unhappy, ought henot to stay with us? Is he not our nearest relation?"

°°°°"Yes, my child, it seems natural; but your father has his reasons: wemust respect them."

°°°°The mother and daughter sat down in silence, the former upon herraised seat, the latter in her little armchair, and both took up theirwork. Swelling with gratitude for the full heart-understanding hermother had given her, Eugenie kissed the dear hand, saying,--"How good you are, my kind mamma!"

°°°°The words sent a glow of light into the motherly face, worn andblighted as it was by many sorrows.

°°°°"You like him?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°Madame Grandet only smiled in reply. Then, after a moment's silence,she said in a low voice: "Do you love him already? That is wrong.""Wrong?" said Eugenie. "Why is it wrong? You are pleased with him,Nanon is pleased with him; why should he not please me? Come, mamma,let us set the table for his breakfast."

°°°°She threw down her work, and her mother did the same, saying, "Foolishchild!" But she sanctioned the child's folly by sharing it. Eugeniecalled Nanon.

°°°°"What do you want now, mademoiselle?"

°°°°"Nanon, can we have cream by midday?"

°°°°"Ah! midday, to be sure you can," answered the old servant."Well, let him have his coffee very strong; I heard Monsieur desGrassins say that they make the coffee very strong in Paris. Put in agreat deal."

°°°°"Where am I to get it?"

°°°°"Buy some."

°°°°"Suppose monsieur meets me?"

°°°°"He has gone to his fields."

°°°°"I'll run, then. But Monsieur Fessard asked me yesterday if the Magihad come to stay with us when I bought the wax candle. All the townwill know our goings-on."

°°°°"If your father finds it out," said Madame Grandet, "he is capable ofbeating us."

°°°°"Well, let him beat us; we will take his blows on our knees."Madame Grandet for all answer raised her eyes to heaven. Nanon put onher hood and went off. Eugenie got out some clean table-linen, andwent to fetch a few bunches of grapes which she had amused herself byhanging on a string across the attic; she walked softly along thecorridor, so as not to waken her cousin, and she could not helplistening at the door to his quiet breathing.

°°°°"Sorrow is watching while he sleeps," she thought.

°°°°She took the freshest vine-leaves and arranged her dish of grapes ascoquettishly as a practised house-keeper might have done, and placedit triumphantly on the table. She laid hands on the pears counted outby her father, and piled them in a pyramid mixed with leaves. She wentand came, and skipped and ran. She would have liked to lay undercontribution everything in her father's house; but the keys were inhis pocket. Nanon came back with two fresh eggs. At sight of themEugenie almost hugged her round the neck.

°°°°"The farmer from Lande had them in his basket. I asked him for them,and he gave them to me, the darling, for nothing, as an attention!"VAfter two hours' thought and care, during which Eugenie jumped uptwenty times from her work to see if the coffee were boiling, or to goand listen to the noise her cousin made in dressing, she succeeded inpreparing a simple little breakfast, very inexpensive, but which,nevertheless, departed alarmingly from the inveterate customs of thehouse. The midday breakfast was always taken standing. Each took aslice of bread, a little fruit or some butter, and a glass of wine. AsEugenie looked at the table drawn up near the fire with an arm-chairplaced before her cousin's plate, at the two dishes of fruit, the egg-cup, the bottle of white wine, the bread, and the sugar heaped up in asaucer, she trembled in all her limbs at the mere thought of the lookher father would give her if he should come in at that moment. Sheglanced often at the clock to see if her cousin could breakfast beforethe master's return.

°°°°"Don't be troubled, Eugenie; if your father comes in, I will take itall upon myself," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Eugenie could not repress a tear.

°°°°"Oh, my good mother!" she cried, "I have never loved you enough."Charles, who had been tramping about his room for some time, singingto himself, now came down. Happily, it was only eleven o'clock. Thetrue Parisian! he had put as much dandyism into his dress as if hewere in the chateau of the noble lady then travelling in Scotland. Hecame into the room with the smiling, courteous manner so becoming toyouth, which made Eugenie's heart beat with mournful joy. He had takenthe destruction of his castles in Anjou as a joke, and came up to hisaunt gaily.

°°°°"Have you slept well, dear aunt? and you, too, my cousin?""Very well, monsieur; did you?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"I? perfectly."

°°°°"You must be hungry, cousin," said Eugenie; "will you take your seat?""I never breakfast before midday; I never get up till then. However, Ifared so badly on the journey that I am glad to eat something at once.Besides--" here he pulled out the prettiest watch Breguet ever made."Dear me! I am early, it is only eleven o'clock!"

°°°°"Early?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Yes; but I wanted to put my things in order. Well, I shall be glad tohave anything to eat,--anything, it doesn't matter what, a chicken, apartridge."

°°°°"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Nanon, overhearing the words.

°°°°"A partridge!" whispered Eugenie to herself; she would gladly havegiven the whole of her little hoard for a partridge.

°°°°"Come and sit down," said his aunt.

°°°°The young dandy let himself drop into an easy-chair, just as a prettywoman falls gracefully upon a sofa. Eugenie and her mother tookordinary chairs and sat beside him, near the fire.

°°°°"Do you always live here?" said Charles, thinking the room uglier bydaylight than it had seemed the night before.

°°°°"Always," answered Eugenie, looking at him, "except during thevintage. Then we go and help Nanon, and live at the Abbaye desNoyers."

°°°°"Don't you ever take walks?"

°°°°"Sometimes on Sunday after vespers, when the weather is fine," saidMadame Grandet, "we walk on the bridge, or we go and watch thehaymakers."

°°°°"Have you a theatre?"

°°°°"Go to the theatre!" exclaimed Madame Grandet, "see a play! Why,monsieur, don't you know it is a mortal sin?"

°°°°"See here, monsieur," said Nanon, bringing in the eggs, "here are yourchickens,--in the shell."

°°°°"Oh! fresh eggs," said Charles, who, like all people accustomed toluxury, had already forgotten about his partridge, "that is delicious:now, if you will give me the butter, my good girl."

°°°°"Butter! then you can't have the /galette/."

°°°°"Nanon, bring the butter," cried Eugenie.

°°°°The young girl watched her cousin as he cut his sippets, with as muchpleasure as a grisette takes in a melodrama where innocence and virtuetriumph. Charles, brought up by a charming mother, improved, andtrained by a woman of fashion, had the elegant, dainty, foppishmovements of a coxcomb. The compassionate sympathy and tenderness of ayoung girl possess a power that is actually magnetic; so that Charles,finding himself the object of the attentions of his aunt and cousin,could not escape the influence of feelings which flowed towards him,as it were, and inundated him. He gave Eugenie a bright, caressinglook full of kindness,--a look which seemed itself a smile. Heperceived, as his eyes lingered upon her, the exquisite harmony offeatures in the pure face, the grace of her innocent attitude, themagic clearness of the eyes, where young love sparkled and desireshone unconsciously.

°°°°"Ah! my dear cousin, if you were in full dress at the Opera, I assureyou my aunt's words would come true,--you would make the men committhe mortal sin of envy, and the women the sin of jealousy."The compliment went to Eugenie's heart and set it beating, though shedid not understand its meaning.

°°°°"Oh! cousin," she said, "you are laughing at a poor little countrygirl."

°°°°"If you knew me, my cousin, you would know that I abhor ridicule; itwithers the heart and jars upon all my feelings." Here he swallowedhis buttered sippet very gracefully. "No, I really have not enoughmind to make fun of others; and doubtless it is a great defect. InParis, when they want to disparage a man, they say: 'He has a goodheart.' The phrase means: 'The poor fellow is as stupid as arhinoceros.' But as I am rich, and known to hit the bull's-eye atthirty paces with any kind of pistol, and even in the open fields,ridicule respects me."

°°°°"My dear nephew, that bespeaks a good heart."

°°°°"You have a very pretty ring," said Eugenie; "is there any harm inasking to see it?"

°°°°Charles held out his hand after loosening the ring, and Eugenieblushed as she touched the pink nails of her cousin with the tips ofher fingers.

°°°°"See, mamma, what beautiful workmanship."

°°°°"My! there's a lot of gold!" said Nanon, bringing in the coffee."What is that?" exclaimed Charles, laughing, as he pointed to anoblong pot of brown earthenware, glazed on the inside, and edged witha fringe of ashes, from the bottom of which the coffee-grounds werebubbling up and falling in the boiling liquid.

°°°°"It is boiled coffee," said Nanon.

°°°°"Ah! my dear aunt, I shall at least leave one beneficent trace of myvisit here. You are indeed behind the age! I must teach you to makegood coffee in a Chaptal coffee-pot."

°°°°He tried to explain the process of a Chaptal coffee-pot.

°°°°"Gracious! if there are so many things as all that to do," said Nanon,"we may as well give up our lives to it. I shall never make coffeethat way; I know that! Pray, who is to get the fodder for the cowwhile I make the coffee?"

°°°°"I will make it," said Eugenie.

°°°°"Child!" said Madame Grandet, looking at her daughter.

°°°°The word recalled to their minds the sorrow that was about to fallupon the unfortunate young man; the three women were silent, andlooked at him with an air of commiseration that caught his attention."Is anything the matter, my cousin?" he said.

°°°°"Hush!" said Madame Grandet to Eugenie, who was about to answer; "youknow, my daughter, that your father charged us not to speak tomonsieur--"

°°°°"Say Charles," said young Grandet.

°°°°"Ah! you are called Charles? What a beautiful name!" cried Eugenie.Presentiments of evil are almost always justified. At this momentNanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie, who had all three been thinkingwith a shudder of the old man's return, heard the knock whose echoesthey knew but too well.

°°°°"There's papa!" said Eugenie.

°°°°She removed the saucer filled with sugar, leaving a few pieces on thetable-cloth; Nanon carried off the egg-cup; Madame Grandet sat up likea frightened hare. It was evidently a panic, which amazed Charles, whowas wholly unable to understand it.

°°°°"Why! what is the matter?" he asked.

°°°°"My father has come," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, what of that?"

°°°°Monsieur Grandet entered the room, threw his keen eye upon the table,upon Charles, and saw the whole thing.

°°°°"Ha! ha! so you have been making a feast for your nephew; very good,very good, very good indeed!" he said, without stuttering. "When thecat's away, the mice will play."

°°°°"Feast!" thought Charles, incapable of suspecting or imagining therules and customs of the household.

°°°°"Give me my glass, Nanon," said the master

°°°°Eugenie brought the glass. Grandet drew a horn-handled knife with abig blade from his breeches' pocket, cut a slice of bread, took asmall bit of butter, spread it carefully on the bread, and ate itstanding. At this moment Charlie was sweetening his coffee. PereGrandet saw the bits of sugar, looked at his wife, who turned pale,and made three steps forward; he leaned down to the poor woman's earand said,--

°°°°"Where did you get all that sugar?"

°°°°"Nanon fetched it from Fessard's; there was none."

°°°°It is impossible to picture the profound interest the three women tookin this mute scene. Nanon had left her kitchen and stood looking intothe room to see what would happen. Charles, having tasted his coffee,found it bitter and glanced about for the sugar, which Grandet hadalready put away.

°°°°"What do you want?" said his uncle.

°°°°"The sugar."

°°°°"Put in more milk," answered the master of the house; "your coffeewill taste sweeter."

°°°°Eugenie took the saucer which Grandet had put away and placed it onthe table, looking calmly at her father as she did so. Most assuredly,the Parisian woman who held a silken ladder with her feeble arms tofacilitate the flight of her lover, showed no greater courage thanEugenie displayed when she replaced the sugar upon the table. Thelover rewarded his mistress when she proudly showed him her beautifulbruised arm, and bathed every swollen vein with tears and kisses tillit was cured with happiness. Charles, on the other hand, never so muchas knew the secret of the cruel agitation that shook and bruised theheart of his cousin, crushed as it was by the look of the old miser."You are not eating your breakfast, wife."

°°°°The poor helot came forward with a piteous look, cut herself a pieceof bread, and took a pear. Eugenie boldly offered her father somegrapes, saying,--

°°°°"Taste my preserves, papa. My cousin, you will eat some, will you not?I went to get these pretty grapes expressly for you."

°°°°"If no one stops them, they will pillage Saumur for you, nephew. Whenyou have finished, we will go into the garden; I have something totell you which can't be sweetened."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother cast a look on Charles whose meaning the youngman could not mistake.

°°°°"What is it you mean, uncle? Since the death of my poor mother"--atthese words his voice softened--"no other sorrow can touch me.""My nephew, who knows by what afflictions God is pleased to try us?"said his aunt.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta," said Grandet, "there's your nonsense beginning. I amsorry to see those white hands of yours, nephew"; and he showed theshoulder-of-mutton fists which Nature had put at the end of his ownarms. "There's a pair of hands made to pick up silver pieces. You'vebeen brought up to put your feet in the kid out of which we make thepurses we keep our money in. A bad look-out! Very bad!"

°°°°"What do you mean, uncle? I'll be hanged if I understand a single wordof what you are saying."

°°°°"Come!" said Grandet.

°°°°The miser closed the blade of his knife with a snap, drank the last ofhis wine, and opened the door.

°°°°"My cousin, take courage!"

°°°°The tone of the young girl struck terror to Charles's heart, and hefollowed his terrible uncle, a prey to disquieting thoughts. Eugenie,her mother, and Nanon went into the kitchen, moved by irresistiblecuriosity to watch the two actors in the scene which was about to takeplace in the garden, where at first the uncle walked silently ahead ofthe nephew. Grandet was not at all troubled at having to tell Charlesof the death of his father; but he did feel a sort of compassion inknowing him to be without a penny, and he sought for some phrase orformula by which to soften the communication of that cruel truth. "Youhave lost your father," seemed to him a mere nothing to say; fathersdie before their children. But "you are absolutely without means,"--all the misfortunes of life were summed up in those words! Grandetwalked round the garden three times, the gravel crunching under hisheavy step.

°°°°In the crucial moments of life our minds fasten upon the localitywhere joys or sorrows overwhelm us. Charles noticed with minuteattention the box-borders of the little garden, the yellow leaves asthey fluttered down, the dilapidated walls, the gnarled fruit-trees,--picturesque details which were destined to remain forever in hismemory, blending eternally, by the mnemonics that belong exclusivelyto the passions, with the recollections of this solemn hour."It is very fine weather, very warm," said Grandet, drawing a longbreath.

°°°°"Yes, uncle; but why--"

°°°°"Well, my lad," answered his uncle, "I have some bad news to give you.Your father is ill--"

°°°°"Then why am I here?" said Charles. "Nanon," he cried, "order post-horses! I can get a carriage somewhere?" he added, turning to hisuncle, who stood motionless.

°°°°"Horses and carriages are useless," answered Grandet, looking atCharles, who remained silent, his eyes growing fixed. "Yes, my poorboy, you guess the truth,--he is dead. But that's nothing; there issomething worse: he blew out his brains."

°°°°"My father!"

°°°°"Yes, but that's not the worst; the newspapers are all talking aboutit. Here, read that."

°°°°Grandet, who had borrowed the fatal article from Cruchot, thrust thepaper under his nephew's eyes. The poor young man, still a child,still at an age when feelings wear no mask, burst into tears."That's good!" thought Grandet; "his eyes frightened me. He'll be allright if he weeps,--That is not the worst, my poor nephew," he saidaloud, not noticing whether Charles heard him, "that is nothing; youwill get over it: but--"

°°°°"Never, never! My father! Oh, my father!"

°°°°"He has ruined you, you haven't a penny."

°°°°"What does that matter? My father! Where is my father?"

°°°°His sobs resounded horribly against those dreary walls andreverberated in the echoes. The three women, filled with pity, weptalso; for tears are often as contagious as laughter. Charles, withoutlistening further to his uncle, ran through the court and up thestaircase to his chamber, where he threw himself across the bed andhid his face in the sheets, to weep in peace for his lost parents."The first burst must have its way," said Grandet, entering theliving-room, where Eugenie and her mother had hastily resumed theirseats and were sewing with trembling hands, after wiping their eyes."But that young man is good for nothing; his head is more taken upwith the dead than with his money."

°°°°Eugenie shuddered as she heard her father's comment on the most sacredof all griefs. From that moment she began to judge him. Charles'ssobs, though muffled, still sounded through the sepulchral house; andhis deep groans, which seemed to come from the earth beneath, onlyceased towards evening, after growing gradually feebler.

°°°°"Poor young man!" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Fatal exclamation! Pere Grandet looked at his wife, at Eugenie, and atthe sugar-bowl. He recollected the extraordinary breakfast preparedfor the unfortunate youth, and he took a position in the middle of theroom.

°°°°"Listen to me," he said, with his usual composure. "I hope that youwill not continue this extravagance, Madame Grandet. I don't give youMY money to stuff that young fellow with sugar."

°°°°"My mother had nothing to do with it," said Eugenie; "it was I who--""Is it because you are of age," said Grandet, interrupting hisdaughter, "that you choose to contradict me? Remember, Eugenie--""Father, the son of your brother ought to receive from us--""Ta, ta, ta, ta!" exclaimed the cooper on four chromatic tones; "theson of my brother this, my nephew that! Charles is nothing at all tous; he hasn't a farthing, his father has failed; and when this dandyhas cried his fill, off he goes from here. I won't have himrevolutionize my household."

°°°°"What is 'failing,' father?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°"To fail," answered her father, "is to commit the most dishonorableaction that can disgrace a man."

°°°°"It must be a great sin," said Madame Grandet, "and our brother may bedamned."

°°°°"There, there, don't begin with your litanies!" said Grandet,shrugging his shoulders. "To fail, Eugenie," he resumed, "is to commita theft which the law, unfortunately, takes under its protection.People have given their property to Guillaume Grandet trusting to hisreputation for honor and integrity; he has made away with it all, andleft them nothing but their eyes to weep with. A highway robber isbetter than a bankrupt: the one attacks you and you can defendyourself, he risks his own life; but the other--in short, Charles isdishonored."

°°°°The words rang in the poor girl's heart and weighed it down with theirheavy meaning. Upright and delicate as a flower born in the depths ofa forest, she knew nothing of the world's maxims, of its deceitfularguments and specious sophisms; she therefore believed the atrociousexplanation which her father gave her designedly, concealing thedistinction which exists between an involuntary failure and anintentional one.

°°°°"Father, could you not have prevented such a misfortune?""My brother did not consult me. Besides, he owes four millions.""What is a 'million,' father?" she asked, with the simplicity of achild which thinks it can find out at once all that it wants to know."A million?" said Grandet, "why, it is a million pieces of twenty souseach, and it takes five twenty sous pieces to make five francs.""Dear me!" cried Eugenie, "how could my uncle possibly have had fourmillions? Is there any one else in France who ever had so manymillions?" Pere Grandet stroked his chin, smiled, and his wen seemedto dilate. "But what will become of my cousin Charles?"

°°°°"He is going off to the West Indies by his father's request, and hewill try to make his fortune there."

°°°°"Has he got the money to go with?"

°°°°"I shall pay for his journey as far as--yes, as far as Nantes."Eugenie sprang into his arms.

°°°°"Oh, father, how good you are!"

°°°°She kissed him with a warmth that almost made Grandet ashamed ofhimself, for his conscience galled him a little.

°°°°"Will it take much time to amass a million?" she asked.

°°°°"Look here!" said the old miser, "you know what a napoleon is? Well,it takes fifty thousand napoleons to make a million."

°°°°"Mamma, we must say a great many /neuvaines/ for him."

°°°°"I was thinking so," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"That's the way, always spending my money!" cried the father. "Do youthink there are francs on every bush?"

°°°°At this moment a muffled cry, more distressing than all the others,echoed through the garrets and struck a chill to the hearts of Eugenieand her mother.

°°°°"Nanon, go upstairs and see that he does not kill himself," saidGrandet. "Now, then," he added, looking at his wife and daughter, whohad turned pale at his words, "no nonsense, you two! I must leave you;I have got to see about the Dutchmen who are going away to-day. Andthen I must find Cruchot, and talk with him about all this."He departed. As soon as he had shut the door Eugenie and her motherbreathed more freely. Until this morning the young girl had never feltconstrained in the presence of her father; but for the last few hoursevery moment wrought a change in her feelings and ideas.

°°°°"Mamma, how many louis are there in a cask of wine?"

°°°°"Your father sells his from a hundred to a hundred and fifty francs,sometimes two hundred,--at least, so I've heard say."

°°°°"Then papa must be rich?"

°°°°"Perhaps he is. But Monsieur Cruchot told me he bought Froidfond twoyears ago; that may have pinched him."

°°°°Eugenie, not being able to understand the question of her father'sfortune, stopped short in her calculations.

°°°°"He didn't even see me, the darling!" said Nanon, coming back from hererrand. "He's stretched out like a calf on his bed and crying like theMadeleine, and that's a blessing! What's the matter with the poor dearyoung man!"

°°°°"Let us go and console him, mamma; if any one knocks, we can comedown."

°°°°Madame Grandet was helpless against the sweet persuasive tones of herdaughter's voice. Eugenie was sublime: she had become a woman. Thetwo, with beating hearts, went up to Charles's room. The door wasopen. The young man heard and saw nothing; plunged in grief, he onlyuttered inarticulate cries.

°°°°"How he loves his father!" said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°In the utterance of those words it was impossible to mistake the hopesof a heart that, unknown to itself, had suddenly become passionate.Madame Grandet cast a mother's look upon her daughter, and thenwhispered in her ear,--

°°°°"Take care, you will love him!"

°°°°"Love him!" answered Eugenie. "Ah! if you did but know what my fathersaid to Monsieur Cruchot."

°°°°Charles turned over, and saw his aunt and cousin.

°°°°"I have lost my father, my poor father! If he had told me his secrettroubles we might have worked together to repair them. My God! my poorfather! I was so sure I should see him again that I think I kissed himquite coldly--"

°°°°Sobs cut short the words.

°°°°"We will pray for him," said Madame Grandet. "Resign yourself to thewill of God."

°°°°"Cousin," said Eugenie, "take courage! Your loss is irreparable;therefore think only of saving your honor."

°°°°With the delicate instinct of a woman who intuitively puts her mindinto all things, even at the moment when she offers consolation,Eugenie sought to cheat her cousin's grief by turning his thoughtsinward upon himself.

°°°°"My honor?" exclaimed the young man, tossing aside his hair with animpatient gesture as he sat up on his bed and crossed his arms. "Ah!that is true. My uncle said my father had failed." He uttered a heart-rending cry, and hid his face in his hands. "Leave me, leave me,cousin! My God! my God! forgive my father, for he must have sufferedsorely!"

°°°°There was something terribly attractive in the sight of this youngsorrow, sincere without reasoning or afterthought. It was a virgingrief which the simple hearts of Eugenie and her mother were fitted tocomprehend, and they obeyed the sign Charles made them to leave him tohimself. They went downstairs in silence and took their accustomedplaces by the window and sewed for nearly an hour without exchanging aword. Eugenie had seen in the furtive glance that she cast about theyoung man's room--that girlish glance which sees all in the twinklingof an eye--the pretty trifles of his dressing-case, his scissors, hisrazors embossed with gold. This gleam of luxury across her cousin'sgrief only made him the more interesting to her, possibly by way ofcontrast. Never before had so serious an event, so dramatic a sight,touched the imaginations of these two passive beings, hitherto sunk inthe stillness and calm of solitude.

°°°°"Mamma," said Eugenie, "we must wear mourning for my uncle.""Your father will decide that," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°They relapsed into silence. Eugenie drew her stitches with a uniformmotion which revealed to an observer the teeming thoughts of hermeditation. The first desire of the girl's heart was to share hercousin's mourning.

°°°°VI

°°°°About four o'clock an abrupt knock at the door struck sharply on theheart of Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What can have happened to your father?" she said to her daughter.Grandet entered joyously. After taking off his gloves, he rubbed hishands hard enough to take off their skin as well, if his epidermis hadnot been tanned and cured like Russia leather,--saving, of course, theperfume of larch-trees and incense. Presently his secret escaped him."Wife," he said, without stuttering, "I've trapped them all! Our wineis sold! The Dutch and the Belgians have gone. I walked about themarket-place in front of their inn, pretending to be doing nothing.That Belgian fellow--you know who I mean--came up to me. The owners ofall the good vineyards have kept back their vintages, intending towait; well, I didn't hinder them. The Belgian was in despair; I sawthat. In a minute the bargain was made. He takes my vintage at twohundred francs the puncheon, half down. He paid me in gold; the notesare drawn. Here are six louis for you. In three months wines will havefallen."

°°°°These words, uttered in a quiet tone of voice, were nevertheless sobitterly sarcastic that the inhabitants of Saumur, grouped at thismoment in the market-place and overwhelmed by the news of the saleGrandet had just effected, would have shuddered had they heard them.Their panic would have brought the price of wines down fifty per centat once.

°°°°"Did you have a thousand puncheons this year, father?"

°°°°"Yes, little one."

°°°°That term applied to his daughter was the superlative expression ofthe old miser's joy.

°°°°"Then that makes two hundred thousand pieces of twenty sous each?""Yes, Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"Then, father, you can easily help Charles."

°°°°The amazement, the anger, the stupefaction of Belshazzar when he sawthe /Mene-Tekel-Upharsin/ before his eyes is not to be compared withthe cold rage of Grandet, who, having forgotten his nephew, now foundhim enshrined in the heart and calculations of his daughter."What's this? Ever since that dandy put foot in MY house everythinggoes wrong! You behave as if you had the right to buy sugar-plums andmake feasts and weddings. I won't have that sort of thing. I hope Iknow my duty at my time of life! I certainly sha'n't take lessons frommy daughter, or from anybody else. I shall do for my nephew what it isproper to do, and you have no need to poke your nose into it. As foryou, Eugenie," he added, facing her, "don't speak of this again, orI'll send you to the Abbaye des Noyers with Nanon, see if I don't; andno later than to-morrow either, if you disobey me! Where is thatfellow, has he come down yet?"

°°°°"No, my friend," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What is he doing then?"

°°°°"He is weeping for his father," said Eugenie.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter without finding a word to say; afterall, he was a father. He made a couple of turns up and down the room,and then went hurriedly to his secret den to think over an investmenthe was meditating in the public Funds. The thinning out of his twothousand acres of forest land had yielded him six hundred thousandfrancs: putting this sum to that derived from the sale of his poplarsand to his other gains for the last year and for the current year, hehad amassed a total of nine hundred thousand francs, without countingthe two hundred thousand he had got by the sale just concluded. Thetwenty per cent which Cruchot assured him would gain in a short timefrom the Funds, then quoted at seventy, tempted him. He figured outhis calculation on the margin of the newspaper which gave the accountof his brother's death, all the while hearing the moans of his nephew,but without listening to them. Nanon came and knocked on the wall tosummon him to dinner. On the last step of the staircase he was sayingto himself as he came down,--

°°°°"I'll do it; I shall get eight per cent interest. In two years I shallhave fifteen hundred thousand francs, which I will then draw out ingood gold,--Well, where's my nephew?"

°°°°"He says he doesn't want anything to eat," answered Nanon; "that's notgood for him."

°°°°"So much saved," retorted her master.

°°°°"That's so," she said.

°°°°"Bah! he won't cry long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the woods."The dinner was eaten in silence.

°°°°"My good friend," said Madame Grandet, when the cloth was removed, "wemust put on mourning."

°°°°"Upon my word, Madame Grandet! what will you invent next to spendmoney on? Mourning is in the heart, and not in the clothes.""But mourning for a brother is indispensable; and the Church commandsus to--"

°°°°"Buy your mourning out of your six louis. Give me a hat-band; that'senough for me."

°°°°Eugenie raised her eyes to heaven without uttering a word. Hergenerous instincts, slumbering and long repressed but now suddenly andfor the first time awakened, were galled at every turn. The eveningpassed to all appearance like a thousand other evenings of theirmonotonous life, yet it was certainly the most horrible. Eugenie sewedwithout raising her head, and did not use the workbox which Charleshad despised the night before. Madame Grandet knitted her sleeves.Grandet twirled his thumbs for four hours, absorbed in calculationswhose results were on the morrow to astonish Saumur. No one came tovisit the family that day. The whole town was ringing with the news ofthe business trick just played by Grandet, the failure of his brother,and the arrival of his nephew. Obeying the desire to gossip over theirmutual interests, all the upper and middle-class wine-growers inSaumur met at Monsieur des Grassins, where terrible imprecations werebeing fulminated against the ex-mayor. Nanon was spinning, and thewhirr of her wheel was the only sound heard beneath the gray raftersof that silent hall.

°°°°"We don't waste our tongues," she said, showing her teeth, as largeand white as peeled almonds.

°°°°"Nothing should be wasted," answered Grandet, rousing himself from hisreverie. He saw a perspective of eight millions in three years, and hewas sailing along that sheet of gold. "Let us go to bed. I will bid mynephew good-night for the rest of you, and see if he will takeanything."

°°°°Madame Grandet remained on the landing of the first storey to hear theconversation that was about to take place between the goodman and hisnephew. Eugenie, bolder than her mother, went up two stairs."Well, nephew, you are in trouble. Yes, weep, that's natural. A fatheris a father; but we must bear our troubles patiently. I am a gooduncle to you, remember that. Come, take courage! Will you have alittle glass of wine?" (Wine costs nothing in Saumur, and they offerit as tea is offered in China.) "Why!" added Grandet, "you have got nolight! That's bad, very bad; you ought to see what you are about," andhe walked to the chimney-piece. "What's this?" he cried. "A waxcandle! How the devil did they filch a wax candle? The spendthriftswould tear down the ceilings of my house to boil the fellow's eggs."Hearing these words, mother and daughter slipped back into their roomsand burrowed in their beds, with the celerity of frightened micegetting back to their holes.

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you found a mine?" said the man, coming into thechamber of his wife.

°°°°"My friend, wait; I am saying my prayers," said the poor mother in atrembling voice.

°°°°"The devil take your good God!" growled Grandet in reply.Misers have no belief in a future life; the present is their all inall. This thought casts a terrible light upon our present epoch, inwhich, far more than at any former period, money sways the laws andpolitics and morals.  Institutions, books, men, and dogmas, allconspire to undermine belief in a future life,--a belief upon whichthe social edifice has rested for eighteen hundred years. The grave,as a means of transition, is little feared in our day. The future,which once opened to us beyond the requiems, has now been importedinto the present. To obtain /per fas et nefas/ a terrestrial paradiseof luxury and earthly enjoyment, to harden the heart and macerate thebody for the sake of fleeting possessions, as the martyrs oncesuffered all things to reach eternal joys, this is now the universalthought--a thought written everywhere, even in the very laws which askof the legislator, "What do you pay?" instead of asking him, "What doyou think?" When this doctrine has passed down from the bourgeoisie tothe populace, where will this country be?

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you done?" asked the old man.

°°°°"My friend, I am praying for you."

°°°°"Very good! Good-night; to-morrow morning we will have a talk."The poor woman went to sleep like a schoolboy who, not having learnedhis lessons, knows he will see his master's angry face on the morrow.At the moment when, filled with fear, she was drawing the sheet aboveher head that she might stifle hearing, Eugenie, in her night-gown andwith naked feet, ran to her side and kissed her brow.

°°°°"Oh! my good mother," she said, "to-morrow I will tell him it was I.""No; he would send you to Noyers. Leave me to manage it; he cannot eatme."

°°°°"Do you hear, mamma?"

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"/He/ is weeping still."

°°°°"Go to bed, my daughter; you will take cold in your feet: the floor isdamp."

°°°°*****

°°°°Thus passed the solemn day which was destined to weight upon the wholelife of the rich and poor heiress, whose sleep was never again to beso calm, nor yet so pure, as it had been up to this moment. It oftenhappens that certain actions of human life seem, literally speaking,improbable, though actual. Is not this because we constantly omit toturn the stream of psychological light upon our impulsivedeterminations, and fail to explain the subtile reasons, mysteriouslyconceived in our minds, which impelled them? Perhaps Eugenie's deeppassion should be analyzed in its most delicate fibres; for it became,scoffers might say, a malady which influenced her whole existence.Many people prefer to deny results rather than estimate the force ofties and links and bonds, which secretly join one fact to another inthe moral order. Here, therefore, Eugenie's past life will offer toobservers of human nature an explanation of her naive want ofreflection and the suddenness of the emotions which overflowed hersoul. The more tranquil her life had been, the more vivid was herwomanly pity, the more simple-minded were the sentiments now developedin her soul.

°°°°Made restless by the events of the day, she woke at intervals tolisten to her cousin, thinking she heard the sighs which still echoedin her heart. Sometimes she saw him dying of his trouble, sometimesshe dreamed that he fainted from hunger. Towards morning she wascertain that she heard a startling cry. She dressed at once and ran,in the dawning light, with a swift foot to her cousin's chamber, thedoor of which he had left open. The candle had burned down to thesocket. Charles, overcome by nature, was sleeping, dressed and sittingin an armchair beside the bed, on which his head rested; he dreamed asmen dream on an empty stomach. Eugenie might weep at her ease; shemight admire the young and handsome face blotted with grief, the eyesswollen with weeping, that seemed, sleeping as they were, to wellforth tears. Charles felt sympathetically the young girl's presence;he opened his eyes and saw her pitying him.

°°°°"Pardon me, my cousin," he said, evidently not knowing the hour northe place in which he found himself.

°°°°"There are hearts who hear you, cousin, and /we/ thought you mightneed something. You should go to bed; you tire yourself by sittingthus."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, then, adieu!"

°°°°She escaped, ashamed and happy at having gone there. Innocence alonecan dare to be so bold. Once enlightened, virtue makes hercalculations as well as vice. Eugenie, who had not trembled beside hercousin, could scarcely stand upon her legs when she regained herchamber. Her ignorant life had suddenly come to an end; she reasoned,she rebuked herself with many reproaches.

°°°°"What will he think of me? He will think that I love him!"That was what she most wished him to think. An honest love has its ownprescience, and knows that love begets love. What an event for thispoor solitary girl thus to have entered the chamber of a young man!Are there not thoughts and actions in the life of love which tocertain souls bear the full meaning of the holiest espousals? An hourlater she went to her mother and dressed her as usual. Then they bothcame down and sat in their places before the window waiting forGrandet, with that cruel anxiety which, according to the individualcharacter, freezes the heart or warms it, shrivels or dilates it, whena scene is feared, a punishment expected,--a feeling so natural thateven domestic animals possess it, and whine at the slightest pain ofpunishment, though they make no outcry when they inadvertently hurtthemselves. The goodman came down; but he spoke to his wife with anabsent manner, kissed Eugenie, and sat down to table without appearingto remember his threats of the night before.

°°°°"What has become of my nephew? The lad gives no trouble.""Monsieur, he is asleep," answered Nanon.

°°°°"So much the better; he won't want a wax candle," said Grandet in ajeering tone.

°°°°This unusual clemency, this bitter gaiety, struck Madame Grandet withamazement, and she looked at her husband attentively. The goodman--here it may be well to explain that in Touraine, Anjou, Pitou, andBretagne the word "goodman," already used to designate Grandet, isbestowed as often upon harsh and cruel men as upon those of kindlytemperament, when either have reached a certain age; the title meansnothing on the score of individual gentleness--the goodman took hishat and gloves, saying as he went out,--

°°°°"I am going to loiter about the market-place and find Cruchot.""Eugenie, your father certainly has something on his mind."Grandet, who was a poor sleeper, employed half his nights in thepreliminary calculations which gave such astonishing accuracy to hisviews and observations and schemes, and secured to them the unfailingsuccess at sight of which his townsmen stood amazed. All human poweris a compound of time and patience. Powerful beings will and wait. Thelife of a miser is the constant exercise of human power put to theservice of self. It rests on two sentiments only,--self-love and self-interest; but self-interest being to a certain extent compact andintelligent self-love, the visible sign of real superiority, itfollows that self-love and self-interest are two parts of the samewhole,--egotism. From this arises, perhaps, the excessive curiosityshown in the habits of a miser's life whenever they are put before theworld. Every nature holds by a thread to those beings who challengeall human sentiments by concentrating all in one passion. Where is theman without desire? and what social desire can be satisfied withoutmoney?

°°°°Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

°°°°In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

°°°°"My cousin!"

°°°°"Yes, cousin."

°°°°"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

°°°°"Where you like."

°°°°"How do you feel?"

°°°°"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

°°°°This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

°°°°She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

°°°°That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

°°°°"What troubles you?" she said.

°°°°"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

°°°°Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

°°°°When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

°°°°"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

°°°°"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

°°°°Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

°°°°"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

°°°°"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

°°°°The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

°°°°"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

°°°°Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

°°°°"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

°°°°"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

°°°°*****

°°°°About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

°°°°VII

°°°°At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

°°°°The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

°°°°"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

°°°°"Certainly, nephew."

°°°°As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

°°°°He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

°°°°"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

°°°°"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

°°°°"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

°°°°"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

°°°°"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

°°°°"--is threatened with insolvency--"

°°°°"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

°°°°"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

°°°°"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

°°°°"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

°°°°"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

°°°°"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

°°°°"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

°°°°"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

°°°°"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

°°°°"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

°°°°Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

°°°°"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

°°°°"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

°°°°"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

°°°°"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Exactly so," said the president.

°°°°"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

°°°°"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

°°°°"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

°°°°"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

°°°°"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

°°°°"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

°°°°"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

°°°°"Bentham, an Englishman.'

°°°°"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

°°°°"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

°°°°"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

°°°°"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

°°°°"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

°°°°"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

°°°°"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

°°°°"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

°°°°"That's very true."

°°°°"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

°°°°"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

°°°°"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

°°°°"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

°°°°A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

°°°°"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

°°°°He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

°°°°"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

°°°°"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

°°°°These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

°°°°"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

°°°°"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

°°°°The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

°°°°"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

°°°°She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

°°°°"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

°°°°"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

°°°°"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

°°°°"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

°°°°"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

°°°°"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

°°°°"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

°°°°"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

°°°°"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

°°°°The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

°°°°"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

°°°°"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

°°°°"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

°°°°When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

°°°°"Are not they fuming, hein?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

°°°°"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

°°°°In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

°°°°When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

°°°°"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

°°°°So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

°°°°"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

°°°°Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

°°°°"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

°°°°"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

°°°°The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

°°°°"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

°°°°"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

°°°°"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

°°°°"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

°°°°"I didn't know where."

°°°°"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

°°°°"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

°°°°"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

°°°°"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

°°°°The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

°°°°VIII

°°°°"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

°°°°"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

°°°°"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

°°°°"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

°°°°These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

°°°°She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

°°°°"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

°°°°My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

°°°°great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

°°°°foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

°°°°fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

°°°°when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

°°°°yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

°°°°plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

°°°°If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

°°°°that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

°°°°fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

°°°°my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

°°°°me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

°°°°so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

°°°°the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

°°°°bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

°°°°killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

°°°°there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

°°°°ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

°°°°I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

°°°°last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

°°°°enterprise.

°°°°"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

°°°°She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

°°°°I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

°°°°hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

°°°°not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

°°°°even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

°°°°have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

°°°°to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

°°°°world like other men who have started young without a sou and

°°°°brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

°°°°faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

°°°°another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

°°°°so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

°°°°my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

°°°°life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

°°°°Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

°°°°young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

°°°°caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

°°°°family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

°°°°were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

°°°°Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

°°°°grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

°°°°with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

°°°°your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

°°°°expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

°°°°accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

°°°°Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

°°°°When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

°°°°ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

°°°°hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

°°°°your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

°°°°spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

°°°°cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

°°°°ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

°°°°depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

°°°°of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

°°°°poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

°°°°see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

°°°°life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

°°°°can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

°°°°necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

°°°°have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

°°°°face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

°°°°seems to me--

°°°°"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

°°°°Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

°°°°Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

°°°°"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

°°°°Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

°°°°Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

°°°°My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

°°°°friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

°°°°of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

°°°°settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

°°°°can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

°°°°have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

°°°°have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

°°°°and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

°°°°can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

°°°°horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

°°°°keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

°°°°the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

°°°°will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

°°°°these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

°°°°nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

°°°°give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

°°°°his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

°°°°travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

°°°°them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

°°°°do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

°°°°seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

°°°°British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

°°°°pay him--

°°°°"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

°°°°Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

°°°°"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

°°°°"I have read those letters."

°°°°Charles colored.

°°°°"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

°°°°"And what?" asked Charles.

°°°°"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

°°°°"My dear cousin--"

°°°°"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

°°°°Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

°°°°"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

°°°°Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

°°°°As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

°°°°"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

°°°°Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

°°°°"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

°°°°"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

°°°°"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

°°°°"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

°°°°Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

°°°°"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

°°°°"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

°°°°"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

°°°°"But he owns Froidfond."

°°°°"What is Froidfond worth?"

°°°°"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

°°°°"Nothing but a poor farm!"

°°°°"He has vineyards and fields."

°°°°"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

°°°°"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

°°°°Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

°°°°Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

°°°°It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

°°°°"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

°°°°"Nothing," answered the old man.

°°°°Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

°°°°"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

°°°°"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

°°°°"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

°°°°"Say /was/ worth--"

°°°°"Where the devil have they got any?"

°°°°"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

°°°°"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

°°°°"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

°°°°"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

°°°°"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

°°°°Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

°°°°"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

°°°°The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

°°°°"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

°°°°Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

°°°°"Dans les gardes francaises

°°°°J'avais un bon papa."

°°°°Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

°°°°"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

°°°°He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

°°°°"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

°°°°"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

°°°°"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

°°°°"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

°°°°IX

°°°°The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

°°°°For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

°°°°After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

°°°°Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

°°°°"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

°°°°"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

°°°°"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

°°°°"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

°°°°"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

°°°°"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

°°°°"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

°°°°"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

°°°°"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

°°°°"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

°°°°The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

°°°°"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

°°°°Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

°°°°"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

°°°°He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

°°°°"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

°°°°"I must," he said, bowing his head.

°°°°For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

°°°°"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

°°°°"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

°°°°When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

°°°°"Do you love me?" she said.

°°°°"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

°°°°"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

°°°°She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

°°°°"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

°°°°"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

°°°°The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

°°°°"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

°°°°"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

°°°°"Then my heart will be always there."

°°°°"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

°°°°No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

°°°°"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

°°°°At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

°°°°"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

°°°°"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

°°°°"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

°°°°Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

°°°°Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

°°°°"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

°°°°Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

°°°°In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

°°°°Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

°°°°In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

°°°°"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

°°°°Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

°°°°"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

°°°°"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

°°°°The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

°°°°But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

°°°°As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

°°°°"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

°°°°"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

°°°°"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

°°°°In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

°°°°*****

°°°°In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

°°°°"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

°°°°Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

°°°°"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

°°°°X

°°°°Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

°°°°"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

°°°°The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

°°°°"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

°°°°"Where could we have got the money?"

°°°°"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

°°°°"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

°°°°Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

°°°°"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

°°°°There was a moment's silence.

°°°°"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

°°°°"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

°°°°"I'm always gay,--

°°°°"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

°°°°Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

°°°°he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

°°°°Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

°°°°"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

°°°°The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

°°°°When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

°°°°"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

°°°°"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

°°°°"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

°°°°"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

°°°°"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

°°°°"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur."

°°°°"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

°°°°"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

°°°°Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

°°°°"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

°°°°"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

°°°°"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

°°°°"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

°°°°The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

°°°°"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

°°°°At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

°°°°"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

°°°°"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

°°°°The two women were dumb.

°°°°"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

°°°°Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

°°°°"I have not got /my/ gold."

°°°°"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

°°°°"No, I have not got it."

°°°°"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

°°°°"No."

°°°°"By the shears of my father!"

°°°°Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

°°°°"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

°°°°Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

°°°°"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

°°°°Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

°°°°"Yes, father."

°°°°She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

°°°°"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

°°°°"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

°°°°Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

°°°°"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

°°°°"What use?"

°°°°"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

°°°°"And this is mine."

°°°°"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

°°°°"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

°°°°"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

°°°°She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

°°°°"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

°°°°Eugenie was silent and impassive.

°°°°"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

°°°°"You are a child."

°°°°"Of age."

°°°°Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

°°°°He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

°°°°Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

°°°°"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

°°°°Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

°°°°"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

°°°°"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

°°°°"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

°°°°"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

°°°°Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

°°°°"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

°°°°"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

°°°°"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

°°°°"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

°°°°"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

°°°°"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

°°°°He looked fixedly at his wife.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

°°°°"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

°°°°"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

°°°°"I will ask God to punish only me."

°°°°"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

°°°°"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

°°°°"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

°°°°"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

°°°°*****

°°°°Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

°°°°"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

°°°°"It is grease I'm trying out."

°°°°"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

°°°°The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

°°°°"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

°°°°At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

°°°°"How is Madame Grandet?"

°°°°"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

°°°°"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

°°°°They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

°°°°"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

°°°°When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

°°°°"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

°°°°"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

°°°°XI

°°°°For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

°°°°"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

°°°°"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

°°°°Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

°°°°One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

°°°°"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

°°°°"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

°°°°"All" meant "him."

°°°°"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

°°°°"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

°°°°Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

°°°°"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

°°°°Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

°°°°When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

°°°°"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

°°°°At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

°°°°"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

°°°°"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

°°°°"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

°°°°On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

°°°°"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

°°°°"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

°°°°"What do you mean?"

°°°°"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

°°°°"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

°°°°These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

°°°°"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

°°°°"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

°°°°"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

°°°°"She has given away her gold!"

°°°°"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

°°°°"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

°°°°"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

°°°°"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

°°°°"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

°°°°"How much?"

°°°°"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

°°°°"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

°°°°After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

°°°°"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

°°°°"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

°°°°"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

°°°°"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

°°°°"She has not a month to live."

°°°°Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

°°°°"What can be done?"

°°°°"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

°°°°"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

°°°°"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

°°°°"The scoundrels!"

°°°°"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

°°°°"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

°°°°He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

°°°°"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

°°°°"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

°°°°But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

°°°°"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

°°°°He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

°°°°"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

°°°°"O God, have pity upon us!"

°°°°The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

°°°°"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

°°°°Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

°°°°"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

°°°°"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

°°°°"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

°°°°"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

°°°°"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

°°°°Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

°°°°"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

°°°°"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

°°°°The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

°°°°"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

°°°°"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

°°°°"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

°°°°Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

°°°°"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

°°°°Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

°°°°"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

°°°°"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

°°°°"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

°°°°"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

°°°°XII

°°°°On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

°°°°"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

°°°°"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

°°°°"Oh! father--"

°°°°"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

°°°°"What is it you wish me to do?"

°°°°"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

°°°°"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

°°°°"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

°°°°"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

°°°°"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

°°°°Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

°°°°"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

°°°°"I will do all you wish, father."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

°°°°"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

°°°°He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

°°°°"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

°°°°The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

°°°°"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

°°°°"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

°°°°"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

°°°°Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

°°°°*****

°°°°Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

°°°°At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

°°°°"Yes, my father," she would answer.

°°°°"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

°°°°Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

°°°°"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

°°°°When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

°°°°"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

°°°°"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

°°°°*****

°°°°Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

°°°°"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

°°°°The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

°°°°"Nanon, we are alone--"

°°°°"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

°°°°"The ocean is between us," she said.

°°°°While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

°°°°"Fast colors!" said the draper.

°°°°"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

°°°°"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

°°°°When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

°°°°At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

°°°°It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

°°°°"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

°°°°"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

°°°°"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

°°°°"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

°°°°Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

°°°°Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

°°°°"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

°°°°"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

°°°°XIII

°°°°While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

°°°°With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

°°°°Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

°°°°Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

°°°°"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

°°°°Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

°°°°Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

°°°°"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

°°°°*****

°°°°At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

°°°°"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

°°°°The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

°°°°"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

°°°°Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

°°°°"Read it, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

°°°°Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

°°°°My dear Cousin,--

°°°°"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

°°°°You--

°°°°"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

°°°°"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

°°°°"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

°°°°She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

°°°°My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

°°°°success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

°°°°rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

°°°°together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

°°°°des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

°°°°we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

°°°°Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

°°°°the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

°°°°be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

°°°°life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

°°°°To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

°°°°dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

°°°°realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

°°°°from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

°°°°forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

°°°°long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

°°°°Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

°°°°--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

°°°°forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

°°°°night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

°°°°to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

°°°°heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

°°°°Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

°°°°sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

°°°°deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

°°°°all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

°°°°present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

°°°°all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

°°°°Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

°°°°your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

°°°°will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

°°°°education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

°°°°with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

°°°°myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

°°°°to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

°°°°think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

°°°°be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

°°°°right to understand it and to judge it.

°°°°I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

°°°°francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

°°°°Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

°°°°me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

°°°°Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

°°°°dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

°°°°marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

°°°°advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

°°°°are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

°°°°my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

°°°°have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

°°°°year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

°°°°proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

°°°°You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

°°°°heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

°°°°years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

°°°°but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

°°°°remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

°°°°which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

°°°°and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

°°°°you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

°°°°convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

°°°°putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

°°°°of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

°°°°ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

°°°°simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

°°°°Your devoted cousin,

°°°°Charles.

°°°°"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

°°°°P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

°°°°thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

°°°°capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

°°°°am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

°°°°which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

°°°°gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

°°°°hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

°°°°"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

°°°°Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

°°°°"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

°°°°Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

°°°°This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

°°°°"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

°°°°"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

°°°°"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

°°°°"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

°°°°"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

°°°°At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

°°°°"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

°°°°"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

°°°°"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

°°°°"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

°°°°Eugenie read the following letter:--

°°°°My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

°°°°has been in Paris about a month--

°°°°"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

°°°°I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

°°°°Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

°°°°the banns are published--

°°°°"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

°°°°The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

°°°°will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

°°°°tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

°°°°business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

°°°°keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

°°°°fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

°°°°devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

°°°°/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

°°°°the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

°°°°francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

°°°°there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

°°°°creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

°°°°I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

°°°°Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

°°°°Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

°°°°for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

°°°°have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

°°°°happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

°°°°matter before you have spoken to her about it--

°°°°There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

°°°°"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

°°°°"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

°°°°"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

°°°°"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

°°°°"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

°°°°The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

°°°°"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

°°°°There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

°°°°"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

°°°°"A love game," said the notary.

°°°°Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

°°°°"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

°°°°"I am ready for all things," said the president.

°°°°"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

°°°°The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

°°°°"I will be your slave!" he said.

°°°°"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

°°°°The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

°°°°When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

°°°°The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

°°°°The president gave Charles the following letter:--

°°°°My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

°°°°place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

°°°°also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

°°°°sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

°°°°I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

°°°°Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

°°°°mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

°°°°I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

°°°°not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

°°°°according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

°°°°our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

°°°°your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

°°°°in your cousin

°°°°Eugenie.

°°°°The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

°°°°"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

°°°°"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

°°°°Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

°°°°"Seventeen mil--"

°°°°"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

°°°°"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

°°°°"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

°°°°"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

°°°°"In money?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

°°°°"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

°°°°"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

°°°°The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

°°°°"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

°°°°The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

°°°°"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

°°°°"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

°°°°Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

°°°°God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

°°°°The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

°°°°Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

°°°°End





°°°°Colonel Chabert

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage and Clara Bell

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Madame la Comtesse Ida de Bocarme nee du Chasteler.

°°°°COLONEL CHABERT

°°°°"HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!"

°°°°This exclamation was made by a lawyer's clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper--a messenger in fact--who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread with a hearty appetite. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

°°°°"Come, Simonnin, don't play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!" said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

°°°°The lawyer's messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and /billets-doux/ keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

°°°°"If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?" asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

°°°°And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

°°°°"What trick can we play that cove?" said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

°°°°Then he went on improvising:

°°°°"/But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth/--(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned-- you, as you engross it!)--/when he resumed the reins of Government, understood/--(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)--/the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!/--(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)--/and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents/--('numerous' is flattering, and ought to please the Bench)--/all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in/--Stop," said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, "that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.--Well," he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, "well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!"

°°°°And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating--"/given in/--Are you ready?"

°°°°"Yes," cried the three writers.

°°°°It all went all together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

°°°°"/Given in/--Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our /i/'s and cross our /t/'s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages."

°°°°"By Jingo!" repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

°°°°"What! have you written /by Jingo/?" cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

°°°°"Why, yes," said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor's copy, "he has written, '/We must dot our i's/' and spelt it /by Gingo/!"

°°°°All the clerks shouted with laughter.

°°°°"Why! Monsieur Hure, you take 'By Jingo' for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!" exclaimed Simonnin.

°°°°"Scratch it cleanly out," said the head clerk. "If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the 'Shoulder arms!' of the law."

°°°°"/Given in--in/?" asked Godeschal.--"Tell me when, Boucard."

°°°°"June 1814," replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

°°°°A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, "Come in!"

°°°°Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers--/broutilles/ (odds and ends) in French law jargon--and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

°°°°The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk's cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk's table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

°°°°The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,--all the glory of a lawyer's office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine --neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of /remainders/, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to /Chlet/)--a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

°°°°So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients--something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities--an attorney's office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

°°°°But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man's soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

°°°°"Where is my penknife?"

°°°°"I am eating my breakfast."

°°°°"You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen!"

°°°°These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

°°°°"Monsieur, is your master at home?"

°°°°The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, "I am deaf."

°°°°"What do you want, sir?" asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

°°°°"This is the fifth time I have called," replied the victim. "I wish to speak to M. Derville."

°°°°"On business?"

°°°°"Yes, but I can explain it to no one but--"

°°°°"M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to----"

°°°°The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers' clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the old man, "as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up."

°°°°Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

°°°°"It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning." The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in "parties," went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

°°°°"I will come again to-night," said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

°°°°The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

°°°°"What do you think of that for a cracked pot?" said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

°°°°"He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again," said a clerk.

°°°°"He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay," said the head clerk.

°°°°"No, he is a retired concierge," said Godeschal.

°°°°"I bet you he is a nobleman," cried Boucard.

°°°°"I bet you he has been a porter," retorted Godeschal. "Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body's. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch."

°°°°"He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch," cried Desroches. "It has been known!"

°°°°"No," Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, "I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic."

°°°°"I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Done with you," answered Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur! Monsieur!" shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

°°°°"What are you at now, Simonnin?" asked Boucard.

°°°°"I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know."

°°°°All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

°°°°"What can we say to him?" cried Godeschal.

°°°°"Leave it to me," replied Boucard.

°°°°The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Boucard, "will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know----"

°°°°"Chabert."

°°°°"The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?" asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

°°°°"The same, monsieur," replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

°°°°"Whew!"

°°°°"Done brown!"

°°°°"Poof!"

°°°°"Oh!"

°°°°"Ah!"

°°°°"Boum!"

°°°°"The old rogue!"

°°°°"Ting-a-ring-ting!"

°°°°"Sold again!"

°°°°"Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying," said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

°°°°There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopeia of the language would fail to represent.

°°°°"Which theatre shall we go to?"

°°°°"To the opera," cried the head clerk.

°°°°"In the first place," said Godeschal, "I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui."

°°°°"Madame Saqui is not the play."

°°°°"What is a play?" replied Godeschal. "First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen--"

°°°°"But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!" cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

°°°°"To be seen for money," Godeschal added.

°°°°"But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective," said Desroches.

°°°°"But do listen to me!"

°°°°"You are talking nonsense, my dear boy," said Boucard.

°°°°"Is Curtius' a play?" said Godeschal.

°°°°"No," said the head clerk, "it is a collection of figures--but it is a spectacle."

°°°°"I bet you a hundred francs to a sou," Godeschal resumed, "that Curtius' Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy."

°°°°"And so on, and so forth!" said Simonnin.

°°°°"You mind I don't box your ears!" said Godeschal.

°°°°The clerk shrugged their shoulders.

°°°°"Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us," he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. "On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients."

°°°°"Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow," said Boucard. "To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!"

°°°°"If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?" said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal's.

°°°°"Since nothing is settled," said Boucard, "let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in 'Nero.' Simonnin may go to the pit."

°°°°And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

°°°°"/Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen/ (in words)," said Godeschal. "Ready?"

°°°°"Yes," replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

°°°°"/And we hope that my lords on the Bench/," the extemporizing clerk went on. "Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself."

°°°°"Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines," said Boucard.

°°°°"/We hope/," Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, "/that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth/----"

°°°°"Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn't you like a glass of water?" said the little messenger.

°°°°"That imp of a boy!" said Boucard. "Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides."

°°°°"/Here set forth/," Godeschal went on. "Add /in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse/ (at full length) /de Grandlieu/."

°°°°"What!" cried the chief, "are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor--a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of 'inasmuch,' and go to the Courts myself."

°°°°This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, "Those were good times."

°°°°At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maitre Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

°°°°Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at finding the head clerk busily arranging in a convenient order on his master's dining-room table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take a seat, which the client did.

°°°°"On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you named such an hour for an interview," said the old man, with the forced mirth of a ruined man, who does his best to smile.

°°°°"The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too," replied the man, going on with his work. "M. Derville chooses this hour for studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect is freer at this hour--the only time when he can have the silence and quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case, read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business, then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money."

°°°°As he listened to this explanation, the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an expression so bereft of intelligence, that the clerk, after looking at him, thought no more about him.

°°°°A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers. The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius' collection to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This quiescence would not have been a subject for astonishment if it had not completed the supernatural aspect of the man's whole person. The old soldier was dry and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, if I may use such a vulgar expression, was as the face of the dead. Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

°°°°Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head was due to some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by Rembrandt, without a frame. The brim of the hat which covered the old man's brow cast a black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This grotesque effect, though natural, threw into relief by contrast the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a certain look of melancholy madness, and the deteriorating symptoms characteristic of senility, giving the face an indescribably ill- starred look which no human words could render.

°°°°But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had worn into this face, as drops of water from the sky falling on fine marble at last destroy its beauty. A physician, an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama at the sight of its sublime horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques which artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of the lithographic stone while chatting with a friend.

°°°°On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful reverie in silence and at night. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow to the young man; the leather lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was, "His intelligence must have escaped through that cut."

°°°°"If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!" thought Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Derville, "to whom have I the honor of speaking?"

°°°°"To Colonel Chabert."

°°°°"Which?"

°°°°"He who was killed at Eylau," replied the old man.

°°°°On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each other, as much as to say, "He is mad."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Colonel went on, "I wish to confide to you the secret of my position."

°°°°A thing worthy of note is the natural intrepidity of lawyers. Whether from the habit of receiving a great many persons, or from the deep sense of the protection conferred on them by the law, or from confidence in their missions, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing, like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

°°°°"During the day, sir," said the attorney, "I am not so miserly of my time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise. Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I may consider necessary. Speak."

°°°°Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he turned over the bundles of papers.

°°°°"You know, perhaps," said the dead man, "that I commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat's famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is a historical fact, recorded in /Victoires et Conquetes/, where it is related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor, after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the enemy's cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers, perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse. Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men, fifteen hundred of them--there might have been more! My death was announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution --for he was fond of me, was the master--wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and bring me into Hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, for he was very busy, 'Go and see whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.' These rascally saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse, and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was probably made out in accordance with the rules of military jurisprudence."

°°°°As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and relate a story so probable though so strange, the young lawyer ceased fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

°°°°"Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud," he said, interrupting the speaker, "Colonel Chabert's widow?"

°°°°"My wife--yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the custom in time of the war, and thrown into the common grave by the men ordered to bury the dead?

°°°°"Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded. Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a ball.

°°°°"When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. the little air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room. I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die. This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard--or I thought I heard, I will assert nothing--groans from the world of dead among whom I was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very indistinct, in spite of my impressions of far more acute suffering I was fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

°°°°"But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such as I have never known elsewhere--literally, the silence of the grave. At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would seem that, thanks to the carelessness and the haste with which we had been pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules! A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unhoped-for help, I must have perished. But with a fury you may imagine, I began to work my way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which had no doubt been thrown over us--I say us, as if there had been others living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms. This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw daylight, but through snow!

°°°°"At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse, who knows, had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow. However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole, where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the moment for saying, 'Respect courage in misfortune!' In short, monsieur, after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy, of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them they got me to their poor hovel.

°°°°"It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy--allow me to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which, from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

°°°°"You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave as naked as I came from my mother's; so that six months afterwards, when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert, and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man, named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

°°°°"Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence, nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond, begging my bread, treated as a madman when I have told my story, without ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert. For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample reason for shutting a man up.

°°°°"At the end of two years' detention, which I was compelled to submit to, after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, 'Here is a poor man who thinks he is Colonel Chabert' to people who would reply, 'Poor fellow!' I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh, monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I----"

°°°°Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study, which Derville respected.

°°°°"One fine day," his visitor resumed, "one spring day, they gave me the key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me. If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name, no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field- Marshal in Austria or Russia. Who knows?"

°°°°"Monsieur," said the attorney, "you have upset all my ideas. I feel as if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you."

°°°°"You are the only person," said the Colonel, with a melancholy look, "who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary documents to begin my lawsuit--"

°°°°"What lawsuit?" said the attorney, who had forgotten his client's painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

°°°°"Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a son. When I tell lawyers these things--men of sense; when I propose-- I, a beggar--to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I--a dead man--bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold politeness, which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler or a madman--it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts, under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!"

°°°°"Pray resume your narrative," said Derville.

°°°°" 'Pray resume it!' " cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer's hand. "That is the first polite word I have heard since----"

°°°°The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing and unutterable eloquence that lies in the eyes, in a gesture, even in silence, entirely convinced Derville, and touched him deeply.

°°°°"Listen, monsieur," said he; "I have this evening won three hundred francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his fortune to make. Proceed."

°°°°The Colonel, as he called himself, sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps it was in obedience to the inexplicable feeling, the latent germ in every man's heart, to which we owe the experiments of alchemists, the passion for glory, the discoveries of astronomy and of physics, everything which prompts man to expand his being by multiplying himself through deeds or ideas. In his mind the /Ego/ was now but a secondary object, just as the vanity of success or the pleasures of winning become dearer to the gambler than the object he has at stake. The young lawyer's words were as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer's office the ten gold pieces which had so long been refused him by so many people, and in so many ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured. There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us, it is like a thunderbolt; they burn us. The poor man's gratitude was too great to find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found his voice.

°°°°"Where was I?" said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier, and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in France.

°°°°"At Stuttgart. You were out of prison," said Derville.

°°°°"You know my wife?" asked the Colonel.

°°°°"Yes," said Derville, with a bow.

°°°°"What is she like?"

°°°°"Still quite charming."

°°°°The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation that is characteristic of men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, with a sort of cheerfulness--for he breathed again, the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave; he had just melted a covering of snow less easily thawed than that which had once before frozen his head; and he drew a deep breath, as if he had just escaped from a dungeon--"Monsieur, if I had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a /sans-culotte/. I was more like an Esquimaux than a Frenchman--I, who had formerly been considered one of the smartest of fops in 1799!--I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

°°°°"Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier's name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; but though I recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin's mouth opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known. It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was, then, unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former friends!

°°°°"I had once saved Boutin's life, but it was only the repayment of a debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but, like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I recalled them to his mind his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me, were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered triumphantly.

°°°°"He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon's first abdication. That news was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

°°°°"We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland, Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies. Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert. That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage, whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose only protector is the Almighty.--Nay, I am wrong! I had a father--the Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see /his Chabert/, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my wife's silence!

°°°°"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar. Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me. I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

°°°°"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu. There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me! Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

°°°°"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur, knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury, "when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

°°°°"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness; well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not know what will become of me!"

°°°°With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

°°°°"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg, it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

°°°°"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I fail, I can die--but not alone."

°°°°The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy, lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

°°°°"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

°°°°"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

°°°°"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to recover; you are rich."

°°°°This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

°°°°"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

°°°°The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville, and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

°°°°"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

°°°°The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs, and held a light for him.

°°°°"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the day."

°°°°When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

°°°°"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.

°°°°About three months after this interview, at night, in Derville's room, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville's account to his eccentric client, came to consult the attorney on a serious matter, and began by begging him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

°°°°"Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?" said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought up the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

°°°°"I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair," replied Derville. "My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty- five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism."

°°°°As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers his head clerk had laid out for him. His eye was struck by the appearance of the stamps--long, square, and triangular, in red and blue ink, which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

°°°°"Ah ha!" said he with a laugh, "here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!"

°°°°He took up the letter and opened it; but he could not read it; it was written in German.

°°°°"Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately," said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

°°°°The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, all perfectly regular and duly witnessed, and legally stamped to serve as evidence in law. He also informed him that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

°°°°"This looks like business," cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. "But look here, my boy," he went on, addressing the notary, "I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?"

°°°°"We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin," interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

°°°°"Well, was it not that ill-used man who has just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients' money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert's estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud."

°°°°"Yes," said Crottat. "It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollections, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at the time of his decease, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury."

°°°°"So that Comte Chabert's personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?"

°°°°"Consequently so it was, old fellow!" said Crottat. "You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other."

°°°°Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint- Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were rather too deep for cab wheels. Looking about him on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, "Vergniaud, dairyman." To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, all painted in white. The gate was open, and no doubt remained open all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels built in the neighborhood of Paris, which are like nothing else, not even the most wretched dwellings in the country, of which they have all the poverty without their poetry.

°°°°Indeed, in the midst of the fields, even a hovel may have a certain grace derived from the pure air, the verdure, the open country--a hill, a serpentine road, vineyards, quickset hedges, moss-grown thatch and rural implements; but poverty in Paris gains dignity only by horror. Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found a legitimate use; they had been collected from the various demolitions which are going on every day in Paris. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, "Fancy Goods." The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed to be the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil, and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall of this frail construction, which seemed rather more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred their numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes, the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough deal boards nailed so as to overlap, and shabbily thatched with rushes.

°°°°Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of the necessity for being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags that were used to clean them, fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat was munching the shoots of a starved and dusty vine that clung to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, was licking them over. The fowls, scared by Derville's approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

°°°°"And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!" said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the general effect of the squalid scene.

°°°°The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, in the hope that they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole thing tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither of them replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity, if I may combine those two words. Derville repeated his questions, but without success. Provoked by the saucy cunning of these three imps, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry which young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

°°°°The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold of his doorway with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely- colored pipe--a technical phrase to a smoker--a humble, short clay pipe of the kind called "/brule-queule/." He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join his benefactor the sooner, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

°°°°"Silence in the ranks!"

°°°°The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

°°°°"Why did you not write to me?" he said to Derville. "Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there," he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer's hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

°°°°Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; and, in fact, Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel's bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread two or three of those old fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating salt-petre, green with mould, and full of cracks, were so excessively damp that on the side where the Colonel's bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the /Bulletins de la Grande Armee/, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel's reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit to Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived in them traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

°°°°"Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?" he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

°°°°"But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!"

°°°°The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the deplorable experience which they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

°°°°"Here," said he to himself, "is a man who has of course spent my money in satisfying a trooper's three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!"

°°°°"To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----" And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--"I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace."

°°°°Derville reflected that there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums of money he had advanced, so he merely said:

°°°°"But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, but where you would have been better lodged?"

°°°°"Why," replied the Colonel, "the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me /gratis/ for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old /Egyptian/--"

°°°°"An Egyptian!"

°°°°"We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read."

°°°°"He might have lodged you better for your money," said Derville.

°°°°"Bah!" said the Colonel, "his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune . . . However, it does very well."

°°°°"Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!"

°°°°"Curse the money! To think I haven't got any!" he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

°°°°Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

°°°°"Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business," said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

°°°°"To me," said the soldier, "it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau."

°°°°"Things are not done so in the legal world," said Derville. "Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing that justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

°°°°"In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets."

°°°°"And my fortune?"

°°°°"Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?"

°°°°"Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?"

°°°°"My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs."

°°°°"And you call that justice!" said the Colonel, in dismay.

°°°°"Why, certainly--"

°°°°"A pretty kind of justice!"

°°°°"So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, that what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor."

°°°°"But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----"

°°°°"I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to."

°°°°"That would be to sell my wife!"

°°°°"With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in the position in which you are, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice."

°°°°"Let us go together."

°°°°"What, just as you are?" said the lawyer. "No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot."

°°°°"Can I possibly gain it?"

°°°°"On every count," replied Derville. "But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor."

°°°°"To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that," said he simply.

°°°°"Well, until then," Derville went on, "will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it."

°°°°Large tears gathered in the poor veteran's faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

°°°°"I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!" he cried. "I will call out: 'I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!'--The statue--he--he will know me."

°°°°"And you will find yourself in Charenton."

°°°°At this terrible name the soldier's transports collapsed.

°°°°"And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?"

°°°°"The war office!" said Derville. "Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire."

°°°°The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

°°°°His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements, which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

°°°°Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

°°°°"Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests."

°°°°"Do what you will," said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death."

°°°°"Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?"

°°°°"That is not my view of it," said the lawyer. "We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud's intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension."

°°°°"Well, proceed then," said Chabert. "I put myself entirely in your hands."

°°°°"I will send you a power of attorney to sign," said Derville. "Good- bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me."

°°°°Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer's hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him excepting with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

°°°°During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer's; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir," said he, taking Derville by the arm, "if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General's."

°°°°"And what then?" replied Derville. "What concern have you with him?-- But who are you?" said the cautious lawyer.

°°°°"I am Louis Vergniaud," he replied at once. "I have a few words to say to you."

°°°°"So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?"

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think? --Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it's neighbors' fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings."

°°°°"He?"

°°°°"Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, 'Really, General----' 'Bah!' says he, 'I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.'--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados-- Do you know him, sir?"

°°°°"But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you."

°°°°"He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it's just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----"

°°°°Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

°°°°"On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!" thought he.

°°°°"All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure."

°°°°"And will that be soon?"

°°°°"Why, yes."

°°°°"Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!" and the cowkeeper's tanned face seemed to expand.

°°°°"Now," said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, "let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but . . ."

°°°°And he set to work to study the Countess' position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves up when concocting their own plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

°°°°But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer's cleverness.

°°°°Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old /Parlement/ of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon's blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor's advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised the restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

°°°°The Emperor fell.

°°°°At the time of Comte Chabert's death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband's fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving of this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband's will; but Napoleon's hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count's marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

°°°°Then came the Restoration. The Count's political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the "Gulf of Revolution should be closed"--for this phrase of the King's, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer's preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

°°°°Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master's influence, and he made the Count's fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness of which most women have a share more or less, understood the man's motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well, that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

°°°°The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess' abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress' capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on the housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess' greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

°°°°At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert's widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

°°°°A speech he made, /a propos/ of Talleyrand's marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess' heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband's return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

°°°°"There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud's position," said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. "How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the /pairie/ by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the /Parlement/ is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King's great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess," thought he as he went up the steps.

°°°°Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

°°°°She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, while playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert's wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

°°°°"The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them."

°°°°A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

°°°°"Good-morning, Monsieur Derville," said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

°°°°"Madame," said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. "I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter."

°°°°"I am so /grieved/, M. le Comte is away--"

°°°°"I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count."

°°°°"Then I will send for Delbecq," said she.

°°°°"He would be of no use to you, clever as he is," replied Derville. "Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!"

°°°°"Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?" said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

°°°°"Madame," he said with cold and piercing solemnity, "you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point."

°°°°"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

°°°°"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

°°°°"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come."

°°°°"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

°°°°"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--"

°°°°"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

°°°°"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----"

°°°°The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's attorney, be so good as to--"

°°°°"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening."

°°°°"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

°°°°"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

°°°°"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

°°°°"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you."

°°°°"And who is he?"

°°°°"Comte Ferraud."

°°°°"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--"

°°°°"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--"

°°°°"He would defend me, monsieur."

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

°°°°"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

°°°°The Countess turned pale.

°°°°"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

°°°°"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?"

°°°°"Compromise!" said Derville.

°°°°"Does he still love me?" she said.

°°°°"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

°°°°The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

°°°°"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.

°°°°A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and seemed to have acquired youth and /impasto/, to borrow a picturesque word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture and a book.

°°°°When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville's office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off, when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a dress which, though simple, was cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was. She wore a pretty drawn bonnet lined with pink, which framed her face to perfection, softening its outlines and making it look younger.

°°°°If the clients were rejuvenescent, the office was unaltered, and presented the same picture as that described at the beginning of this story. Simonnin was eating his breakfast, his shoulder leaning against the window, which was then open, and he was staring up at the blue sky in the opening of the courtyard enclosed by four gloomy houses.

°°°°"Ah, ha!" cried the little clerk, "who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?"

°°°°"The chief is a great magician," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Then there is no trick to play on him this time?" asked Desroches.

°°°°"His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud," said Boucard.

°°°°"What next?" said Godeschal. "Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?"

°°°°"Here she is," answered Simonnin.

°°°°"So you are not deaf, you young rogue!" said Chabert, taking the gutter-jumper by the ear and twisting it, to the delight of the other clerks, who began to laugh, looking at the Colonel with the curious attention due to so singular a personage.

°°°°Comte Chabert was in Derville's private room at the moment when his wife came in by the door of the office.

°°°°"I say, Boucard, there is going to be a queer scene in the chief's room! There is a woman who can spend her days alternately, the odd with Comte Ferraud, and the even with Comte Chabert."

°°°°"And in leap year," said Godeschal, "they must settle the /count/ between them."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen, you can be heard!" said Boucard severely. "I never was in an office where there was so much jesting as there is here over the clients."

°°°°Derville had made the Colonel retire to the bedroom when the Countess was admitted.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert, I have placed you apart. If, however, you should wish it--"

°°°°"It is an attention for which I am obliged to you."

°°°°"I have drawn up the memorandum of an agreement of which you and M. Chabert can discuss the conditions, here, and now. I will go alternately to him and to you, and explain your views respectively."

°°°°"Let me see, monsieur," said the Countess impatiently.

°°°°Derville read aloud:

°°°°" 'Between the undersigned:

°°°°" 'M. Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, Marechal de Camp, and Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, living in Paris, Rue du Petit-Banquier, on the one part;

°°°°" 'And Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the aforesaid M. le Comte Chabert, /nee/--' "

°°°°"Pass over the preliminaries," said she. "Come to the conditions."

°°°°"Madame," said the lawyer, "the preamble briefly sets forth the position in which you stand to each other. Then, by the first clause, you acknowledge, in the presence of three witnesses, of whom two shall be notaries, and one the dairyman with whom your husband has been lodging, to all of whom your secret is known, and who will be absolutely silent--you acknowledge, I say, that the individual designated in the documents subjoined to the deed, and whose identity is to be further proved by an act of recognition prepared by your notary, Alexandre Crottat, is your first husband, Comte Chabert. By the second clause Comte Chabert, to secure your happiness, will undertake to assert his rights only under certain circumstances set forth in the deed.--And these," said Derville, in a parenthesis, "are none other than a failure to carry out the conditions of this secret agreement.--M. Chabert, on his part, agrees to accept judgment on a friendly suit, by which his certificate of death shall be annulled, and his marriage dissolved."

°°°°"That will not suit me in the least," said the Countess with surprise. "I will be a party to no suit; you know why."

°°°°"By the third clause," Derville went on, with imperturbable coolness, "you pledge yourself to secure to Hyacinthe Comte Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock held in his name, to revert to you at his death--"

°°°°"But it is much too dear!" exclaimed the Countess.

°°°°"Can you compromise the matter cheaper?"

°°°°"Possibly."

°°°°"But what do you want, madame?"

°°°°"I want--I will not have a lawsuit. I want--"

°°°°"You want him to remain dead?" said Derville, interrupting her hastily.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, "if twenty-four thousand francs a year are necessary, we will go to law--"

°°°°"Yes, we will go to law," said the Colonel in a deep voice, as he opened the door and stood before his wife, with one hand in his waistcoat and the other hanging by his side--an attitude to which the recollection of his adventure gave horrible significance.

°°°°"It is he," said the Countess to herself.

°°°°"Too dear!" the old soldier exclaimed. "I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you--you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved--"

°°°°"But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!" cried the Countess, in feigned amazement.

°°°°"Indeed!" said the old man, in a tone of intense irony. "Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais Royal----"

°°°°The Countess turned pale. Seeing her grow white under her rouge, the old soldier paused, touched by the acute suffering he was inflicting on the woman he had once so ardently loved; but she shot such a venomous glance at him that he abruptly went on:

°°°°"You were with La--"

°°°°"Allow me, Monsieur Derville," said the Countess to the lawyer. "You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things."

°°°°She rose and went out. Derville rushed after her; but the Countess had taken wings, and seemed to have flown from the place.

°°°°On returning to his private room, he found the Colonel in a towering rage, striding up and down.

°°°°"In those times a man took his wife where he chose," said he. "But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted to appearances. She has no heart."

°°°°"Well, Colonel, was I not right to beg you not to come?--I am now positive of your identity; when you came in, the Countess gave a little start, of which the meaning was unequivocal. But you have lost your chances. Your wife knows that you are unrecognizable."

°°°°"I will kill her!"

°°°°"Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch. Besides you might miss! That would be unpardonable. A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife.--Let me set things straight; you are only a big child. Go now. Take care of yourself; she is capable of setting some trap for you and shutting you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you against a surprise."

°°°°The unhappy Colonel obeyed his young benefactor, and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly went down the dark staircase, lost in gloomy thoughts, and crushed perhaps by the blow just dealt him--the most cruel he could feel, the thrust that could most deeply pierce his heart--when he heard the rustle of a woman's dress on the lowest landing, and his wife stood before him.

°°°°"Come, monsieur," said she, taking his arm with a gesture like those familiar to him of old. Her action and the accent of her voice, which had recovered its graciousness, were enough to allay the Colonel's wrath, and he allowed himself to be led to the carriage.

°°°°"Well, get in!" said she, when the footman had let down the step.

°°°°And as if by magic, he found himself sitting by his wife in the brougham.

°°°°"Where to?" asked the servant.

°°°°"To Groslay," said she.

°°°°The horses started at once, and carried them all across Paris.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, in a tone of voice which betrayed one of those emotions which are rare in our lives, and which agitate every part of our being. At such moments the heart, fibres, nerves, countenance, soul, and body, everything, every pore even, feels a thrill. Life no longer seems to be within us; it flows out, springs forth, is communicated as if by contagion, transmitted by a look, a tone of voice, a gesture, impressing our will on others. The old soldier started on hearing this single word, this first, terrible "monsieur!" But still it was at once a reproach and a pardon, a hope and a despair, a question and an answer. This word included them all; none but an actress could have thrown so much eloquence, so many feelings into a single word. Truth is less complete in its utterance; it does not put everything on the outside; it allows us to see what is within. The Colonel was filled with remorse for his suspicions, his demands, and his anger; he looked down not to betray his agitation.

°°°°"Monsieur," repeated she, after an imperceptible pause, "I knew you at once."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old soldier, "those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes."

°°°°Two large tears rolled hot on to his wife's hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

°°°°"Monsieur," she went on, "could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false as mine now is? If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in the privacy of my family. Ought not such a secret to remain buried in our hearts? You will forgive me, I hope, for my apparent indifference to the woes of a Chabert in whose existence I could not possibly believe. I received your letters," she hastily added, seeing in his face the objection it expressed, "but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing was unrecognizable; and after obtaining Napoleon's signature to my second marriage contract, I could not help believing that some clever swindler wanted to make a fool of me. Therefore, to avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud's peace of mind, and disturbing family ties, I was obliged to take precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right, I ask you?"

°°°°"Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot, the owl, the dolt, not to have calculated better what the consequences of such a position might be.--But where are we going?" he asked, seeing that they had reached the barrier of La Chapelle.

°°°°"To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There, monsieur, we will consider the steps to be taken. I know my duties. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? We need not inform the public of a situation, which for me has its ridiculous side, and let us preserve our dignity. You still love me," she said, with a sad, sweet gaze at the Colonel, "but have not I been authorized to form other ties? In so strange a position, a secret voice bids me trust to your kindness, which is so well known to me. Can I be wrong in taking you as the sole arbiter of my fate? Be at once judge and party to the suit. I trust in your noble character; you will be generous enough to forgive me for the consequences of faults committed in innocence. I may then confess to you: I love M. Ferraud. I believed that I had a right to love him. I do not blush to make this confession to you; even if it offends you, it does not disgrace us. I cannot conceal the facts. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother."

°°°°The Colonel with a wave of his hand bid his wife be silent, and for a mile and a half they sat without speaking a single word. Chabert could fancy he saw the two little ones before him.

°°°°"Rosine."

°°°°"Monsieur?"

°°°°"The dead are very wrong to come to life again."

°°°°"Oh, monsieur, no, no! Do not think me ungrateful. Only, you find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old man in a softened tone, "I no longer feel any resentment against you. We will forget anything," he added, with one of those smiles which always reflect a noble soul; "I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me."

°°°°The Countess gave him a flashing look full of such deep gratitude that poor Chabert would have been glad to sink again into his grave at Eylau. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion, of which the whole reward consists in the assurance that they have made the person they love happy.

°°°°"My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested," said the Countess.

°°°°The conversation turned to other subjects, for it was impossible to dwell very long on this one. Though the couple came back again and again to their singular position, either by some allusion or of serious purpose, they had a delightful drive, recalling the events of their former life together and the times of the Empire. The Countess knew how to lend peculiar charm to her reminiscences, and gave the conversation the tinge of melancholy that was needed to keep it serious. She revived his love without awakening his desires, and allowed her first husband to discern the mental wealth she had acquired while trying to accustom him to moderate his pleasure to that which a father may feel in the society of a favorite daughter.

°°°°The Colonel had known the Countess of the Empire; he found her a Countess of the Restoration.

°°°°At last, by a cross-road, they arrived at the entrance to a large park lying in the little valley which divides the heights of Margency from the pretty village of Groslay. The Countess had there a delightful house, where the Colonel on arriving found everything in readiness for his stay there, as well as for his wife's. Misfortune is a kind of talisman whose virtue consists in its power to confirm our original nature; in some men it increases their distrust and malignancy, just as it improves the goodness of those who have a kind heart.

°°°°Sorrow had made the Colonel even more helpful and good than he had always been, and he could understand some secrets of womanly distress which are unrevealed to most men. Nevertheless, in spite of his loyal trustfulness, he could not help saying to his wife:

°°°°"Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?"

°°°°"Yes," replied she, "if I found Colonel Chabert in Derville's client."

°°°°The appearance of truth she contrived to give to this answer dissipated the slight suspicions which the Colonel was ashamed to have felt. For three days the Countess was quite charming to her first husband. By tender attentions and unfailing sweetness she seemed anxious to wipe out the memory of the sufferings he had endured, and to earn forgiveness for the woes which, as she confessed, she had innocently caused him. She delighted in displaying for him the charms she knew he took pleasure in, while at the same time she assumed a kind of melancholy; for men are more especially accessible to certain ways, certain graces of the heart or of the mind which they cannot resist. She aimed at interesting him in her position, and appealing to his feelings so far as to take possession of his mind and control him despotically.

°°°°Ready for anything to attain her ends, she did not yet know what she was to do with this man; but at any rate she meant to annihilate him socially. On the evening of the third day she felt that in spite of her efforts she could not conceal her uneasiness as to the results of her manoeuvres. To give herself a minute's reprieve she went up to her room, sat down before her writing-table, and laid aside the mask of composure which she wore in Chabert's presence, like an actress who, returning to her dressing-room after a fatiguing fifth act, drops half dead, leaving with the audience an image of herself which she no longer resembles. She proceeded to finish a letter she had begun to Delbecq, whom she desired to go in her name and demand of Derville the deeds relating to Colonel Chabert, to copy them, and to come to her at once to Groslay. She had hardly finished when she heard the Colonel's step in the passage; uneasy at her absence, he had come to look for her.

°°°°"Alas!" she exclaimed, "I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable . . ."

°°°°"Why, what is the matter?" asked the good man.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing!" she replied.

°°°°She rose, left the Colonel, and went down to speak privately to her maid, whom she sent off to Paris, impressing on her that she was herself to deliver to Delbecq the letter just written, and to bring it back to the writer as soon as he had read it. Then the Countess went out to sit on a bench sufficiently in sight for the Colonel to join her as soon as he might choose. The Colonel, who was looking for her, hastened up and sat down by her.

°°°°"Rosine," said he, "what is the matter with you?"

°°°°She did not answer.

°°°°It was one of those glorious, calm evenings in the month of June, whose secret harmonies infuse such sweetness into the sunset. The air was clear, the stillness perfect, so that far away in the park they could hear the voices of some children, which added a kind of melody to the sublimity of the scene.

°°°°"You do not answer me?" the Colonel said to his wife.

°°°°"My husband----" said the Countess, who broke off, started a little, and with a blush stopped to ask him, "What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?"

°°°°"Call him your husband, my poor child," replied the Colonel, in a kind voice. "Is he not the father of your children?"

°°°°"Well, then," she said, "if he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out that I came here, alone, with a stranger, what am I to say to him? Listen, monsieur," she went on, assuming a dignified attitude, "decide my fate, I am resigned to anything--"

°°°°"My dear," said the Colonel, taking possession of his wife's hands, "I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness--"

°°°°"That is impossible!" she exclaimed, with a sudden spasmodic movement. "Remember that you would have to renounce your identity, and in an authenticated form."

°°°°"What?" said the Colonel. "Is not my word enough for you?"

°°°°The word "authenticated" fell on the old man's heart, and roused involuntary distrust. He looked at his wife in a way that made her color, she cast down her eyes, and he feared that he might find himself compelled to despise her. The Countess was afraid lest she had scared the shy modesty, the stern honesty, of a man whose generous temper and primitive virtues were known to her. Though these feelings had brought the clouds to her brow, they immediately recovered their harmony. This was the way of it. A child's cry was heard in the distance.

°°°°"Jules, leave your sister in peace," the Countess called out.

°°°°"What, are your children here?" said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but I told them not to trouble you."

°°°°The old soldier understood the delicacy, the womanly tact of so gracious a precaution, and took the Countess' hand to kiss it.

°°°°"But let them come," said he.

°°°°The little girl ran up to complain of her brother.

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"It was Jules--"

°°°°"It was her--"

°°°°Their little hands were held out to their mother, and the two childish voices mingled; it was an unexpected and charming picture.

°°°°"Poor little things!" cried the Countess, no longer restraining her tears, "I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother's heart cannot be divided; I want them, I want them."

°°°°"Are you making mamma cry?" said Jules, looking fiercely at the Colonel.

°°°°"Silence, Jules!" said the mother in a decided tone.

°°°°The two children stood speechless, examining their mother and the stranger with a curiosity which it is impossible to express in words.

°°°°"Oh yes!" she cried. "If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything . . ."

°°°°This was the decisive speech which gained all that she had hoped from it.

°°°°"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, as if he were ending a sentence already begun in his mind, "I must return underground again. I had told myself so already."

°°°°"Can I accept such a sacrifice?" replied his wife. "If some men have died to save a mistress' honor, they gave their life but once. But in this case you would be giving your life every day. No, no. It is impossible. If it were only your life, it would be nothing; but to sign a declaration that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to sacrifice your honor, and live a lie every hour of the day! Human devotion cannot go so far. Only think!--No. But for my poor children I would have fled with you by this time to the other end of the world."

°°°°"But," said Chabert, "cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn out as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but a little tobacco and the /Constitutionnel/."

°°°°The Countess melted into tears. There was a contest of generosity between the Comtesse Ferraud and Colonel Chabert, and the soldier came out victorious. One evening, seeing this mother with her children, the soldier was bewitched by the touching grace of a family picture in the country, in the shade and the silence; he made a resolution to remain dead, and, frightened no longer at the authentication of a deed, he asked what he could do to secure beyond all risk the happiness of this family.

°°°°"Do exactly as you like," said the Countess. "I declare to you that I will have nothing to do with this affair. I ought not."

°°°°Delbecq had arrived some days before, and in obedience to the Countess' verbal instructions, the intendant had succeeded in gaining the old soldier's confidence. So on the following morning Colonel Chabert went with the erewhile attorney to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had caused the notary to draw up an affidavit in such terms that, after hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

°°°°"Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!" he exclaimed.

°°°°"Indeed, monsieur," said Delbecq, "I should advise you not to sign in haste. In your place I would get at least thirty thousand francs a year out of the bargain. Madame would pay them."

°°°°After annihilating this scoundrel /emeritus/ by the lightning look of an honest man insulted, the Colonel rushed off, carried away by a thousand contrary emotions. He was suspicious, indignant, and calm again by turns.

°°°°Finally he made his way back into the park of Groslay by a gap in a fence, and slowly walked on to sit down and rest, and meditate at his ease, in a little room under a gazebo, from which the road to Saint- Leu could be seen. The path being strewn with the yellowish sand which is used instead of river-gravel, the Countess, who was sitting in the upper room of this little summer-house, did not hear the Colonel's approach, for she was too much preoccupied with the success of her business to pay the smallest attention to the slight noise made by her husband. Nor did the old man notice that his wife was in the room over him.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur Delbecq, has he signed?" the Countess asked her secretary, whom she saw alone on the road beyond the hedge of a haha.

°°°°"No, madame. I do not even know what has become of our man. The old horse reared."

°°°°"Then we shall be obliged to put him into Charenton," said she, "since we have got him."

°°°°The Colonel, who recovered the elasticity of youth to leap the haha, in the twinkling of an eye was standing in front of Delbecq, on whom he bestowed the two finest slaps that ever a scoundrel's cheeks received.

°°°°"And you may add that old horses can kick!" said he.

°°°°His rage spent, the Colonel no longer felt vigorous enough to leap the ditch. He had seen the truth in all its nakedness. The Countess' speech and Delbecq's reply had revealed the conspiracy of which he was to be the victim. The care taken of him was but a bait to entrap him in a snare. That speech was like a drop of subtle poison, bringing on in the old soldier a return of all his sufferings, physical and moral. He came back to the summer-house through the park gate, walking slowly like a broken man.

°°°°Then for him there was to be neither peace nor truce. From this moment he must begin the odious warfare with this woman of which Derville had spoken, enter on a life of litigation, feed on gall, drink every morning of the cup of bitterness. And then--fearful thought!--where was he to find the money needful to pay the cost of the first proceedings? He felt such disgust of life, that if there had been any water at hand he would have thrown himself into it; that if he had had a pistol, he would have blown out his brains. Then he relapsed into the indecision of mind which, since his conversation with Derville at the dairyman's had changed his character.

°°°°At last, having reached the kiosque, he went up to the gazebo, where little rose-windows afforded a view over each lovely landscape of the valley, and where he found his wife seated on a chair. The Countess was gazing at the distance, and preserved a calm countenance, showing that impenetrable face which women can assume when resolved to do their worst. She wiped her eyes as if she had been weeping, and played absently with the pink ribbons of her sash. Nevertheless, in spite of her apparent assurance, she could not help shuddering slightly when she saw before her her venerable benefactor, standing with folded arms, his face pale, his brow stern.

°°°°"Madame," he said, after gazing at her fixedly for a moment and compelling her to blush, "Madame, I do not curse you--I scorn you. I can now thank the chance that has divided us. I do not feel even a desire for revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on the strength of my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps have made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of the sunshine.--Farewell!"

°°°°The Countess threw herself at his feet; she would have detained him by taking his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust, saying:

°°°°"Do not touch me!"

°°°°The Countess' expression when she heard her husband's retreating steps is quite indescribable. Then, with the deep perspicacity given only by utter villainy, or by fierce worldly selfishness, she knew that she might live in peace on the word and the contempt of this loyal veteran.

°°°°Chabert, in fact, disappeared. The dairyman failed in business, and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel, perhaps, took up some similar industry for a time. Perhaps, like a stone flung into a chasm, he went falling from ledge to ledge, to be lost in the mire of rags that seethes through the streets of Paris.

°°°°Six months after this event, Derville, hearing no more of Colonel Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed that they had no doubt come to a compromise, which the Countess, out of revenge, had had arranged by some other lawyer. So one morning he added up the sums he had advanced to the said Chabert with the costs, and begged the Comtesse Ferraud to claim from M. le Comte Chabert the amount of the bill, assuming that she would know where to find her first husband.

°°°°The very next day Comte Ferraud's man of business, lately appointed President of the County Court in a town of some importance, wrote this distressing note to Derville:

°°°°"MONSIEUR,--

°°°°"Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your   client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the   individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he   came forward under false pretences. "Yours, etc.,                DELBECQ."

°°°°"One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half," cried Derville. "They don't deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand- franc notes!"

°°°°Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader to whom he wished to speak, and who was employed in the Police Court. As chance would have it, Derville went into Court Number 6 at the moment when the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months' imprisonment as a vagabond, and subsequently to be taken to the Mendicity House of Detention, a sentence which, by magistrates' law, is equivalent to perpetual imprisonment. On hearing the name of Hyacinthe, Derville looked at the deliquent, sitting between two /gendarmes/ on the bench for the accused, and recognized in the condemned man his false Colonel Chabert.

°°°°The old soldier was placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In spite of his rags, in spite of the misery stamped on his countenance, it gave evidence of noble pride. His eye had a stoical expression which no magistrate ought to have misunderstood; but as soon as a man has fallen into the hands of justice, he is no more than a moral entity, a matter of law or of fact, just as to statists he has become a zero.

°°°°When the veteran was taken back to the lock-up, to be removed later with the batch of vagabonds at that moment at the bar, Derville availed himself of the privilege accorded to lawyers of going wherever they please in the Courts, and followed him to the lock-up, where he stood scrutinizing him for some minutes, as well as the curious crew of beggars among whom he found himself. The passage to the lock-up at that moment afforded one of those spectacles which, unfortunately, neither legislators, nor philanthropists, nor painters, nor writers come to study. Like all the laboratories of the law, this ante-room is a dark and malodorous place; along the walls runs a wooden seat, blackened by the constant presence there of the wretches who come to this meeting-place of every form of social squalor, where not one of them is missing.

°°°°A poet might say that the day was ashamed to light up this dreadful sewer through which so much misery flows! There is not a spot on that plank where some crime has not sat, in embryo or matured; not a corner where a man has never stood who, driven to despair by the blight which justice has set upon him after his first fault, has not there begun a career, at the end of which looms the guillotine or the pistol-snap of the suicide. All who fall on the pavement of Paris rebound against these yellow-gray walls, on which a philanthropist who was not a speculator might read a justification of the numerous suicides complained of by hypocritical writers who are incapable of taking a step to prevent them--for that justification is written in that ante- room, like a preface to the dramas of the Morgue, or to those enacted on the Place de la Greve.

°°°°At this moment Colonel Chabert was sitting among these men--men with coarse faces, clothed in the horrible livery of misery, and silent at intervals, or talking in a low tone, for three gendarmes on duty paced to and fro, their sabres clattering on the floor.

°°°°"Do you recognize me?" said Derville to the old man, standing in front of him.

°°°°"Yes, sir," said Chabert, rising.

°°°°"If you are an honest man," Derville went on in an undertone, "how could you remain in my debt?"

°°°°The old soldier blushed as a young girl might when accused by her mother of a clandestine love affair.

°°°°"What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?" cried he in a loud voice.

°°°°"Paid me?" said Derville. "She wrote to me that you were a swindler."

°°°°The Colonel cast up his eyes in a sublime impulse of horror and imprecation, as if to call heaven to witness to this fresh subterfuge.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, in a voice that was calm by sheer huskiness, "get the gendarmes to allow me to go into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored."

°°°°At a word from Derville to the sergeant he was allowed to take his client into the room, where Hyacinthe wrote a few lines, and addressed them to the Comtesse Ferraud.

°°°°"Send her that," said the soldier, "and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is not the less there," and he laid his hand on his heart. "Yes, it is there, deep and sincere. But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all."

°°°°"What!" said Derville. "Did you not stipulate for an allowance?"

°°°°"Do not speak of it!" cried the old man. "You cannot conceive how deep my contempt is for the outside life to which most men cling. I was suddenly attacked by a sickness--disgust of humanity. When I think that Napoleon is at Saint-Helena, everything on earth is a matter of indifference to me. I can no longer be a soldier; that is my only real grief. After all," he added with a gesture of childish simplicity, "it is better to enjoy luxury of feeling than of dress. For my part, I fear nobody's contempt."

°°°°And the Colonel sat down on his bench again.

°°°°Derville went away. On returning to his office, he sent Godeschal, at that time his second clerk, to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert's lawyer.

°°°°In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now himself an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, to whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal's staff among beggars by living on at Bicetre as poor women live on at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures who are lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners, which consists in drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords to its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

°°°°"I say, Derville," said Godeschal to his traveling companion, "look at that old fellow. Isn't he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy."

°°°°Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

°°°°"That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?"

°°°°"Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious," said Godeschal.

°°°°"That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger's glare she shot at him at that moment."

°°°°This opening having excited Godeschal's curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

°°°°Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

°°°°"Good-morning, Colonel Chabert," said Derville.

°°°°"Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe," replied the veteran. "I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7," he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--"Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?" he asked after a moment's silence. "He is not married! He is very lucky!"

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Godeschal. "Would you like something to buy snuff?"

°°°°With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

°°°°"Brave troopers!"

°°°°He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

°°°°"Fire! both arms! /Vive Napoleon/!" And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

°°°°"The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish," said Derville.

°°°°"Childish! he?" said another old pauper, who was looking on. "Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, 'Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.'--'I was too young to be there,' said Hyacinthe. 'But I was at Jena.' And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions."

°°°°"What a destiny!" exclaimed Derville. "Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow," Derville went on after a pause, "there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

°°°°"How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris."

°°°°"I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches' office," replied Godeschal.

°°°°PARIS, February-March 1832.

°°°°End



°°°°Father Goriot

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage

°°°°To the great and illustrious Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a token of admiration for his works and genius. DE BALZAC.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans) is an elderly person, who for the past forty years has kept a lodging-house in the Rue Nueve- Sainte-Genevieve, in the district that lies between the Latin Quarter and the Faubourg Saint-Marcel. Her house (known in the neighborhood as the Maison Vauquer) receives men and women, old and young, and no word has ever been breathed against her respectable establishment; but, at the same time, it must be said that as a matter of fact no young woman has been under her roof for thirty years, and that if a young man stays there for any length of time it is a sure sign that his allowance must be of the slenderest. In 1819, however, the time when this drama opens, there was an almost penniless young girl among Mme. Vauquer's boarders.

°°°°That word drama has been somewhat discredited of late; it has been overworked and twisted to strange uses in these days of dolorous literature; but it must do service again here, not because this story is dramatic in the restricted sense of the word, but because some tears may perhaps be shed intra et extra muros before it is over.

°°°°Will any one without the walls of Paris understand it? It is open to doubt. The only audience who could appreciate the results of close observation, the careful reproduction of minute detail and local color, are dwellers between the heights of Montrouge and Montmartre, in a vale of crumbling stucco watered by streams of black mud, a vale of sorrows which are real and joys too often hollow; but this audience is so accustomed to terrible sensations, that only some unimaginable and well-neigh impossible woe could produce any lasting impression there. Now and again there are tragedies so awful and so grand by reason of the complication of virtues and vices that bring them about, that egotism and selfishness are forced to pause and are moved to pity; but the impression that they receive is like a luscious fruit, soon consumed. Civilization, like the car of Juggernaut, is scarcely stayed perceptibly in its progress by a heart less easy to break than the others that lie in its course; this also is broken, and Civilization continues on her course triumphant. And you, too, will do the like; you who with this book in your white hand will sink back among the cushions of your armchair, and say to yourself, "Perhaps this may amuse me." You will read the story of Father Goriot's secret woes, and, dining thereafter with an unspoiled appetite, will lay the blame of your insensibility upon the writer, and accuse him of exaggeration, of writing romances. Ah! once for all, this drama is neither a fiction nor a romance! ALL IS TRUE,--so true, that every one can discern the elements of the tragedy in his own house, perhaps in his own heart.

°°°°The lodging-house is Mme. Vauquer's own property. It is still standing in the lower end of the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, just where the road slopes so sharply down to the Rue de l'Arbalete, that wheeled traffic seldom passes that way, because it is so stony and steep. This position is sufficient to account for the silence prevalent in the streets shut in between the dome of the Pantheon and the dome of the Val-de-Grace, two conspicuous public buildings which give a yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies beneath the shadow of their leaden- hued cupolas.

°°°°In that district the pavements are clean and dry, there is neither mud nor water in the gutters, grass grows in the chinks of the walls. The most heedless passer-by feels the depressing influences of a place where the sound of wheels creates a sensation; there is a grim look about the houses, a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls. A Parisian straying into a suburb apparently composed of lodging-houses and public institutions would see poverty and dullness, old age lying down to die, and joyous youth condemned to drudgery. It is the ugliest quarter of Paris, and, it may be added, the least known. But, before all things, the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve is like a bronze frame for a picture for which the mind cannot be too well prepared by the contemplation of sad hues and sober images. Even so, step by step the daylight decreases, and the cicerone's droning voice grows hollower as the traveler descends into the Catacombs. The comparison holds good! Who shall say which is more ghastly, the sight of the bleached skulls or of dried-up human hearts?

°°°°The front of the lodging-house is at right angles to the road, and looks out upon a little garden, so that you see the side of the house in section, as it were, from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. Beneath the wall of the house front there lies a channel, a fathom wide, paved with cobble-stones, and beside it runs a graveled walk bordered by geraniums and oleanders and pomegranates set in great blue and white glazed earthenware pots. Access into the graveled walk is afforded by a door, above which the words MAISON VAUQUER may be read, and beneath, in rather smaller letters, "Lodgings for both sexes, etc."

°°°°During the day a glimpse into the garden is easily obtained through a wicket to which a bell is attached. On the opposite wall, at the further end of the graveled walk, a green marble arch was painted once upon a time by a local artist, and in this semblance of a shrine a statue representing Cupid is installed; a Parisian Cupid, so blistered and disfigured that he looks like a candidate for one of the adjacent hospitals, and might suggest an allegory to lovers of symbolism. The half-obliterated inscription on the pedestal beneath determines the date of this work of art, for it bears witness to the widespread enthusiasm felt for Voltaire on his return to Paris in 1777:

°°°°"Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;   He is, or was, or ought to be."

°°°°At night the wicket gate is replaced by a solid door. The little garden is no wider than the front of the house; it is shut in between the wall of the street and the partition wall of the neighboring house. A mantle of ivy conceals the bricks and attracts the eyes of passers-by to an effect which is picturesque in Paris, for each of the walls is covered with trellised vines that yield a scanty dusty crop of fruit, and furnish besides a subject of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her lodgers; every year the widow trembles for her vintage.

°°°°A straight path beneath the walls on either side of the garden leads to a clump of lime-trees at the further end of it; LINE- trees, as Mme. Vauquer persists in calling them, in spite of the fact that she was a de Conflans, and regardless of repeated corrections from her lodgers.

°°°°The central space between the walls is filled with artichokes and rows of pyramid fruit-trees, and surrounded by a border of lettuce, pot-herbs, and parsley. Under the lime-trees there are a few green-painted garden seats and a wooden table, and hither, during the dog-days, such of the lodgers as are rich enough to indulge in a cup of coffee come to take their pleasure, though it is hot enough to roast eggs even in the shade.

°°°°The house itself is three stories high, without counting the attics under the roof. It is built of rough stone, and covered with the yellowish stucco that gives a mean appearance to almost every house in Paris. There are five windows in each story in the front of the house; all the blinds visible through the small square panes are drawn up awry, so that the lines are all at cross purposes. At the side of the house there are but two windows on each floor, and the lowest of all are adorned with a heavy iron grating.

°°°°Behind the house a yard extends for some twenty feet, a space inhabited by a happy family of pigs, poultry, and rabbits; the wood-shed is situated on the further side, and on the wall between the wood-shed and the kitchen window hangs the meat-safe, just above the place where the sink discharges its greasy streams. The cook sweeps all the refuse out through a little door into the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, and frequently cleanses the yard with copious supplies of water, under pain of pestilence.

°°°°The house might have been built on purpose for its present uses. Access is given by a French window to the first room on the ground floor, a sitting-room which looks out upon the street through the two barred windows already mentioned. Another door opens out of it into the dining-room, which is separated from the kitchen by the well of the staircase, the steps being constructed partly of wood, partly of tiles, which are colored and beeswaxed. Nothing can be more depressing than the sight of that sitting- room. The furniture is covered with horse hair woven in alternate dull and glossy stripes. There is a round table in the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from Telemaque are depicted, the various classical personages being colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

°°°°The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the language, and which should be called the odeur de pension. The damp atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy, musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet, in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining dining- room.

°°°°The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which the lodgers' table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine, are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long table is so greasy that a waggish externe will write his name on the surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky, worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one- eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire, parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet, its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

°°°°This apartment is in all its glory at seven o'clock in the morning, when Mme. Vauquer's cat appears, announcing the near approach of his mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated countenance, and a nose like a parrot's beak set in the middle of it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn; there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and interpretation of her lodging- house, as surely as her lodging-house implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital. The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room, and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its mistress.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who "have seen a deal of trouble." She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still, "she is a good woman at bottom," said the lodgers who believed that the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

°°°°What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head. How had she lost her money? "Through trouble," was her answer. He had treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody, because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every possible misfortune.

°°°°Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress' shuffling footsteps, hastened to serve the lodgers' breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these externes usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty francs a month.

°°°°At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme. Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary- general in the service of the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred francs a year.

°°°°The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on the third floor were also let-- one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle. Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli, Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as "Father Goriot." The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of passage, to impecunious students, who like "Father Goriot" and Mlle. Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of better.

°°°°At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him. Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that their parents' hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as by those who had brought it to pass.

°°°°Above the third story there was a garret where the linen was hung to dry, and a couple of attics. Christophe, the man-of-all-work, slept in one, and Sylvie, the stout cook, in the other. Beside the seven inmates thus enumerated, taking one year with another, some eight law or medical students dined in the house, as well as two or three regular comers who lived in the neighborhood. There were usually eighteen people at dinner, and there was room, if need be, for twenty at Mme. Vauquer's table; at breakfast, however, only the seven lodgers appeared. It was almost like a family party. Every one came down in dressing-gown and slippers, and the conversation usually turned on anything that had happened the evening before; comments on the dress or appearance of the dinner contingent were exchanged in friendly confidence.

°°°°These seven lodgers were Mme. Vauquer's spoiled children. Among them she distributed, with astronomical precision, the exact proportion of respect and attention due to the varying amounts they paid for their board. One single consideration influenced all these human beings thrown together by chance. The two second- floor lodgers only paid seventy-two francs a month. Such prices as these are confined to the Faubourg Saint-Marcel and the district between La Bourbe and the Salpetriere; and, as might be expected, poverty, more or less apparent, weighed upon them all, Mme. Couture being the sole exception to the rule.

°°°°The dreary surroundings were reflected in the costumes of the inmates of the house; all were alike threadbare. The color of the men's coats were problematical; such shoes, in more fashionable quarters, are only to be seen lying in the gutter; the cuffs and collars were worn and frayed at the edges; every limp article of clothing looked like the ghost of its former self. The women's dresses were faded, old-fashioned, dyed and re-dyed; they wore gloves that were glazed with hard wear, much-mended lace, dingy ruffles, crumpled muslin fichus. So much for their clothing; but, for the most part, their frames were solid enough; their constitutions had weathered the storms of life; their cold, hard faces were worn like coins that have been withdrawn from circulation, but there were greedy teeth behind the withered lips. Dramas brought to a close or still in progress are foreshadowed by the sight of such actors as these, not the dramas that are played before the footlights and against a background of painted canvas, but dumb dramas of life, frost-bound dramas that sere hearts like fire, dramas that do not end with the actors' lives.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau, that elderly young lady, screened her weak eyes from the daylight by a soiled green silk shade with a rim of brass, an object fit to scare away the Angel of Pity himself. Her shawl, with its scanty, draggled fringe, might have covered a skeleton, so meagre and angular was the form beneath it. Yet she must have been pretty and shapely once. What corrosive had destroyed the feminine outlines? Was it trouble, or vice, or greed? Had she loved too well? Had she been a second-hand clothes dealer, a frequenter of the backstairs of great houses, or had she been merely a courtesan? Was she expiating the flaunting triumphs of a youth overcrowded with pleasures by an old age in which she was shunned by every passer-by? Her vacant gaze sent a chill through you; her shriveled face seemed like a menace. Her voice was like the shrill, thin note of the grasshopper sounding from the thicket when winter is at hand. She said that she had nursed an old gentleman, ill of catarrh of the bladder, and left to die by his children, who thought that he had nothing left. His bequest to her, a life annuity of a thousand francs, was periodically disputed by his heirs, who mingled slander with their persecutions. In spite of the ravages of conflicting passions, her face retained some traces of its former fairness and fineness of tissue, some vestiges of the physical charms of her youth still survived.

°°°°M. Poiret was a sort of automaton. He might be seen any day sailing like a gray shadow along the walks of the Jardin des Plantes, on his head a shabby cap, a cane with an old yellow ivory handle in the tips of his thin fingers; the outspread skirts of his threadbare overcoat failed to conceal his meagre figure; his breeches hung loosely on his shrunken limbs; the thin, blue-stockinged legs trembled like those of a drunken man; there was a notable breach of continuity between the dingy white waistcoat and crumpled shirt frills and the cravat twisted about a throat like a turkey gobbler's; altogether, his appearance set people wondering whether this outlandish ghost belonged to the audacious race of the sons of Japhet who flutter about on the Boulevard Italien. What devouring kind of toil could have so shriveled him? What devouring passions had darkened that bulbous countenance, which would have seemed outrageous as a caricature? What had he been? Well, perhaps he had been part of the machinery of justice, a clerk in the office to which the executioner sends in his accounts,--so much for providing black veils for parricides, so much for sawdust, so much for pulleys and cord for the knife. Or he might have been a receiver at the door of a public slaughter-house, or a sub-inspector of nuisances. Indeed, the man appeared to have been one of the beasts of burden in our great social mill; one of those Parisian Ratons whom their Bertrands do not even know by sight; a pivot in the obscure machinery that disposes of misery and things unclean; one of those men, in short, at sight of whom we are prompted to remark that, "After all, we cannot do without them."

°°°°Stately Paris ignores the existence of these faces bleached by moral or physical suffering; but, then, Paris is in truth an ocean that no line can plumb. You may survey its surface and describe it; but no matter how numerous and painstaking the toilers in this sea, there will always be lonely and unexplored regions in its depths, caverns unknown, flowers and pearls and monsters of the deep overlooked or forgotten by the divers of literature. The Maison Vauquer is one of these curious monstrosities.

°°°°Two, however, of Mme. Vauquer's boarders formed a striking contrast to the rest. There was a sickly pallor, such as is often seen in anaemic girls, in Mlle. Victorine Taillefer's face; and her unvarying expression of sadness, like her embarrassed manner and pinched look, was in keeping with the general wretchedness of the establishment in the Rue Nueve-Saint-Genevieve, which forms a background to this picture; but her face was young, there was youthfulness in her voice and elasticity in her movements. This young misfortune was not unlike a shrub, newly planted in an uncongenial soil, where its leaves have already begun to wither. The outlines of her figure, revealed by her dress of the simplest and cheapest materials, were also youthful. There was the same kind of charm about her too slender form, her faintly colored face and light-brown hair, that modern poets find in mediaeval statuettes; and a sweet expression, a look of Christian resignation in the dark gray eyes. She was pretty by force of contrast; if she had been happy, she would have been charming. Happiness is the poetry of woman, as the toilette is her tinsel. If the delightful excitement of a ball had made the pale face glow with color; if the delights of a luxurious life had brought the color to the wan cheeks that were slightly hollowed already; if love had put light into the sad eyes, then Victorine might have ranked among the fairest; but she lacked the two things which create woman a second time--pretty dresses and love- letters.

°°°°A book might have been made of her story. Her father was persuaded that he had sufficient reason for declining to acknowledge her, and allowed her a bare six hundred francs a year; he had further taken measures to disinherit his daughter, and had converted all his real estate into personalty, that he might leave it undivided to his son. Victorine's mother had died broken-hearted in Mme. Couture's house; and the latter, who was a near relation, had taken charge of the little orphan. Unluckily, the widow of the commissary-general to the armies of the Republic had nothing in the world but her jointure and her widow's pension, and some day she might be obliged to leave the helpless, inexperienced girl to the mercy of the world. The good soul, therefore, took Victorine to mass every Sunday, and to confession once a fortnight, thinking that, in any case, she would bring up her ward to be devout. She was right; religion offered a solution of the problem of the young girl's future. The poor child loved the father who refused to acknowledge her. Once every year she tried to see him to deliver her mother's message of forgiveness, but every year hitherto she had knocked at that door in vain; her father was inexorable. Her brother, her only means of communication, had not come to see her for four years, and had sent her no assistance; yet she prayed to God to unseal her father's eyes and to soften her brother's heart, and no accusations mingled with her prayers. Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exhausted the vocabulary of abuse, and failed to find words that did justice to the banker's iniquitous conduct; but while they heaped execrations on the millionaire, Victorine's words were as gentle as the moan of the wounded dove, and affection found expression even in the cry drawn from her by pain.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac was a thoroughly southern type; he had a fair complexion, blue eyes, black hair. In his figure, manner, and his whole bearing it was easy to see that he had either come of a noble family, or that, from his earliest childhood, he had been gently bred. If he was careful of his wardrobe, only taking last year's clothes into daily wear, still upon occasion he could issue forth as a young man of fashion. Ordinarily he wore a shabby coat and waistcoat, the limp black cravat, untidily knotted, that students affect, trousers that matched the rest of his costume, and boots that had been resoled.

°°°°Vautrin (the man of forty with the dyed whiskers) marked a transition stage between these two young people and the others. He was the kind of man that calls forth the remark: "He looks a jovial sort!" He had broad shoulders, a well-developed chest, muscular arms, and strong square-fisted hands; the joints of his fingers were covered with tufts of fiery red hair. His face was furrowed by premature wrinkles; there was a certain hardness about it in spite of his bland and insinuating manner. His bass voice was by no means unpleasant, and was in keeping with his boisterous laughter. He was always obliging, always in good spirits; if anything went wrong with one of the locks, he would soon unscrew it, take it to pieces, file it, oil and clean and set it in order, and put it back in its place again; "I am an old hand at it," he used to say. Not only so, he knew all about ships, the sea, France, foreign countries, men, business, law, great houses and prisons,--there was nothing that he did not know. If any one complained rather more than usual, he would offer his services at once. He had several times lent money to Mme. Vauquer, or to the boarders; but, somehow, those whom he obliged felt that they would sooner face death than fail to repay him; a certain resolute look, sometimes seen on his face, inspired fear of him, for all his appearance of easy good-nature. In the way he spat there was an imperturbable coolness which seemed to indicate that this was a man who would not stick at a crime to extricate himself from a false position. His eyes, like those of a pitiless judge, seemed to go to the very bottom of all questions, to read all natures, all feelings and thoughts. His habit of life was very regular; he usually went out after breakfast, returning in time for dinner, and disappeared for the rest of the evening, letting himself in about midnight with a latch key, a privilege that Mme. Vauquer accorded to no other boarder. But then he was on very good terms with the widow; he used to call her "mamma," and put his arm round her waist, a piece of flattery perhaps not appreciated to the full! The worthy woman might imagine this to be an easy feat; but, as a matter of fact, no arm but Vautrin's was long enough to encircle her.

°°°°It was a characteristic trait of his generously to pay fifteen francs a month for the cup of coffee with a dash of brandy in it, which he took after dinner. Less superficial observers than young men engulfed by the whirlpool of Parisian life, or old men, who took no interest in anything that did not directly concern them, would not have stopped short at the vaguely unsatisfactory impression that Vautrin made upon them. He knew or guessed the concerns of every one about him; but none of them had been able to penetrate his thoughts, or to discover his occupation. He had deliberately made his apparent good-nature, his unfailing readiness to oblige, and his high spirits into a barrier between himself and the rest of them, but not seldom he gave glimpses of appalling depths of character. He seemed to delight in scourging the upper classes of society with the lash of his tongue, to take pleasure in convicting it of inconsistency, in mocking at law and order with some grim jest worthy of Juvenal, as if some grudge against the social system rankled in him, as if there were some mystery carefully hidden away in his life.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer felt attracted, perhaps unconsciously, by the strength of the one man, and the good looks of the other; her stolen glances and secret thoughts were divided between them; but neither of them seemed to take any notice of her, although some day a chance might alter her position, and she would be a wealthy heiress. For that matter, there was not a soul in the house who took any trouble to investigate the various chronicles of misfortunes, real or imaginary, related by the rest. Each one regarded the others with indifference, tempered by suspicion; it was a natural result of their relative positions. Practical assistance not one could give, this they all knew, and they had long since exhausted their stock of condolence over previous discussions of their grievances. They were in something the same position as an elderly couple who have nothing left to say to each other. The routine of existence kept them in contact, but they were parts of a mechanism which wanted oil. There was not one of them but would have passed a blind man begging in the street, not one that felt moved to pity by a tale of misfortune, not one who did not see in death the solution of the all- absorbing problem of misery which left them cold to the most terrible anguish in others.

°°°°The happiest of these hapless beings was certainly Mme. Vauquer, who reigned supreme over this hospital supported by voluntary contributions. For her, the little garden, which silence, and cold, and rain, and drought combined to make as dreary as an Asian steppe, was a pleasant shaded nook; the gaunt yellow house, the musty odors of a back shop had charms for her, and for her alone. Those cells belonged to her. She fed those convicts condemned to penal servitude for life, and her authority was recognized among them. Where else in Paris would they have found wholesome food in sufficient quantity at the prices she charged them, and rooms which they were at liberty to make, if not exactly elegant or comfortable, at any rate clean and healthy? If she had committed some flagrant act of injustice, the victim would have borne it in silence.

°°°°Such a gathering contained, as might have been expected, the elements out of which a complete society might be constructed. And, as in a school, as in the world itself, there was among the eighteen men and women who met round the dinner table a poor creature, despised by all the others, condemned to be the butt of all their jokes. At the beginning of Eugene de Rastignac's second twelvemonth, this figure suddenly started out into bold relief against the background of human forms and faces among which the law student was yet to live for another two years to come. This laughing-stock was the retired vermicelli-merchant, Father Goriot, upon whose face a painter, like the historian, would have concentrated all the light in his picture.

°°°°How had it come about that the boarders regarded him with a half- malignant contempt? Why did they subject the oldest among their number to a kind of persecution, in which there was mingled some pity, but no respect for his misfortunes? Had he brought it on himself by some eccentricity or absurdity, which is less easily forgiven or forgotten than more serious defects? The question strikes at the root of many a social injustice. Perhaps it is only human nature to inflict suffering on anything that will endure suffering, whether by reason of its genuine humility, or indifference, or sheer helplessness. Do we not, one and all, like to feel our strength even at the expense of some one or of something? The poorest sample of humanity, the street arab, will pull the bell handle at every street door in bitter weather, and scramble up to write his name on the unsullied marble of a monument.

°°°°In the year 1813, at the age of sixty-nine or thereabouts, "Father Goriot" had sold his business and retired--to Mme. Vauquer's boarding house. When he first came there he had taken the rooms now occupied by Mme. Couture; he had paid twelve hundred francs a year like a man to whom five louis more or less was a mere trifle. For him Mme. Vauquer had made various improvements in the three rooms destined for his use, in consideration of a certain sum paid in advance, so it was said, for the miserable furniture, that is to say, for some yellow cotton curtains, a few chairs of stained wood covered with Utrecht velvet, several wretched colored prints in frames, and wall papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained. Possibly it was the careless generosity with which Father Goriot allowed himself to be overreached at this period of his life (they called him Monsieur Goriot very respectfully then) that gave Mme. Vauquer the meanest opinion of his business abilities; she looked on him as an imbecile where money was concerned.

°°°°Goriot had brought with him a considerable wardrobe, the gorgeous outfit of a retired tradesman who denies himself nothing. Mme. Vauquer's astonished eyes beheld no less than eighteen cambric- fronted shirts, the splendor of their fineness being enhanced by a pair of pins each bearing a large diamond, and connected by a short chain, an ornament which adorned the vermicelli-maker's shirt front. He usually wore a coat of corn-flower blue; his rotund and portly person was still further set off by a clean white waistcoat, and a gold chain and seals which dangled over that broad expanse. When his hostess accused him of being "a bit of a beau," he smiled with the vanity of a citizen whose foible is gratified. His cupboards (ormoires, as he called them in the popular dialect) were filled with a quantity of plate that he brought with him. The widow's eyes gleamed as she obligingly helped him to unpack the soup ladles, table-spoons, forks, cruet- stands, tureens, dishes, and breakfast services--all of silver, which were duly arranged upon shelves, besides a few more or less handsome pieces of plate, all weighing no inconsiderable number of ounces; he could not bring himself to part with these gifts that reminded him of past domestic festivals.

°°°°"This was my wife's present to me on the first anniversary of our wedding day," he said to Mme. Vauquer, as he put away a little silver posset dish, with two turtle-doves billing on the cover. "Poor dear! she spent on it all the money she had saved before we were married. Do you know, I would sooner scratch the earth with my nails for a living, madame, than part with that. But I shall be able to take my coffee out of it every morning for the rest of my days, thank the Lord! I am not to be pitied. There's not much fear of my starving for some time to come."

°°°°Finally, Mme. Vauquer's magpie's eye had discovered and read certain entries in the list of shareholders in the funds, and, after a rough calculation, was disposed to credit Goriot (worthy man) with something like ten thousand francs a year. From that day forward Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans), who, as a matter of fact, had seen forty-eight summers, though she would only own to thirty-nine of them--Mme. Vauquer had her own ideas. Though Goriot's eyes seemed to have shrunk in their sockets, though they were weak and watery, owing to some glandular affection which compelled him to wipe them continually, she considered him to be a very gentlemanly and pleasant-looking man. Moreover, the widow saw favorable indications of character in the well-developed calves of his legs and in his square-shaped nose, indications still further borne out by the worthy man's full-moon countenance and look of stupid good-nature. This, in all probability, was a strongly-build animal, whose brains mostly consisted in a capacity for affection. His hair, worn in ailes de pigeon, and duly powdered every morning by the barber from the Ecole Polytechnique, described five points on his low forehead, and made an elegant setting to his face. Though his manners were somewhat boorish, he was always as neat as a new pin and he took his snuff in a lordly way, like a man who knows that his snuff- box is always likely to be filled with maccaboy, so that when Mme. Vauquer lay down to rest on the day of M. Goriot's installation, her heart, like a larded partridge, sweltered before the fire of a burning desire to shake off the shroud of Vauquer and rise again as Goriot. She would marry again, sell her boarding-house, give her hand to this fine flower of citizenship, become a lady of consequence in the quarter, and ask for subscriptions for charitable purposes; she would make little Sunday excursions to Choisy, Soissy, Gentilly; she would have a box at the theatre when she liked, instead of waiting for the author's tickets that one of her boarders sometimes gave her, in July; the whole Eldorado of a little Parisian household rose up before Mme. Vauquer in her dreams. Nobody knew that she herself possessed forty thousand francs, accumulated sou by sou, that was her secret; surely as far as money was concerned she was a very tolerable match. "And in other respects, I am quite his equal," she said to herself, turning as if to assure herself of the charms of a form that the portly Sylvie found moulded in down feathers every morning.

°°°°For three months from that day Mme. Veuve Vauquer availed herself of the services of M. Goriot's coiffeur, and went to some expense over her toilette, expense justifiable on the ground that she owed it to herself and her establishment to pay some attention to appearances when such highly-respectable persons honored her house with their presence. She expended no small amount of ingenuity in a sort of weeding process of her lodgers, announcing her intention of receiving henceforward none but people who were in every way select. If a stranger presented himself, she let him know that M. Goriot, one of the best known and most highly- respected merchants in Paris, had singled out her boarding-house for a residence. She drew up a prospectus headed MAISON VAUQUER, in which it was asserted that hers was "one of the oldest and most highly recommended boarding-houses in the Latin Quarter." "From the windows of the house," thus ran the prospectus, "there is a charming view of the Vallee des Gobelins (so there is--from the third floor), and a BEAUTIFUL garden, EXTENDING down to AN AVENUE OF LINDENS at the further end." Mention was made of the bracing air of the place and its quiet situation.

°°°°It was this prospectus that attracted Mme. la Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil, a widow of six and thirty, who was awaiting the final settlement of her husband's affairs, and of another matter regarding a pension due to her as the wife of a general who had died "on the field of battle." On this Mme. Vauquer saw to her table, lighted a fire daily in the sitting-room for nearly six months, and kept the promise of her prospectus, even going to some expense to do so. And the Countess, on her side, addressed Mme. Vauquer as "my dear," and promised her two more boarders, the Baronne de Vaumerland and the widow of a colonel, the late Comte de Picquoisie, who were about to leave a boarding-house in the Marais, where the terms were higher than at the Maison Vauquer. Both these ladies, moreover, would be very well to do when the people at the War Office had come to an end of their formalities. "But Government departments are always so dilatory," the lady added.

°°°°After dinner the two widows went together up to Mme. Vauquer's room, and had a snug little chat over some cordial and various delicacies reserved for the mistress of the house. Mme. Vauquer's ideas as to Goriot were cordially approved by Mme. de l'Ambermesnil; it was a capital notion, which for that matter she had guessed from the very first; in her opinion the vermicelli maker was an excellent man.

°°°°"Ah! my dear lady, such a well-preserved man of his age, as sound as my eyesight--a man who might make a woman happy!" said the widow.

°°°°The good-natured Countess turned to the subject of Mme. Vauquer's dress, which was not in harmony with her projects. "You must put yourself on a war footing," said she.

°°°°After much serious consideration the two widows went shopping together--they purchased a hat adorned with ostrich feathers and a cap at the Palais Royal, and the Countess took her friend to the Magasin de la Petite Jeannette, where they chose a dress and a scarf. Thus equipped for the campaign, the widow looked exactly like the prize animal hung out for a sign above an a la mode beef shop; but she herself was so much pleased with the improvement, as she considered it, in her appearance, that she felt that she lay under some obligation to the Countess; and, though by no means open-handed, she begged that lady to accept a hat that cost twenty francs. The fact was that she needed the Countess' services on the delicate mission of sounding Goriot; the countess must sing her praises in his ears. Mme. de l'Ambermesnil lent herself very good-naturedly to this manoeuvre, began her operations, and succeeded in obtaining a private interview; but the overtures that she made, with a view to securing him for herself, were received with embarrassment, not to say a repulse. She left him, revolted by his coarseness.

°°°°"My angel," said she to her dear friend, "you will make nothing of that man yonder. He is absurdly suspicious, and he is a mean curmudgeon, an idiot, a fool; you would never be happy with him."

°°°°After what had passed between M. Goriot and Mme. de l'Ambermesnil, the Countess would no longer live under the same roof. She left the next day, forgot to pay for six months' board, and left behind her wardrobe, cast-off clothing to the value of five francs. Eagerly and persistently as Mme. Vauquer sought her quondam lodger, the Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil was never heard of again in Paris. The widow often talked of this deplorable business, and regretted her own too confiding disposition. As a matter of fact, she was as suspicious as a cat; but she was like many other people, who cannot trust their own kin and put themselves at the mercy of the next chance comer--an odd but common phenomenon, whose causes may readily be traced to the depths of the human heart.

°°°°Perhaps there are people who know that they have nothing more to look for from those with whom they live; they have shown the emptiness of their hearts to their housemates, and in their secret selves they are conscious that they are severely judged, and that they deserve to be judged severely; but still they feel an unconquerable craving for praises that they do not hear, or they are consumed by a desire to appear to possess, in the eyes of a new audience, the qualities which they have not, hoping to win the admiration or affection of strangers at the risk of forfeiting it again some day. Or, once more, there are other mercenary natures who never do a kindness to a friend or a relation simply because these have a claim upon them, while a service done to a stranger brings its reward to self-love. Such natures feel but little affection for those who are nearest to them; they keep their kindness for remoter circles of acquaintance, and show most to those who dwell on its utmost limits. Mme. Vauquer belonged to both these essentially mean, false, and execrable classes.

°°°°"If I had been there at the time," Vautrin would say at the end of the story, I would have shown her up, and that misfortune would not have befallen you. I know that kind of phiz!"

°°°°Like all narrow natures, Mme. Vauquer was wont to confine her attention to events, and did not go very deeply into the causes that brought them about; she likewise preferred to throw the blame of her own mistakes on other people, so she chose to consider that the honest vermicelli maker was responsible for her misfortune. It had opened her eyes, so she said, with regard to him. As soon as she saw that her blandishments were in vain, and that her outlay on her toilette was money thrown away, she was not slow to discover the reason of his indifference. It became plain to her at once that there was SOME OTHER ATTRACTION, to use her own expression. In short, it was evident that the hope she had so fondly cherished was a baseless delusion, and that she would "never make anything out of that man yonder," in the Countess' forcible phrase. The Countess seemed to have been a judge of character. Mme. Vauquer's aversion was naturally more energetic than her friendship, for her hatred was not in proportion to her love, but to her disappointed expectations. The human heart may find here and there a resting-place short of the highest height of affection, but we seldom stop in the steep, downward slope of hatred. Still, M. Goriot was a lodger, and the widow's wounded self-love could not vent itself in an explosion of wrath; like a monk harassed by the prior of his convent, she was forced to stifle her sighs of disappointment, and to gulp down her craving for revenge. Little minds find gratification for their feelings, benevolent or otherwise, by a constant exercise of petty ingenuity. The widow employed her woman's malice to devise a system of covert persecution. She began by a course of retrenchment--various luxuries which had found their way to the table appeared there no more.

°°°°"No more gherkins, no more anchovies; they have made a fool of me!" she said to Sylvie one morning, and they returned to the old bill of fare.

°°°°The thrifty frugality necessary to those who mean to make their way in the world had become an inveterate habit of life with M. Goriot. Soup, boiled beef, and a dish of vegetables had been, and always would be, the dinner he liked best, so Mme. Vauquer found it very difficult to annoy a boarder whose tastes were so simple. He was proof against her malice, and in desperation she spoke to him and of him slightingly before the other lodgers, who began to amuse themselves at his expense, and so gratified her desire for revenge.

°°°°Towards the end of the first year the widow's suspicions had reached such a pitch that she began to wonder how it was that a retired merchant with a secure income of seven or eight thousand livres, the owner of such magnificent plate and jewelry handsome enough for a kept mistress, should be living in her house. Why should he devote so small a proportion of his money to his expenses? Until the first year was nearly at an end, Goriot had dined out once or twice every week, but these occasions came less frequently, and at last he was scarcely absent from the dinner- table twice a month. It was hardly expected that Mme. Vauquer should regard the increased regularity of her boarder's habits with complacency, when those little excursions of his had been so much to her interest. She attributed the change not so much to a gradual diminution of fortune as to a spiteful wish to annoy his hostess. It is one of the most detestable habits of a Liliputian mind to credit other people with its own malignant pettiness.

°°°°Unluckily, towards the end of the second year, M. Goriot's conduct gave some color to the idle talk about him. He asked Mme. Vauquer to give him a room on the second floor, and to make a corresponding reduction in her charges. Apparently, such strict economy was called for, that he did without a fire all through the winter. Mme. Vauquer asked to be paid in advance, an arrangement to which M. Goriot consented, and thenceforward she spoke of him as "Father Goriot."

°°°°What had brought about this decline and fall? Conjecture was keen, but investigation was difficult. Father Goriot was not communicative; in the sham countess' phrase he was "a curmudgeon." Empty-headed people who babble about their own affairs because they have nothing else to occupy them, naturally conclude that if people say nothing of their doings it is because their doings will not bear being talked about; so the highly respectable merchant became a scoundrel, and the late beau was an old rogue. Opinion fluctuated. Sometimes, according to Vautrin, who came about this time to live in the Maison Vauquer, Father Goriot was a man who went on 'Change and DABBLED (to use the sufficiently expressive language of the Stock Exchange) in stocks and shares after he had ruined himself by heavy speculation. Sometimes it was held that he was one of those petty gamblers who nightly play for small stakes until they win a few francs. A theory that he was a detective in the employ of the Home Office found favor at one time, but Vautrin urged that "Goriot was not sharp enough for one of that sort." There were yet other solutions; Father Goriot was a skinflint, a shark of a money- lender, a man who lived by selling lottery tickets. He was by turns all the most mysterious brood of vice and shame and misery; yet, however vile his life might be, the feeling of repulsion which he aroused in others was not so strong that he must be banished from their society--he paid his way. Besides, Goriot had his uses, every one vented his spleen or sharpened his wit on him; he was pelted with jokes and belabored with hard words. The general consensus of opinion was in favor of a theory which seemed the most likely; this was Mme. Vauquer's view. According to her, the man so well preserved at his time of life, as sound as her eyesight, with whom a woman might be very happy, was a libertine who had strange tastes. These are the facts upon which Mme. Vauquer's slanders were based.

°°°°Early one morning, some few months after the departure of the unlucky Countess who had managed to live for six months at the widow's expense, Mme. Vauquer (not yet dressed) heard the rustle of a silk dress and a young woman's light footstep on the stair; some one was going to Goriot's room. He seemed to expect the visit, for his door stood ajar. The portly Sylvie presently came up to tell her mistress that a girl too pretty to be honest, "dressed like a goddess," and not a speck of mud on her laced cashmere boots, had glided in from the street like a snake, had found the kitchen, and asked for M. Goriot's room. Mme. Vauquer and the cook, listening, overheard several words affectionately spoken during the visit, which lasted for some time. When M. Goriot went downstairs with the lady, the stout Sylvie forthwith took her basket and followed the lover-like couple, under pretext of going to do her marketing.

°°°°"M. Goriot must be awfully rich, all the same, madame," she reported on her return, "to keep her in such style. Just imagine it! There was a splendid carriage waiting at the corner of the Place de l'Estrapade, and SHE got into it."

°°°°While they were at dinner that evening, Mme. Vauquer went to the window and drew the curtain, as the sun was shining into Goriot's eyes.

°°°°"You are beloved of fair ladies, M. Goriot--the sun seeks you out," she said, alluding to his visitor. "Peste! you have good taste; she was very pretty."

°°°°"That was my daughter," he said, with a kind of pride in his voice, and the rest chose to consider this as the fatuity of an old man who wishes to save appearances.

°°°°A month after this visit M. Goriot received another. The same daughter who had come to see him that morning came again after dinner, this time in evening dress. The boarders, in deep discussion in the dining-room, caught a glimpse of a lovely, fair-haired woman, slender, graceful, and much too distinguished- looking to be a daughter of Father Goriot's.

°°°°"Two of them!" cried the portly Sylvie, who did not recognize the lady of the first visit.

°°°°A few days later, and another young lady--a tall, well-moulded brunette, with dark hair and bright eyes--came to ask for M. Goriot.

°°°°"Three of them!" said Sylvie.

°°°°Then the second daughter, who had first come in the morning to see her father, came shortly afterwards in the evening. She wore a ball dress, and came in a carriage.

°°°°"Four of them!" commented Mme. Vauquer and her plump handmaid. Sylvie saw not a trace of resemblance between this great lady and the girl in her simple morning dress who had entered her kitchen on the occasion of her first visit.

°°°°At that time Goriot was paying twelve hundred francs a year to his landlady, and Mme. Vauquer saw nothing out of the common in the fact that a rich man had four or five mistresses; nay, she thought it very knowing of him to pass them off as his daughters. She was not at all inclined to draw a hard-and-fast line, or to take umbrage at his sending for them to the Maison Vauquer; yet, inasmuch as these visits explained her boarder's indifference to her, she went so far (at the end of the second year) as to speak of him as an "ugly old wretch." When at length her boarder declined to nine hundred francs a year, she asked him very insolently what he took her house to be, after meeting one of these ladies on he stairs. Father Goriot answered that the lady was his eldest daughter.

°°°°"So you have two or three dozen daughters, have you?" said Mme. Vauquer sharply.

°°°°"I have only two," her boarder answered meekly, like a ruined man who is broken in to all the cruel usage of misfortune.

°°°°Towards the end of the third year Father Goriot reduced his expenses still further; he went up to the third story, and now paid forty-five francs a month. He did without snuff, told his hairdresser that he no longer required his services, and gave up wearing powder. When Goriot appeared for the first time in this condition, an exclamation of astonishment broke from his hostess at the color of his hair--a dingy olive gray. He had grown sadder day by day under the influence of some hidden trouble; among all the faces round the table, his was the most woe-begone. There was no longer any doubt. Goriot was an elderly libertine, whose eyes had only been preserved by the skill of the physician from the malign influence of the remedies necessitated by the state of his health. The disgusting color of his hair was a result of his excesses and of the drugs which he had taken that he might continue his career. The poor old man's mental and physical condition afforded some grounds for the absurd rubbish talked about him. When his outfit was worn out, he replaced the fine linen by calico at fourteen sous the ell. His diamonds, his gold snuff-box, watch-chain and trinkets, disappeared one by one. He had left off wearing the corn-flower blue coat, and was sumptuously arrayed, summer as well as winter, in a coarse chestnut-brown coat, a plush waistcoat, and doeskin breeches. He grew thinner and thinner; his legs were shrunken, his cheeks, once so puffed out by contented bourgeois prosperity, were covered with wrinkles, and the outlines of the jawbones were distinctly visible; there were deep furrows in his forehead. In the fourth year of his residence in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve he was no longer like his former self. The hale vermicelli manufacturer, sixty-two years of age, who had looked scarce forty, the stout, comfortable, prosperous tradesman, with an almost bucolic air, and such a brisk demeanor that it did you good to look at him; the man with something boyish in his smile, had suddenly sunk into his dotage, and had become a feeble, vacillating septuagenarian.

°°°°The keen, bright blue eyes had grown dull, and faded to a steel- gray color; the red inflamed rims looked as though they had shed tears of blood. He excited feelings of repulsion in some, and of pity in others. The young medical students who came to the house noticed the drooping of his lower lip and the conformation of the facial angle; and, after teasing him for some time to no purpose, they declared that cretinism was setting in.

°°°°One evening after dinner Mme. Vauquer said half banteringly to him, "So those daughters of yours don't come to see you any more, eh?" meaning to imply her doubts as to his paternity; but Father Goriot shrank as if his hostess had touched him with a sword- point.

°°°°"They come sometimes," he said in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Aha! you still see them sometimes?" cried the students. "Bravo, Father Goriot!"

°°°°The old man scarcely seemed to hear the witticisms at his expense that followed on the words; he had relapsed into the dreamy state of mind that these superficial observers took for senile torpor, due to his lack of intelligence. If they had only known, they might have been deeply interested by the problem of his condition; but few problems were more obscure. It was easy, of course, to find out whether Goriot had really been a vermicelli manufacturer; the amount of his fortune was readily discoverable; but the old people, who were most inquisitive as to his concerns, never went beyond the limits of the Quarter, and lived in the lodging-house much as oysters cling to a rock. As for the rest, the current of life in Paris daily awaited them, and swept them away with it; so soon as they left the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, they forgot the existence of the old man, their butt at dinner. For those narrow souls, or for careless youth, the misery in Father Goriot's withered face and its dull apathy were quite incompatible with wealth or any sort of intelligence. As for the creatures whom he called his daughters, all Mme. Vauquer's boarders were of her opinion. With the faculty for severe logic sedulously cultivated by elderly women during long evenings of gossip till they can always find an hypothesis to fit all circumstances, she was wont to reason thus:

°°°°"If Father Goriot had daughters of his own as rich as those ladies who came here seemed to be, he would not be lodging in my house, on the third floor, at forty-five francs a month; and he would not go about dressed like a poor man."

°°°°No objection could be raised to these inferences. So by the end of the month of November 1819, at the time when the curtain rises on this drama, every one in the house had come to have a very decided opinion as to the poor old man. He had never had either wife or daughter; excesses had reduced him to this sluggish condition; he was a sort of human mollusk who should be classed among the capulidoe, so one of the dinner contingent, an employe at the Museum, who had a pretty wit of his own. Poiret was an eagle, a gentleman, compared with Goriot. Poiret would join the talk, argue, answer when he was spoken to; as a matter of fact, his talk, arguments, and responses contributed nothing to the conversation, for Poiret had a habit of repeating what the others said in different words; still, he did join in the talk; he was alive, and seemed capable of feeling; while Father Goriot (to quote the Museum official again) was invariably at zero--Reaumur.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac had just returned to Paris in a state of mind not unknown to young men who are conscious of unusual powers, and to those whose faculties are so stimulated by a difficult position, that for the time being they rise above the ordinary level.

°°°°Rastignac's first year of study for the preliminary examinations in law had left him free to see the sights of Paris and to enjoy some of its amusements. A student has not much time on his hands if he sets himself to learn the repertory of every theatre, and to study the ins and outs of the labyrinth of Paris. To know its customs; to learn the language, and become familiar with the amusements of the capital, he must explore its recesses, good and bad, follow the studies that please him best, and form some idea of the treasures contained in galleries and museums.

°°°°At this stage of his career a student grows eager and excited about all sorts of follies that seem to him to be of immense importance. He has his hero, his great man, a professor at the College de France, paid to talk down to the level of his audience. He adjusts his cravat, and strikes various attitudes for the benefit of the women in the first galleries at the Opera- Comique. As he passes through all these successive initiations, and breaks out of his sheath, the horizons of life widen around him, and at length he grasps the plan of society with the different human strata of which it is composed.

°°°°If he begins by admiring the procession of carriages on sunny afternoons in the Champs-Elysees, he soon reaches the further stage of envying their owners. Unconsciously, Eugene had served his apprenticeship before he went back to Angouleme for the long vacation after taking his degrees as bachelor of arts and bachelor of law. The illusions of childhood had vanished, so also had the ideas he brought with him from the provinces; he had returned thither with an intelligence developed, with loftier ambitions, and saw things as they were at home in the old manor house. His father and mother, his two brothers and two sisters, with an aged aunt, whose whole fortune consisted in annuities, lived on the little estate of Rastignac. The whole property brought in about three thousand francs; and though the amount varied with the season (as must always be the case in a vine- growing district), they were obliged to spare an unvarying twelve hundred francs out of their income for him. He saw how constantly the poverty, which they had generously hidden from him, weighed upon them; he could not help comparing the sisters, who had seemed so beautiful to his boyish eyes, with women in Paris, who had realized the beauty of his dreams. The uncertain future of the whole family depended upon him. It did not escape his eyes that not a crumb was wasted in the house, nor that the wine they drank was made from the second pressing; a multitude of small things, which it is useless to speak of in detail here, made him burn to distinguish himself, and his ambition to succeed increased tenfold.

°°°°He meant, like all great souls, that his success should be owing entirely to his merits; but his was pre-eminently a southern temperament, the execution of his plans was sure to be marred by the vertigo that seizes on youth when youth sees itself alone in a wide sea, uncertain how to spend its energies, whither to steer its course, how to adapt its sails to the winds. At first he determined to fling himself heart and soul into his work, but he was diverted from this purpose by the need of society and connections; then he saw how great an influence women exert in social life, and suddenly made up his mind to go out into this world to seek a protectress there. Surely a clever and high- spirited young man, whose wit and courage were set off to advantage by a graceful figure and the vigorous kind of beauty that readily strikes a woman's imagination, need not despair of finding a protectress. These ideas occurred to him in his country walks with his sisters, whom he had once joined so gaily. The girls thought him very much changed.

°°°°His aunt, Mme. de Marcillac, had been presented at court, and had moved among the brightest heights of that lofty region. Suddenly the young man's ambition discerned in those recollections of hers, which had been like nursery fairy tales to her nephews and nieces, the elements of a social success at least as important as the success which he had achieved at the Ecole de Droit. He began to ask his aunt about those relations; some of the old ties might still hold good. After much shaking of the branches of the family tree, the old lady came to the conclusion that of all persons who could be useful to her nephew among the selfish genus of rich relations, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was the least likely to refuse. To this lady, therefore, she wrote in the old-fashioned style, recommending Eugene to her; pointing out to her nephew that if he succeeded in pleasing Mme. de Beauseant, the Vicomtesse would introduce him to other relations. A few days after his return to Paris, therefore, Rastignac sent his aunt's letter to Mme. de Beauseant. The Vicomtesse replied by an invitation to a ball for the following evening. This was the position of affairs at the Maison Vauquer at the end of November 1819.

°°°°A few days later, after Mme. de Beauseant's ball, Eugene came in at two o'clock in the morning. The persevering student meant to make up for the lost time by working until daylight. It was the first time that he had attempted to spend the night in this way in that silent quarter. The spell of a factitious energy was upon him; he had beheld the pomp and splendor of the world. He had not dined at the Maison Vauquer; the boarders probably would think that he would walk home at daybreak from the dance, as he had done sometimes on former occasions, after a fete at the Prado, or a ball at the Odeon, splashing his silk stockings thereby, and ruining his pumps.

°°°°It so happened that Christophe took a look into the street before drawing the bolts of the door; and Rastignac, coming in at that moment, could go up to his room without making any noise, followed by Christophe, who made a great deal. Eugene exchanged his dress suit for a shabby overcoat and slippers, kindled a fire with some blocks of patent fuel, and prepared for his night's work in such a sort that the faint sounds he made were drowned by Christophe's heavy tramp on the stairs.

°°°°Eugene sat absorbed in thought for a few moments before plunging into his law books. He had just become aware of the fact that the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was one of the queens of fashion, that her house was thought to be the pleasantest in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. And not only so, she was, by right of her fortune, and the name she bore, one of the most conspicuous figures in that aristocratic world. Thanks to the aunt, thanks to Mme. de Marcillac's letter of introduction, the poor student had been kindly received in that house before he knew the extent of the favor thus shown to him. It was almost like a patent of nobility to be admitted to those gilded salons; he had appeared in the most exclusive circle in Paris, and now all doors were open for him. Eugene had been dazzled at first by the brilliant assembly, and had scarcely exchanged a few words with the Vicomtesse; he had been content to single out a goddess among this throng of Parisian divinities, one of those women who are sure to attract a young man's fancy.

°°°°The Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud was tall and gracefully made; she had one of the prettiest figures in Paris. Imagine a pair of great dark eyes, a magnificently moulded hand, a shapely foot. There was a fiery energy in her movements; the Marquis de Ronquerolles had called her "a thoroughbred," "a pure pedigree," these figures of speech have replaced the "heavenly angel" and Ossianic nomenclature; the old mythology of love is extinct, doomed to perish by modern dandyism. But for Rastignac, Mme. Anastasie de Restaud was the woman for whom he had sighed. He had contrived to write his name twice upon the list of partners upon her fan, and had snatched a few words with her during the first quadrille.

°°°°"Where shall I meet you again, Madame?" he asked abruptly, and the tones of his voice were full of the vehement energy that women like so well.

°°°°"Oh, everywhere!" said she, "in the Bois, at the Bouffons, in my own house."

°°°°With the impetuosity of his adventurous southern temper, he did all he could to cultivate an acquaintance with this lovely countess, making the best of his opportunities in the quadrille and during a waltz that she gave him. When he told her that he was a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's, the Countess, whom he took for a great lady, asked him to call at her house, and after her parting smile, Rastignac felt convinced that he must make this visit. He was so lucky as to light upon some one who did not laugh at his ignorance, a fatal defect among the gilded and insolent youth of that period; the coterie of Maulincourts, Maximes de Trailles, de Marsays, Ronquerolles, Ajuda-Pintos, and Vandenesses who shone there in all the glory of coxcombry among the best-dressed women of fashion in Paris--Lady Brandon, the Duchesse de Langeais, the Comtesse de Kergarouet, Mme. de Serizy, the Duchesse de Carigliano, the Comtesse Ferraud, Mme. de Lanty, the Marquise d'Aiglemont, Mme. Firmiani, the Marquise de Listomere and the Marquise d'Espard, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and the Grandlieus. Luckily, therefore, for him, the novice happened upon the Marquis de Montriveau, the lover of the Duchesse de Langeais, a general as simple as a child; from him Rastignac learned that the Comtesse lived in the Rue du Helder.

°°°°Ah, what it is to be young, eager to see the world, greedily on the watch for any chance that brings you nearer the woman of your dreams, and behold two houses open their doors to you! To set foot in the Vicomtesse de Beauseant's house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; to fall on your knees before a Comtesse de Restaud in the Chaussee d'Antin; to look at one glance across a vista of Paris drawing-rooms, conscious that, possessing sufficient good looks, you may hope to find aid and protection there in a feminine heart! To feel ambitious enough to spurn the tight-rope on which you must walk with the steady head of an acrobat for whom a fall is impossible, and to find in a charming woman the best of all balancing poles.

°°°°He sat there with his thoughts for a while, Law on the one hand, and Poverty on the other, beholding a radiant vision of a woman rise above the dull, smouldering fire. Who would not have paused and questioned the future as Eugene was doing? who would not have pictured it full of success? His wondering thoughts took wings; he was transported out of the present into that blissful future; he was sitting by Mme. de Restaud's side, when a sort of sigh, like the grunt of an overburdened St. Joseph, broke the silence of the night. It vibrated through the student, who took the sound for a death groan. He opened his door noiselessly, went out upon the landing, and saw a thin streak of light under Father Goriot's door. Eugene feared that his neighbor had been taken ill; he went over and looked through the keyhole; the old man was busily engaged in an occupation so singular and so suspicious that Rastignac thought he was only doing a piece of necessary service to society to watch the self-styled vermicelli maker's nocturnal industries.

°°°°The table was upturned, and Goriot had doubtless in some way secured a silver plate and cup to the bar before knotting a thick rope round them; he was pulling at this rope with such enormous force that they were being crushed and twisted out of shape; to all appearance he meant to convert the richly wrought metal into ingots.

°°°°"Peste! what a man!" said Rastignac, as he watched Goriot's muscular arms; there was not a sound in the room while the old man, with the aid of the rope, was kneading the silver like dough. "Was he then, indeed, a thief, or a receiver of stolen goods, who affected imbecility and decrepitude, and lived like a beggar that he might carry on his pursuits the more securely?" Eugene stood for a moment revolving these questions, then he looked again through the keyhole.

°°°°Father Goriot had unwound his coil of rope; he had covered the table with a blanket, and was now employed in rolling the flattened mass of silver into a bar, an operation which he performed with marvelous dexterity.

°°°°"Why, he must be as strong as Augustus, King of Poland!" said Eugene to himself when the bar was nearly finished.

°°°°Father Goriot looked sadly at his handiwork, tears fell from his eyes, he blew out the dip which had served him for a light while he manipulated the silver, and Eugene heard him sigh as he lay down again.

°°°°"He is mad," thought the student.

°°°°"Poor child!" Father Goriot said aloud. Rastignac, hearing those words, concluded to keep silence; he would not hastily condemn his neighbor. He was just in the doorway of his room when a strange sound from the staircase below reached his ears; it might have been made by two men coming up in list slippers. Eugene listened; two men there certainly were, he could hear their breathing. Yet there had been no sound of opening the street door, no footsteps in the passage. Suddenly, too, he saw a faint gleam of light on the second story; it came from M. Vautrin's room.

°°°°"There are a good many mysteries here for a lodging-house!" he said to himself.

°°°°He went part of the way downstairs and listened again. The rattle of gold reached his ears. In another moment the light was put out, and again he distinctly heard the breathing of two men, but no sound of a door being opened or shut. The two men went downstairs, the faint sounds growing fainter as they went.

°°°°"Who is there?" cried Mme. Vauquer out of her bedroom window.

°°°°"I, Mme. Vauquer," answered Vautrin's deep bass voice. "I am coming in."

°°°°"That is odd! Christophe drew the bolts," said Eugene, going back to his room. "You have to sit up at night, it seems, if you really mean to know all that is going on about you in Paris."

°°°°These incidents turned his thought from his ambitious dreams; he betook himself to his work, but his thought wandered back to Father Goriot's suspicious occupation; Mme. de Restaud's face swam again and again before his eyes like a vision of a brilliant future; and at last he lay down and slept with clenched fists. When a young man makes up his mind that he will work all night, the chances are that seven times out of ten he will sleep till morning. Such vigils do not begin before we are turned twenty.

°°°°The next morning Paris was wrapped in one of the dense fogs that throw the most punctual people out in their calculations as to the time; even the most business-like folk fail to keep their appointments in such weather, and ordinary mortals wake up at noon and fancy it is eight o'clock. On this morning it was half- past nine, and Mme. Vauquer still lay abed. Christophe was late, Sylvie was late, but the two sat comfortably taking their coffee as usual. It was Sylvie's custom to take the cream off the milk destined for the boarders' breakfast for her own, and to boil the remainder for some time, so that madame should not discover this illegal exaction.

°°°°"Sylvie," said Christophe, as he dipped a piece of toast into the coffee, "M. Vautrin, who is not such a bad sort, all the same, had two people come to see him again last night. If madame says anything, mind you say nothing about it."

°°°°"Has he given you something?"

°°°°"He gave me a five-franc piece this month, which is as good as saying, 'Hold your tongue.' "

°°°°"Except him and Mme. Couture, who doesn't look twice at every penny, there's no one in the house that doesn't try to get back with the left hand all that they give with the right at New Year," said Sylvie.

°°°°"And, after all," said Christophe, "what do they give you? A miserable five-franc piece. There is Father Goriot, who has cleaned his shoes himself these two years past. There is that old beggar Poiret, who goes without blacking altogether; he would sooner drink it than put it on his boots. Then there is that whipper-snapper of a student, who gives me a couple of francs, Two francs will not pay for my brushes, and he sells his old clothes, and gets more for them than they are worth. Oh! they're a shabby lot!"

°°°°"Pooh!" said Sylvie, sipping her coffee, "our places are the best in the Quarter, that I know. But about that great big chap Vautrin, Christophe; has any one told you anything about him?"

°°°°"Yes. I met a gentleman in the street a few days ago; he said to me, 'There's a gentleman in your place, isn't there? a tall man that dyes his whiskers?' I told him, 'No, sir; they aren't dyed. A gay fellow like him hasn't the time to do it.' And when I told M. Vautrin about it afterwards, he said, 'Quite right, my boy. That is the way to answer them. There is nothing more unpleasant than to have your little weaknesses known; it might spoil many a match.' "

°°°°"Well, and for my part," said Sylvie, "a man tried to humbug me at the market wanting to know if I had seen him put on his shirt. Such bosh! There," she cried, interrupting herself, "that's a quarter to ten striking at the Val-de-Grace, and not a soul stirring!"

°°°°"Pooh! they are all gone out. Mme. Couture and the girl went out at eight o'clock to take the wafer at Saint-Etienne. Father Goriot started off somewhere with a parcel, and the student won't be back from his lecture till ten o'clock. I saw them go while I was sweeping the stairs; Father Goriot knocked up against me, and his parcel was as hard as iron. What is the old fellow up to, I wonder? He is as good as a plaything for the rest of them; they can never let him alone; but he is a good man, all the same, and worth more than all of them put together. He doesn't give you much himself, but he sometimes sends you with a message to ladies who fork out famous tips; they are dressed grandly, too."

°°°°"His daughters, as he calls them, eh? There are a dozen of them."

°°°°"I have never been to more than two--the two who came here."

°°°°"There is madame moving overhead; I shall have to go, or she will raise a fine racket. Just keep an eye on the milk, Christophe; don't let the cat get at it."

°°°°Sylvie went up to her mistress' room.

°°°°"Sylvie! How is this? It's nearly ten o'clock, and you let me sleep like a dormouse! Such a thing has never happened before."

°°°°"It's the fog; it is that thick, you could cut it with a knife."

°°°°"But how about breakfast?"

°°°°"Bah! the boarders are possessed, I'm sure. They all cleared out before there was a wink of daylight."

°°°°"Do speak properly, Sylvie," Mme. Vauquer retorted; "say a blink of daylight."

°°°°"Ah, well, madame, whichever you please. Anyhow, you can have breakfast at ten o'clock. La Michonnette and Poiret have neither of them stirred. There are only those two upstairs, and they are sleeping like the logs they are."

°°°°"But, Sylvie, you put their names together as if----"

°°°°"As if what?" said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. "The two of them make a pair."

°°°°"It is a strange thing, isn't it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last night after Christophe had bolted the door?"

°°°°"Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?"

°°°°"Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears on the table, those at five a penny."

°°°°A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all haste.

°°°°"Mistigris!" she cried.

°°°°The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

°°°°"Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!" she said. "Sylvie! Sylvie!"

°°°°"Yes, madame; what is it?"

°°°°"Just see what the cat has done!"

°°°°"It is all that stupid Christophe's fault. I told him to stop and lay the table. What has become of him? Don't you worry, madame; Father Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won't know the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats."

°°°°"I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?" said Mme. Vauquer, setting the plates round the table.

°°°°"Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"I have overslept myself," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same."

°°°°The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the sitting-room, singing loudly:

°°°°" 'Tis the same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance . .

°°°°"Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!" he cried at the sight of his hostess, and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

°°°°"There! have done----"

°°°°" 'Impertinence!' Say it!" he answered. "Come, say it! Now, isn't that what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah! I am a nice man, am I not?

°°°°"For the locks of brown and the golden hair   A sighing lover . . .

°°°°"Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

°°°°. . . . led by chance."

°°°°"What?" asked the widow.

°°°°"Father Goriot in the goldsmith's shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there, and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that's not used to the trade."

°°°°"Really? You don't say so?"

°°°°"Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair. He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went into a money-lender's house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father's bones, a Turk, a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob HIM, for he puts all his coin into the Bank."

°°°°"Then what was Father Goriot doing there?"

°°°°"Doing?" said Vautrin. "Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----"

°°°°"There he is!" cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Christophe," cried Father Goriot's voice, "come upstairs with me."

°°°°Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

°°°°"Where are you going?" Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

°°°°"Out on an errand for M. Goriot."

°°°°"What may that be?" said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe's hand. "Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud," he read. "Where are you going with it?" he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

°°°°"To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands myself."

°°°°"What is there inside it?" said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the light. "A banknote? No." He peered into the envelope. "A receipted account!" he cried. "My word! 'tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you, old chap," he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe's head, and spinning the man round like a thimble; "you will have a famous tip."

°°°°By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme. Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

°°°°"The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance."

°°°°When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

°°°°"Where have you been this morning, fair lady?" said Mme. Vauquer, turning to Mme. Couture.

°°°°"We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She is trembling like a leaf," Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

°°°°"Warm yourself, Victorine," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften your father's heart," said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the orphan girl; "but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl needs a dowry nowadays."

°°°°"Poor child!" said Mme. Vauquer. "Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself."

°°°°Victorine's eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

°°°°"If we could only see him!" said the Commissary-General's widow; "if I could speak to him myself and give him his wife's last letter! I have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my handwriting----"

°°°°" 'Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!' " exclaimed Vautrin, breaking in upon her. "So that is how you are, is it? In a few days' time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall see."

°°°°"Oh! sir," said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin, who showed no sign of being touched by it, "if you know of any way of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his affection and my mother's honor are more to me than all the money in the world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----"

°°°°"The same old story everywhere," sang Vautrin, with a satirical intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven people thus assembled bade each other good- morning, and took their places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student's footstep was heard outside.

°°°°"Ah! here you are, M. Eugene," said Sylvie; "every one is breakfasting at home to-day."

°°°°The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside Goriot.

°°°°"I have just met with a queer adventure," he said, as he helped himself abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer's eyes gauged as usual.

°°°°"An adventure?" queried Poiret.

°°°°"Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?" Vautrin asked of Poiret. "M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing."

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

°°°°"Tell us about your adventure!" demanded M. Vautrin.

°°°°"Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a king---"

°°°°"Fisher," put in Vautrin, interrupting.

°°°°"What do you mean, sir?" said Eugene sharply.

°°°°"I said 'fisher,' because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than kings."

°°°°"Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a king," said Poiret the ditto-ist, "because----"

°°°°"In fact"--the law-student cut him short--"I danced with one of the handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this divine countess about nine o'clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how my heart beat! I began to think----"

°°°°"That she was coming here," said Vautrin, with a keen look at the student. "I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman's heart, you will find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder."

°°°°The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

°°°°"Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!" cried Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

°°°°"It is just as I guessed," said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme. Vauquer's ear.

°°°°Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own thoughts than he did at that moment.

°°°°"Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! there you are!" answered Vautrin. "Old Father Goriot there knew it quite well! and why should I not know it too?"

°°°°"M. Goriot?" the student cried.

°°°°"What is it?" asked the old man. "So she was very beautiful, was she, yesterday night?"

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"Look at the old wretch," said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; "how his eyes light up!"

°°°°"Then does he really keep her?" said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to the student.

°°°°"Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty," Eugene answered. Father Goriot watched him with eager eyes. "If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there, my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list, and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a galloping horse, or a woman dancing."

°°°°"So the wheel turns," said Vautrin; "yesterday night at a duchess' ball, this morning in a money-lender's office, on the lowest rung of the ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers' hearts to find something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside down. Just a Parisienne through and through!"

°°°°Father Goriot's face, which had shone at the student's words like the sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of Vautrin's.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. Vauquer, "but where is your adventure? Did you speak to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?"

°°°°"She did not see me," said Eugene. "But only think of meeting one of the prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o'clock! She could not have reached home after the ball till two o'clock this morning. Wasn't it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of adventures."

°°°°"Pshaw! much funnier things than THAT happen here!" exclaimed Vautrin.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

°°°°"Well, did you see?" said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest of the circle. "He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain."

°°°°"Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de Restaud is anything to Father Goriot," cried the student.

°°°°"Well, and if you don't," broke in Vautrin, "we are not set on convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed to be like the sound of a trumpet to a trooper's horse. "Aha!" said Vautrin, stopping in his speech to give her a searching glance, "so we have had our little experiences, have we?"

°°°°The old maid lowered her eyes like a nun who sees a statue.

°°°°"Well," he went on, "when folk of that kind get a notion into their heads, they cannot drop it. They must drink the water from some particular spring--it is stagnant as often as not; but they will sell their wives and families, they will sell their own souls to the devil to get it. For some this spring is play, or the stock-exchange, or music, or a collection of pictures or insects; for others it is some woman who can give them the dainties they like. You might offer these last all the women on earth--they would turn up their noses; they will have the only one who can gratify their passion. It often happens that the woman does not care for them at all, and treats them cruelly; they buy their morsels of satisfaction very dear; but no matter, the fools are never tired of it; they will take their last blanket to the pawnbroker's to give their last five-franc piece to her. Father Goriot here is one of that sort. He is discreet, so the Countess exploits him--just the way of the gay world. The poor old fellow thinks of her and of nothing else. In all other respects you see he is a stupid animal; but get him on that subject, and his eyes sparkle like diamonds. That secret is not difficult to guess. He took some plate himself this morning to the melting-pot, and I saw him at Daddy Gobseck's in the Rue des Gres. And now, mark what follows--he came back here, and gave a letter for the Comtesse de Restaud to that noodle of a Christophe, who showed us the address; there was a receipted bill inside it. It is clear that it was an urgent matter if the Countess also went herself to the old money lender. Father Goriot has financed her handsomely. There is no need to tack a tale together; the thing is self-evident. So that shows you, sir student, that all the time your Countess was smiling, dancing, flirting, swaying her peach-flower crowned head, with her gown gathered into her hand, her slippers were pinching her, as they say; she was thinking of her protested bills, or her lover's protested bills."

°°°°"You have made me wild to know the truth," cried Eugene; "I will go to call on Mme. de Restaud to-morrow."

°°°°"Yes," echoed Poiret; "you must go and call on Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"And perhaps you will find Father Goriot there, who will take payment for the assistance he politely rendered."

°°°°Eugene looked disgusted. "Why, then, this Paris of yours is a slough."

°°°°"And an uncommonly queer slough, too," replied Vautrin. "The mud splashes you as you drive through it in your carriage--you are a respectable person; you go afoot and are splashed--you are a scoundrel. You are so unlucky as to walk off with something or other belonging to somebody else, and they exhibit you as a curiosity in the Place du Palais-de-Justice; you steal a million, and you are pointed out in every salon as a model of virtue. And you pay thirty millions for the police and the courts of justice, for the maintenance of law and order! A pretty slate of things it is!"

°°°°"What," cried Mme. Vauquer, "has Father Goriot really melted down his silver posset-dish?"

°°°°"There were two turtle-doves on the lid, were there not?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that there were."

°°°°"Then, was he fond of it?" said Eugene. "He cried while he was breaking up the cup and plate. I happened to see him by accident."

°°°°"It was dear to him as his own life," answered the widow.

°°°°"There! you see how infatuated the old fellow is!" cried Vautrin. "The woman yonder can coax the soul out of him"

°°°°The student went up to his room. Vautrin went out, and a few moments later Mme. Couture and Victorine drove away in a cab which Sylvie had called for them. Poiret gave his arm to Mlle. Michonneau, and they went together to spend the two sunniest hours of the day in the Jardin des Plantes.

°°°°"Well, those two are as good as married," was the portly Sylvie's comment. "They are going out together to-day for the first time. They are such a couple of dry sticks that if they happen to strike against each other they will draw sparks like flint and steel."

°°°°"Keep clear of Mlle. Michonneau's shawl, then, said Mme. Vauquer, laughing; "it would flare up like tinder."

°°°°At four o'clock that evening, when Goriot came in, he saw, by the light of two smoky lamps, that Victorine's eyes were red. Mme. Vauquer was listening to the history of the visit made that morning to M. Taillefer; it had been made in vain. Taillefer was tired of the annual application made by his daughter and her elderly friend; he gave them a personal interview in order to arrive at an understanding with them.

°°°°"My dear lady," said Mme. Couture, addressing Mme. Vauquer, "just imagine it; he did not even ask Victorine to sit down, she was standing the whole time. He said to me quite coolly, without putting himself in a passion, that we might spare ourselves the trouble of going there; that the young lady (he would not call her his daughter) was injuring her cause by importuning him (IMPORTUNING! once a year, the wretch!); that as Victorine's mother had nothing when he married her, Victorine ought not to expect anything from him; in fact, he said the most cruel things, that made the poor child burst out crying. The little thing threw herself at her father's feet and spoke up bravely; she said that she only persevered in her visits for her mother's sake; that she would obey him without a murmur, but that she begged him to read her poor dead mother's farewell letter. She took it up and gave it to him, saying the most beautiful things in the world, most beautifully expressed; I do not know where she learned them; God

°°°°must have put them into her head, for the poor child was inspired to speak so nicely that it made me cry like a fool to hear her talk. And what do you think the monster was doing all the time? Cutting his nails! He took the letter that poor Mme. Taillefer had soaked with tears, and flung it on to the chimney-piece. 'That is all right,' he said. He held out his hands to raise his daughter, but she covered them with kisses, and he drew them away again. Scandalous, isn't it? And his great booby of a son came in and took no notice of his sister."

°°°°"What inhuman wretches they must be!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"And then they both went out of the room," Mme. Couture went on, without heeding the worthy vermicelli maker's exclamation; "father and son bowed to me, and asked me to excuse them on account of urgent business! That is the history of our call. Well, he has seen his daughter at any rate. How he can refuse to acknowledge her I cannot think, for they are as alike as two peas."

°°°°The boarders dropped in one after another, interchanging greetings and empty jokes that certain classes of Parisians regard as humorous and witty. Dulness is their prevailing ingredient, and the whole point consists in mispronouncing a word or a gesture. This kind of argot is always changing. The essence of the jest consists in some catchword suggested by a political event, an incident in the police courts, a street song, or a bit of burlesque at some theatre, and forgotten in a month. Anything and everything serves to keep up a game of battledore and shuttlecock with words and ideas. The diorama, a recent invention, which carried an optical illusion a degree further than panoramas, had given rise to a mania among art students for ending every word with RAMA. The Maison Vauquer had caught the infection from a young artist among the boarders.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur-r-r Poiret," said the employe from the Museum, "how is your health-orama?" Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned to Mme. Couture and Victorine with a "Ladies, you seem melancholy."

°°°°"Is dinner ready?" cried Horace Bianchon, a medical student, and a friend of Rastignac's; "my stomach is sinking usque ad talones."

°°°°"There is an uncommon frozerama outside," said Vautrin. "Make room there, Father Goriot! Confound it, your foot covers the whole front of the stove."

°°°°"Illustrious M. Vautrin," put in Bianchon, "why do you say frozerama? It is incorrect; it should be frozenrama."

°°°°"No, it shouldn't," said the official from the Museum; "frozerama is right by the same rule that you say 'My feet are froze.' "

°°°°"Ah! ah!"

°°°°"Here is his Excellency the Marquis de Rastignac, Doctor of the Law of Contraries," cried Bianchon, seizing Eugene by the throat, and almost throttling him.

°°°°"Hallo there! hallo!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau came noiselessly in, bowed to the rest of the party, and took her place beside the three women without saying a word.

°°°°"That old bat always makes me shudder," said Bianchon in a low voice, indicating Mlle. Michonneau to Vautrin. "I have studied Gall's system, and I am sure she has the bump of Judas."

°°°°"Then you have seen a case before?" said Vautrin.

°°°°"Who has not?" answered Bianchon. "Upon my word, that ghastly old maid looks just like one of the long worms that will gnaw a beam through, give them time enough."

°°°°"That is the way, young man," returned he of the forty years and the dyed whiskers:

°°°°"The rose has lived the life of a rose--   A morning's space."

°°°°"Aha! here is a magnificent soupe-au-rama," cried Poiret as Christophe came in bearing the soup with cautious heed.

°°°°"I beg your pardon, sir," said Mme. Vauquer; "it is soupe aux choux."

°°°°All the young men roared with laughter.

°°°°"Had you there, Poiret!"

°°°°"Poir-r-r-rette! she had you there!"

°°°°"Score two points to Mamma Vauquer," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Did any of you notice the fog this morning?" asked the official.

°°°°"It was a frantic fog," said Bianchon, "a fog unparalleled, doleful, melancholy, sea-green, asthmatical--a Goriot of a fog!"

°°°°"A Goriorama," said the art student, "because you couldn't see a thing in it."

°°°°"Hey! Milord Gaoriotte, they air talking about yoo-o-ou!"

°°°°Father Goriot, seated at the lower end of the table, close to the door through which the servant entered, raised his face; he had smelt at a scrap of bread that lay under his table napkin, an old trick acquired in his commercial capacity, that still showed itself at times.

°°°°"Well," Madame Vauquer cried in sharp tones, that rang above the rattle of spoons and plates and the sound of other voices, "and is there anything the matter with the bread?"

°°°°"Nothing whatever, madame," he answered; "on the contrary, it is made of the best quality of corn; flour from Etampes."

°°°°"How could you tell?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"By the color, by the flavor."

°°°°"You knew the flavor by the smell, I suppose," said Mme. Vauquer. "You have grown so economical, you will find out how to live on the smell of cooking at last."

°°°°"Take out a patent for it, then," cried the Museum official; "you would make a handsome fortune."

°°°°"Never mind him," said the artist; "he does that sort of thing to delude us into thinking that he was a vermicelli maker."

°°°°"Your nose is a corn-sampler, it appears?" inquired the official.

°°°°"Corn WHAT?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"Corn-el."

°°°°"Corn-et."

°°°°"Corn-elian."

°°°°"Corn-ice."

°°°°"Corn-ucopia."

°°°°"Corn-crake."

°°°°"Corn-cockle."

°°°°"Corn-orama."

°°°°The eight responses came like a rolling fire from every part of the room, and the laughter that followed was the more uproarious because poor Father Goriot stared at the others with a puzzled look, like a foreigner trying to catch the meaning of words in a language which he does not understand.

°°°°"Corn? . . ." he said, turning to Vautrin, his next neighbor.

°°°°"Corn on your foot, old man!" said Vautrin, and he drove Father Goriot's cap down over his eyes by a blow on the crown.

°°°°The poor old man thus suddenly attacked was for a moment too bewildered to do anything. Christophe carried off his plate, thinking that he had finished his soup, so that when Goriot had pushed back his cap from his eyes his spoon encountered the table. Every one burst out laughing. "You are a disagreeable joker, sir," said the old man, "and if you take any further liberties with me----"

°°°°"Well, what then, old boy?" Vautrin interrupted.

°°°°"Well, then, you shall pay dearly for it some day----"

°°°°"Down below, eh?" said the artist, "in the little dark corner where they put naughty boys."

°°°°"Well, mademoiselle," Vautrin said, turning to Victorine, "you are eating nothing. So papa was refractory, was he?"

°°°°"A monster!" said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"Mademoiselle might make application for aliment pending her suit; she is not eating anything. Eh! eh! just see how Father Goriot is staring at Mlle. Victorine."

°°°°The old man had forgotten his dinner, he was so absorbed in gazing at the poor girl; the sorrow in her face was unmistakable,--the slighted love of a child whose father would not recognize her.

°°°°"We are mistaken about Father Goriot, my dear boy," said Eugene in a low voice. "He is not an idiot, nor wanting in energy. Try your Gall system on him, and let me know what you think. I saw him crush a silver dish last night as if it had been made of wax; there seems to be something extra-ordinary going on in his mind just now, to judge by his face. His life is so mysterious that it must be worth studying. Oh! you may laugh, Bianchon; I am not joking."

°°°°"The man is a subject, is he?" said Bianchon; "all right! I will dissect him, if he will give me the chance."

°°°°"No; feel his bumps."

°°°°"Hm!--his stupidity might perhaps be contagious."

°°°°The next day Rastignac dressed himself very elegantly, and about three o'clock in the afternoon went to call on Mme. de Restaud. On the way thither he indulged in the wild intoxicating dreams which fill a young head so full of delicious excitement. Young men at his age take no account of obstacles nor of dangers; they see success in every direction; imagination has free play, and turns their lives into a romance; they are saddened or discouraged by the collapse of one of the visionary schemes that have no existence save in their heated fancy. If youth were not ignorant and timid, civilization would be impossible.

°°°°Eugene took unheard-of pains to keep himself in a spotless condition, but on his way through the streets he began to think about Mme. de Restaud and what he should say to her. He equipped himself with wit, rehearsed repartees in the course of an imaginary conversation, and prepared certain neat speeches a la Talleyrand, conjuring up a series of small events which should prepare the way for the declaration on which he had based his future; and during these musings the law student was bespattered with mud, and by the time he reached the Palais Royal he was obliged to have his boots blacked and his trousers brushed.

°°°°"If I were rich," he said, as he changed the five-franc piece he had brought with him in case anything might happen, "I would take a cab, then I could think at my ease."

°°°°At last he reached the Rue du Helder, and asked for the Comtesse de Restaud. He bore the contemptuous glances of the servants, who had seen him cross the court on foot, with the cold fury of a man who knows that he will succeed some day. He understood the meaning of their glances at once, for he had felt his inferiority as soon as he entered the court, where a smart cab was waiting. All the delights of life in Paris seemed to be implied by this visible and manifest sign of luxury and extravagance. A fine horse, in magnificent harness, was pawing the ground, and all at once the law student felt out of humor with himself. Every compartment in his brain which he had thought to find so full of wit was bolted fast; he grew positively stupid. He sent up his name to the Countess, and waited in the ante-chamber, standing on one foot before a window that looked out upon the court; mechanically he leaned his elbow against the sash, and stared before him. The time seemed long; he would have left the house but for the southern tenacity of purpose which works miracles when it is single-minded.

°°°°"Madame is in her boudoir, and cannot see any one at present, sir," said the servant. "She gave me no answer; but if you will go into the dining-room, there is some one already there."

°°°°Rastignac was impressed with a sense of the formidable power of the lackey who can accuse or condemn his masters by a word; he coolly opened the door by which the man had just entered the ante-chamber, meaning, no doubt, to show these insolent flunkeys that he was familiar with the house; but he found that he had thoughtlessly precipitated himself into a small room full of dressers, where lamps were standing, and hot-water pipes, on which towels were being dried; a dark passage and a back staircase lay beyond it. Stifled laughter from the ante-chamber added to his confusion.

°°°°"This way to the drawing-room, sir," said the servant, with the exaggerated respect which seemed to be one more jest at his expense.

°°°°Eugene turned so quickly that he stumbled against a bath. By good luck, he managed to keep his hat on his head, and saved it from immersion in the water; but just as he turned, a door opened at the further end of the dark passage, dimly lighted by a small lamp. Rastignac heard voices and the sound of a kiss; one of the speakers was Mme. de Restaud, the other was Father Goriot. Eugene followed the servant through the dining-room into the drawing- room; he went to a window that looked out into the courtyard, and stood there for a while. He meant to know whether this Goriot was really the Goriot that he knew. His heart beat unwontedly fast; he remembered Vautrin's hideous insinuations. A well-dressed young man suddenly emerged from the room almost as Eugene entered it, saying impatiently to the servant who stood at the door: "I am going, Maurice. Tell Madame la Comtesse that I waited more than half an hour for her."

°°°°Whereupon this insolent being, who, doubtless, had a right to be insolent, sang an Italian trill, and went towards the window where Eugene was standing, moved thereto quite as much by a desire to see the student's face as by a wish to look out into the courtyard.

°°°°"But M. le Comte had better wait a moment longer; madame is disengaged," said Maurice, as he returned to the ante-chamber.

°°°°Just at that moment Father Goriot appeared close to the gate; he had emerged from a door at the foot of the back staircase. The worthy soul was preparing to open his umbrella regardless of the fact that the great gate had opened to admit a tilbury, in which a young man with a ribbon at his button-hole was seated. Father Goriot had scarcely time to start back and save himself. The horse took fright at the umbrella, swerved, and dashed forward towards the flight of steps. The young man looked round in annoyance, saw Father Goriot, and greeted him as he went out with constrained courtesy, such as people usually show to a money- lender so long as they require his services, or the sort of respect they feel it necessary to show for some one whose reputation has been blown upon, so that they blush to acknowledge his acquaintance. Father Goriot gave him a little friendly nod and a good-natured smile. All this happened with lightning speed. Eugene was so deeply interested that he forgot that he was not alone till he suddenly heard the Countess' voice.

°°°°"Oh! Maxime, were you going away?" she said reproachfully, with a shade of pique in her manner. The Countess had not seen the incident nor the entrance of the tilbury. Rastignac turned abruptly and saw her standing before him, coquettishly dressed in a loose white cashmere gown with knots of rose-colored ribbon here and there; her hair was carelessly coiled about her head, as is the wont of Parisian women in the morning; there was a soft fragrance about her--doubtless she was fresh from a bath;--her graceful form seemed more flexible, her beauty more luxuriant. Her eyes glistened. A young man can see everything at a glance; he feels the radiant influence of woman as a plant discerns and absorbs its nutriment from the air; he did not need to touch her hands to feel their cool freshness. He saw faint rose tints through the cashmere of the dressing gown; it had fallen slightly open, giving glimpses of a bare throat, on which the student's eyes rested. The Countess had no need of the adventitious aid of corsets; her girdle defined the outlines of her slender waist; her throat was a challenge to love; her feet, thrust into slippers, were daintily small. As Maxime took her hand and kissed it, Eugene became aware of Maxime's existence, and the Countess saw Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! is that you M. de Rastignac? I am very glad to see you," she said, but there was something in her manner that a shrewd observer would have taken as a hint to depart.

°°°°Maxime, as the Countess Anastasie had called the young man with the haughty insolence of bearing, looked from Eugene to the lady, and from the lady to Eugene; it was sufficiently evident that he wished to be rid of the latter. An exact and faithful rendering of the glance might be given in the words: "Look here, my dear; I hope you intend to send this little whipper-snapper about his business."

°°°°The Countess consulted the young man's face with an intent submissiveness that betrays all the secrets of a woman's heart, and Rastignac all at once began to hate him violently. To begin with, the sight of the fair carefully arranged curls on the other's comely head had convinced him that his own crop was hideous; Maxime's boots, moreover, were elegant and spotless, while his own, in spite of all his care, bore some traces of his recent walk; and, finally, Maxime's overcoat fitted the outline of his figure gracefully, he looked like a pretty woman, while Eugene was wearing a black coat at half-past two. The quick- witted child of the Charente felt the disadvantage at which he was placed beside this tall, slender dandy, with the clear gaze and the pale face, one of those men who would ruin orphan children without scruple. Mme. de Restaud fled into the next room without waiting for Eugene to speak; shaking out the skirts of her dressing-gown in her flight, so that she looked like a white butterfly, and Maxime hurried after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant's ball; he guessed the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he said to himself, "This is my rival; I mean to cut him out."

°°°°Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls's eye twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and so sulkily, that Anastasie's fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, "Why do you not go?" a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make their exit.

°°°°Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

°°°°"Madame," he began, "I hastened to call upon you----"

°°°°He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess; he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime with a cordial "Good morning," that astonished Eugene not a little. The young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

°°°°"M. de Restaud," said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law student.

°°°°Eugene bowed profoundly.

°°°°"This gentleman," she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband, "is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last ball."

°°°°Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs! These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house, produced a magical effect. The Count's stiff manner relaxed at once as he returned the student's bow.

°°°°"Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance," he said.

°°°°Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a fairy's wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open again; Rastignac's carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer's lodging- house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

°°°°"I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct," the Comte de Restaud said, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, they are extinct," answered the law student. "My great- uncle, the Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family. They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault, Mme. de Beauseant's grandfather on the mother's side. We are the younger branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King's service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated."

°°°°"Was not your great-uncle in command of the Vengeur before 1789?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the Warwick."

°°°°Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who should say, "If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that fellow, it is all over with us." Anastasie understood the glance that M. de Trailles gave her. With a woman's admirable tact, she began to smile and said:

°°°°"Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the Warwick and the Vengeur."

°°°°She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the boudoir. The morganatic couple (to use a convenient German expression which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

°°°°"Anastasie!" he cried pettishly, "just stay a moment, dear; you know very well that----"

°°°°"I am coming back in a minute," she interrupted; "I have a commission for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it."

°°°°She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her husband's voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands' characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, "You are busy, I do not want to interrupt you; good-day," and he went.

°°°°"Just wait a moment, Maxime!" the Count called after him.

°°°°"Come and dine with us," said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure that Rastignac had taken his leave.

°°°°The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover, for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate, hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair typical Parisian.

°°°°"Anastasie!" the Count called again to his wife.

°°°°"Poor Maxime!" she said, addressing the young man. "Come, we must resign ourselves. This evening----"

°°°°"I hope, Nasie," he said in her ear, "that you will give orders not to admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you will compel me to kill him."

°°°°"Are you mad, Maxime?" she said. "A young lad of a student is, on the contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him."

°°°°Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip, and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had been closed after him.

°°°°"What do you think, dear?" cried the Count, her husband, "this gentleman's family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted."

°°°°"Delighted to find that we have acquaintances in common," said the Countess, with a preoccupied manner.

°°°°"More than you think," said Eugene, in a low voice.

°°°°"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

°°°°"Why, only just now," said the student, "I saw a gentleman go out at the gate, Father Goriot, my next door neighbor in the house where I am lodging."

°°°°At the sound of this name, and the prefix that embellished it, the Count, who was stirring the fire, let the tongs fall as though they had burned his fingers, and rose to his feet.

°°°°"Sir," he cried, "you might have called him 'Monsieur Goriot'!"

°°°°The Countess turned pale at first at the sight of her husband's vexation, then she reddened; clearly she was embarrassed, her answer was made in a tone that she tried to make natural, and with an air of assumed carelessness:

°°°°"You could not know any one who is dearer to us both . . ."

°°°°She broke off, glanced at the piano as if some fancy had crossed her mind, and asked, "Are you fond of music, M. de Rastignac?"

°°°°"Exceedingly," answered Eugene, flushing, and disconcerted by a dim suspicion that he had somehow been guilty of a clumsy piece of folly.

°°°°"Do you sing?" she cried, going to the piano, and, sitting down before it, she swept her fingers over the keyboard from end to end. R-r-r-rah!

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°The Comte de Restaud walked to and fro.

°°°°"That is a pity; you are without one great means of success.--Ca- ro, ca-a-ro, ca-a-a-ro, non du-bi-ta-re," sang the Countess.

°°°°Eugene had a second time waved a magic wand when he uttered Goriot's name, but the effect seemed to be entirely opposite to that produced by the formula "related to Mme. de Beauseant." His position was not unlike that of some visitor permitted as a favor to inspect a private collection of curiosities, when by inadvertence he comes into collision with a glass case full of sculptured figures, and three or four heads, imperfectly secured, fall at the shock. He wished the earth would open and swallow him. Mme. de Restaud's expression was reserved and chilly, her eyes had grown indifferent, and sedulously avoided meeting those of the unlucky student of law.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "you wish to talk with M. de Restaud; permit me to wish you good-day----"

°°°°The Countess interrupted him by a gesture, saying hastily, "Whenever you come to see us, both M. de Restaud and I shall be delighted to see you."

°°°°Eugene made a profound bow and took his leave, followed by M. de Restaud, who insisted, in spite of his remonstrances, on accompanying him into the hall.

°°°°"Neither your mistress nor I are at home to that gentleman when he calls," the Count said to Maurice.

°°°°As Eugene set foot on the steps, he saw that it was raining.

°°°°"Come," said he to himself, "somehow I have just made a mess of it, I do not know how. And now I am going to spoil my hat and coat into the bargain. I ought to stop in my corner, grind away at law, and never look to be anything but a boorish country magistrate. How can I go into society, when to manage properly you want a lot of cabs, varnished boots, gold watch chains, and all sorts of things; you have to wear white doeskin gloves that cost six francs in the morning, and primrose kid gloves every evening? A fig for that old humbug of a Goriot!"

°°°°When he reached the street door, the driver of a hackney coach, who had probably just deposited a wedding party at their door, and asked nothing better than a chance of making a little money for himself without his employer's knowledge, saw that Eugene had no umbrella, remarked his black coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, and varnished boots, and stopped and looked at him inquiringly. Eugene, in the blind desperation that drives a young man to plunge deeper and deeper into an abyss, as if he might hope to find a fortunate issue in its lowest depths, nodded in reply to the driver's signal, and stepped into the cab; a few stray petals of orange blossom and scraps of wire bore witness to its recent occupation by a wedding party.

°°°°"Where am I to drive, sir?" demanded the man, who, by this time, had taken off his white gloves.

°°°°"Confound it!" Eugene said to himself, "I am in for it now, and at least I will not spend cab-hire for nothing!--Drive to the Hotel Beauseant," he said aloud.

°°°°"Which?" asked the man, a portentous word that reduced Eugene to confusion. This young man of fashion, species incerta, did not know that there were two Hotels Beauseant; he was not aware how rich he was in relations who did not care about him.

°°°°"The Vicomte de Beauseant, Rue----"

°°°°"De Grenelle," interrupted the driver, with a jerk of his head. "You see, there are the hotels of the Marquis and Comte de Beauseant in the Rue Saint-Dominique," he added, drawing up the step.

°°°°"I know all about that," said Eugene, severely.--"Everybody is laughing at me to-day, it seems!" he said to himself, as he deposited his hat on the opposite seat. "This escapade will cost me a king's ransom, but, at any rate, I shall call on my so- called cousin in a thoroughly aristocratic fashion. Goriot has cost me ten francs already, the old scoundrel. My word! I will tell Mme. de Beauseant about my adventure; perhaps it may amuse her. Doubtless she will know the secret of the criminal relation between that handsome woman and the old rat without a tail. It would be better to find favor in my cousin's eyes than to come in contact with that shameless woman, who seems to me to have very expensive tastes. Surely the beautiful Vicomtesse's personal interest would turn the scale for me, when the mere mention of her name produces such an effect. Let us look higher. If you set yourself to carry the heights of heaven, you must face God."

°°°°The innumerable thoughts that surged through his brain might be summed up in these phrases. He grew calmer, and recovered something of his assurance as he watched the falling rain. He told himself that though he was about to squander two of the precious five-franc pieces that remained to him, the money was well laid out in preserving his coat, boots, and hat; and his cabman's cry of "Gate, if you please," almost put him in spirits. A Swiss, in scarlet and gold, appeared, the great door groaned on its hinges, and Rastignac, with sweet satisfaction, beheld his equipage pass under the archway and stop before the flight of steps beneath the awning. The driver, in a blue-and-red greatcoat, dismounted and let down the step. As Eugene stepped out of the cab, he heard smothered laughter from the peristyle. Three or four lackeys were making merry over the festal appearance of the vehicle. In another moment the law student was enlightened as to the cause of their hilarity; he felt the full force of the contrast between his equipage and one of the smartest broughams in Paris; a coachman, with powdered hair, seemed to find it difficult to hold a pair of spirited horses, who stood chafing the bit. In Mme. de Restaud's courtyard, in the Chaussee d'Antin, he had seen the neat turnout of a young man of six-and-twenty; in the Faubourg Saint-Germain he found the luxurious equipage of a man of rank; thirty thousand francs would not have purchased it.

°°°°"Who can be here?" said Eugene to himself. He began to understand, though somewhat tardily, that he must not expect to find many women in Paris who were not already appropriated, and that the capture of one of these queens would be likely to cost something more than bloodshed. "Confound it all! I expect my cousin also has her Maxime."

°°°°He went up the steps, feeling that he was a blighted being. The glass door was opened for him; the servants were as solemn as jackasses under the curry comb. So far, Eugene had only been in the ballroom on the ground floor of the Hotel Beauseant; the fete had followed so closely on the invitation, that he had not had time to call on his cousin, and had therefore never seen Mme. de Beauseant's apartments; he was about to behold for the first time a great lady among the wonderful and elegant surroundings that reveal her character and reflect her daily life. He was the more curious, because Mme. de Restaud's drawing-room had provided him with a standard of comparison.

°°°°At half-past four the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was visible. Five minutes earlier she would not have received her cousin, but Eugene knew nothing of the recognized routine of various houses in Paris. He was conducted up the wide, white-painted, crimson- carpeted staircase, between the gilded balusters and masses of flowering plants, to Mme. de Beauseant's apartments. He did not know the rumor current about Mme. de Beauseant, one of the biographies told, with variations, in whispers, every evening in the salons of Paris.

°°°°For three years past her name had been spoken of in connection with that of one of the most wealthy and distinguished Portuguese nobles, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto. It was one of those innocent liaisons which possess so much charm for the two thus attached to each other that they find the presence of a third person intolerable. The Vicomte de Beauseant, therefore, had himself set an example to the rest of the world by respecting, with as good a grace as might be, this morganatic union. Any one who came to call on the Vicomtesse in the early days of this friendship was sure to find the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto there. As, under the circumstances, Mme. de Beauseant could not very well shut her door against these visitors, she gave them such a cold reception, and showed so much interest in the study of the ceiling, that no one could fail to understand how much he bored her; and when it became known in Paris that Mme. de Beauseant was bored by callers between two and four o'clock, she was left in perfect solitude during that interval. She went to the Bouffons or to the Opera with M. de Beauseant and M. d'Ajuda-Pinto; and M. de Beauseant, like a well-bred man of the world, always left his wife and the Portuguese as soon as he had installed them. But M. d'Ajuda-Pinto must marry, and a Mlle. de Rochefide was the young lady. In the whole fashionable world there was but one person who as yet knew nothing of the arrangement, and that was Mme. de Beauseant. Some of her friends had hinted at the possibility, and she had laughed at them, believing that envy had prompted those ladies to try to make mischief. And now, though the bans were about to be published, and although the handsome Portuguese had come that day to break the news to the Vicomtesse, he had not found courage as yet to say one word about his treachery. How was it? Nothing is doubtless more difficult than the notification of an ultimatum of this kind. There are men who feel more at their ease when they stand up before another man who threatens their lives with sword or pistol than in the presence of a woman who, after two hours of lamentations and reproaches, falls into a dead swoon and requires salts. At this moment, therefore, M. d'Ajuda-Pinto was on thorns, and anxious to take his leave. He told himself that in some way or other the news would reach Mme. de Beauseant; he would write, it would be much better to do it by letter, and not to utter the words that should stab her to the heart.

°°°°So when the servant announced M. Eugene de Rastignac, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto trembled with joy. To be sure, a loving woman shows even more ingenuity in inventing doubts of her lover than in varying the monotony of his happiness; and when she is about to be forsaken, she instinctively interprets every gesture as rapidly as Virgil's courser detected the presence of his companion by snuffing the breeze. It was impossible, therefore, that Mme. de Beauseant should not detect that involuntary thrill of satisfaction; slight though it was, it was appalling in its artlessness.

°°°°Eugene had yet to learn that no one in Paris should present himself in any house without first making himself acquainted with the whole history of its owner, and of its owner's wife and family, so that he may avoid making any of the terrible blunders which in Poland draw forth the picturesque exclamation, "Harness five bullocks to your cart!" probably because you will need them all to pull you out of the quagmire into which a false step has plunged you. If, down to the present day, our language has no name for these conversational disasters, it is probably because they are believed to be impossible, the publicity given in Paris to every scandal is so prodigious. After the awkward incident at Mme. de Restaud's, no one but Eugene could have reappeared in his character of bullock-driver in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room. But if Mme. de Restaud and M. de Trailles had found him horribly in the way, M. d'Ajuda hailed his coming with relief.

°°°°"Good-bye," said the Portuguese, hurrying to the door, as Eugene made his entrance into a dainty little pink-and-gray drawing- room, where luxury seemed nothing more than good taste.

°°°°"Until this evening," said Mme. de Beauseant, turning her head to give the Marquis a glance. "We are going to the Bouffons, are we not?"

°°°°"I cannot go," he said, with his fingers on the door handle.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant rose and beckoned to him to return. She did not pay the slightest attention to Eugene, who stood there dazzled by the sparkling marvels around him; he began to think that this was some story out of the Arabian Nights made real, and did not know where to hide himself, when the woman before him seemed to be unconscious of his existence. The Vicomtesse had raised the forefinger of her right hand, and gracefully signed to the Marquis to seat himself beside her. The Marquis felt the imperious sway of passion in her gesture; he came back towards her. Eugene watched him, not without a feeling of envy.

°°°°"That is the owner of the brougham!" he said to himself. "But is it necessary to have a pair of spirited horses, servants in livery, and torrents of gold to draw a glance from a woman here in Paris?"

°°°°The demon of luxury gnawed at his heart, greed burned in his veins, his throat was parched with the thirst of gold.

°°°°He had a hundred and thirty francs every quarter. His father, mother, brothers, sisters, and aunt did not spend two hundred francs a month among them. This swift comparison between his present condition and the aims he had in view helped to benumb his faculties.

°°°°"Why not?" the Vicomtesse was saying, as she smiled at the Portuguese. "Why cannot you come to the Italiens?"

°°°°"Affairs! I am to dine with the English Ambassador."

°°°°"Throw him over."

°°°°When a man once enters on a course of deception, he is compelled to add lie to lie. M. d'Ajuda therefore said, smiling, "Do you lay your commands on me?"

°°°°"Yes, certainly."

°°°°"That was what I wanted to have you say to me," he answered, dissembling his feelings in a glance which would have reassured any other woman.

°°°°He took the Vicomtesse's hand, kissed it, and went.

°°°°Eugene ran his fingers through his hair, and constrained himself to bow. He thought that now Mme. de Beauseant would give him her attention; but suddenly she sprang forward, rushed to a window in the gallery, and watched M. d'Ajuda step into his carriage; she listened to the order that he gave, and heard the Swiss repeat it to the coachman:

°°°°"To M. de Rochefide's house."

°°°°Those words, and the way in which M. d'Ajuda flung himself back in the carriage, were like a lightning flash and a thunderbolt for her; she walked back again with a deadly fear gnawing at her heart. The most terrible catastrophes only happen among the heights. The Vicomtesse went to her own room, sat down at a table, and took up a sheet of dainty notepaper.

°°°°"When, instead of dining with the English Ambassador,"   she wrote, "you go to the Rochefides, you owe me an   explanation, which I am waiting to hear."

°°°°She retraced several of the letters, for her hand was trembling so that they were indistinct; then she signed the note with an initial C for "Claire de Bourgogne," and rang the bell.

°°°°"Jacques," she said to the servant, who appeared immediately, "take this note to M. de Rochefide's house at half-past seven and ask for the Marquis d'Ajuda. If M. d'Ajuda is there, leave the note without waiting for an answer; if he is not there, bring the note back to me."

°°°°"Madame la Vicomtess, there is a visitor in the drawing-room."

°°°°"Ah! yes, of course," she said, opening the door.

°°°°Eugene was beginning to feel very uncomfortable, but at last the Vicomtesse appeared; she spoke to him, and the tremulous tones of her voice vibrated through his heart.

°°°°"Pardon me, monsieur," she said; "I had a letter to write. Now I am quite at liberty."

°°°°She scarcely knew what she was saying, for even as she spoke she thought, "Ah! he means to marry Mlle. de Rochefide? But is he still free? This evening the marriage shall be broken off, or else . . . But before to-morrow I shall know."

°°°°"Cousin . . ." the student replied.

°°°°"Eh?" said the Countess, with an insolent glance that sent a cold shudder through Eugene; he understood what that "Eh?" meant; he had learned a great deal in three hours, and his wits were on the alert. He reddened:

°°°°"Madame . . ." he began; he hesitated a moment, and then went on. "Pardon me; I am in such need of protection that the nearest scrap of relationship could do me no harm."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant smiled but there was sadness in her smile; even now she felt forebodings of the coming pain, the air she breathed was heavy with the storm that was about to burst.

°°°°"If you knew how my family are situated," he went on, "you would love to play the part of a beneficent fairy godmother who graciously clears the obstacles from the path of her protege."

°°°°"Well, cousin," she said, laughing, "and how can I be of service to you?"

°°°°"But do I know even that? I am distantly related to you, and this obscure and remote relationship is even now a perfect godsend to me. You have confused my ideas; I cannot remember the things that I meant to say to you. I know no one else here in Paris. . . . Ah! if I could only ask you to counsel me, ask you to look upon me as a poor child who would fain cling to the hem of your dress, who would lay down his life for you."

°°°°"Would you kill a man for me?"

°°°°"Two," said Eugene.

°°°°"You, child. Yes, you are a child," she said, keeping back the tears that came to her eyes; "you would love sincerely."

°°°°"Oh!" he cried, flinging up his head.

°°°°The audacity of the student's answer interested the Vicomtesse in him. The southern brain was beginning to scheme for the first time. Between Mme. de Restaud's blue boudoir and Mme. de Beauseant's rose-colored drawing-room he had made a three years' advance in a kind of law which is not a recognized study in Paris, although it is a sort of higher jurisprudence, and, when well understood, is a highroad to success of every kind.

°°°°"Ah! that is what I meant to say!" said Eugene. "I met Mme. de Restaud at your ball, and this morning I went to see her.

°°°°"You must have been very much in the way," said Mme. de Beauseant, smiling as she spoke.

°°°°"Yes, indeed. I am a novice, and my blunders will set every one against me, if you do not give me your counsel. I believe that in Paris it is very difficult to meet with a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion who would be willing to teach me, what you women can explain so well--life. I shall find a M. de Trailles everywhere. So I have come to you to ask you to give me a key to a puzzle, to entreat you to tell me what sort of blunder I made this morning. I mentioned an old man----"

°°°°"Madame la Duchess de Langeais," Jacques cut the student short; Eugene gave expression to his intense annoyance by a gesture.

°°°°"If you mean to succeed," said the Vicomtesse in a low voice, "in the first place you must not be so demonstrative."

°°°°"Ah! good morning, dear," she continued, and rising and crossing the room, she grasped the Duchess' hands as affectionately as if they had been sisters; the Duchess responded in the prettiest and most gracious way.

°°°°"Two intimate friends!" said Rastignac to himself. "Henceforward I shall have two protectresses; those two women are great friends, no doubt, and this newcomer will doubtless interest herself in her friend's cousin."

°°°°"To what happy inspiration do I owe this piece of good fortune, dear Antoinette?" asked Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°"Well, I saw M. d'Ajuda-Pinto at M. de Rochefide's door, so I thought that if I came I should find you alone."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant's mouth did not tighten, her color did not rise, her expression did not alter, or rather, her brow seemed to clear as the Duchess uttered those deadly words.

°°°°"If I had known that you were engaged----" the speaker added, glancing at Eugene.

°°°°"This gentleman is M. Eugene de Rastignac, one of my cousins," said the Vicomtesse. "Have you any news of General de Montriveau?" she continued. "Serizy told me yesterday that he never goes anywhere now; has he been to see you to-day?"

°°°°It was believed that the Duchess was desperately in love with M. de Montriveau, and that he was a faithless lover; she felt the question in her very heart, and her face flushed as she answered:

°°°°"He was at the Elysee yesterday."

°°°°"In attendance?"

°°°°"Claire," returned the Duchess, and hatred overflowed in the glances she threw at Mme. de Beauseant; "of course you know that M. d'Ajuda-Pinto is going to marry Mlle. de Rochefide; the bans will be published to-morrow."

°°°°This thrust was too cruel; the Vicomtesse's face grew white, but she answered, laughing, "One of those rumors that fools amuse themselves with. What should induce M. d'Ajuda to take one of the noblest names in Portugal to the Rochefides? The Rochefides were only ennobled yesterday."

°°°°"But Bertha will have two hundred thousand livres a year, they say."

°°°°"M. d'Ajuda is too wealthy to marry for money."

°°°°"But, my dear, Mlle. de Rochefide is a charming girl."

°°°°"Indeed?"

°°°°"And, as a matter of fact, he is dining with them to-day; the thing is settled. It is very surprising to me that you should know so little about it."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant turned to Rastignac. "What was the blunder that you made, monsieur?" she asked. "The poor boy is only just launched into the world, Antoinette, so that he understands nothing of all this that we are speaking of. Be merciful to him, and let us finish our talk to-morrow. Everything will be announced to-morrow, you know, and your kind informal communication can be accompanied by official confirmation."

°°°°The Duchess gave Eugene one of those insolent glances that measure a man from head to foot, and leave him crushed and annihilated.

°°°°"Madame, I have unwittingly plunged a dagger into Mme. de Restaud's heart; unwittingly--therein lies my offence," said the student of law, whose keen brain had served him sufficiently well, for he had detected the biting epigrams that lurked beneath this friendly talk. "You continue to receive, possibly you fear, those who know the amount of pain that they deliberately inflict; but a clumsy blunderer who has no idea how deeply he wounds is looked upon as a fool who does not know how to make use of his opportunities, and every one despise him."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant gave the student a glance, one of those glances in which a great soul can mingle dignity and gratitude. It was like balm to the law student, who was still smarting under the Duchess' insolent scrutiny; she had looked at him as an auctioneer might look at some article to appraise its value.

°°°°"Imagine, too, that I had just made some progress with the Comte de Restaud; for I should tell you, madame," he went on, turning to the Duchess with a mixture of humility and malice in his manner, "that as yet I am only a poor devil of a student, very much alone in the world, and very poor----"

°°°°"You should not tell us that, M. de Rastignac. We women never care about anything that no one else will take."

°°°°"Bah!" said Eugene. "I am only two-and-twenty, and I must make up my mind to the drawbacks of my time of life. Besides, I am confessing my sins, and it would be impossible to kneel in a more charming confessional; you commit your sins in one drawing-room, and receive absolution for them in another."

°°°°The Duchess' expression grew colder, she did not like the flippant tone of these remarks, and showed that she considered them to be in bad taste by turning to the Vicomtesse with--"This gentleman has only just come----"

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant began to laugh outright at her cousin and at the Duchess both.

°°°°"He has only just come to Paris, dear, and is in search of some one who will give him lessons in good taste."

°°°°"Mme. la Duchesse," said Eugene, "is it not natural to wish to be initiated into the mysteries which charm us?" ("Come, now," he said to himself, "my language is superfinely elegant, I'm sure.")

°°°°"But Mme. de Restaud is herself, I believe, M. de Trailles' pupil," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Of that I had no idea, madame," answered the law student, "so I rashly came between them. In fact, I got on very well with the lady's husband, and his wife tolerated me for a time until I took it into my head to tell them that I knew some one of whom I had just caught a glimpse as he went out by a back staircase, a man who had given the Countess a kiss at the end of a passage."

°°°°"Who was it?" both women asked together.

°°°°"An old man who lives at the rate of two louis a month in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, where I, a poor student, lodge likewise. He is a truly unfortunate creature, everybody laughs at him--we all call him 'Father Goriot.' "

°°°°"Why, child that you are," cried the Vicomtesse, "Mme. de Restaud was a Mlle. Goriot!"

°°°°"The daughter of a vermicelli manufacturer," the Duchess added; "and when the little creature went to Court, the daughter of a pastry-cook was presented on the same day. Do you remember, Claire? The King began to laugh, and made some joke in Latin about flour. People--what was it?--people----"

°°°°"Ejusdem farinae," said Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that was it," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Oh! is that her father?" the law student continued, aghast.

°°°°"Yes, certainly; the old man had two daughters; he dotes on them, so to speak, though they will scarcely acknowledge him."

°°°°"Didn't the second daughter marry a banker with a German name?" the Vicomtesse asked, turning to Mme. de Langeais, "a Baron de Nucingen? And her name is Delphine, is it not? Isn't she a fair- haired woman who has a side-box at the Opera? She comes sometimes to the Bouffons, and laughs loudly to attract attention."

°°°°The Duchess smiled and said:

°°°°"I wonder at you, dear. Why do you take so much interest in people of that kind? One must have been as madly in love as Restaud was, to be infatuated with Mlle. Anastasie and her flour sacks. Oh! he will not find her a good bargain! She is in M. de Trailles' hands, and he will ruin her."

°°°°"And they do not acknowledge their father!" Eugene repeated.

°°°°"Oh! well, yes, their father, the father, a father," replied the Vicomtesse, "a kind father who gave them each five or six hundred thousand francs, it is said, to secure their happiness by marrying them well; while he only kept eight or ten thousand livres a year for himself, thinking that his daughters would always be his daughters, thinking that in them he would live his life twice over again, that in their houses he should find two homes, where he would be loved and looked up to, and made much of. And in two years' time both his sons-in-law had turned him out of their houses as if he were one of the lowest outcasts."

°°°°Tears came into Eugene's eyes. He was still under the spell of youthful beliefs, he had just left home, pure and sacred feelings had been stirred within him, and this was his first day on the battlefield of civilization in Paris. Genuine feeling is so infectious that for a moment the three looked at each other in silence.

°°°°"Eh, mon Dieu!" said Mme. de Langeais; "yes, it seems very horrible, and yet we see such things every day. Is there not a reason for it? Tell me, dear, have you ever really thought what a son-in-law is? A son-in-law is the man for whom we bring up, you and I, a dear little one, bound to us very closely in innumerable ways; for seventeen years she will be the joy of her family, its 'white soul,' as Lamartine says, and suddenly she will become its scourge. When HE comes and takes her from us, his love from the very beginning is like an axe laid to the root of all the old affection in our darling's heart, and all the ties that bound her to her family are severed. But yesterday our little daughter thought of no one but her mother and father, as we had no thought that was not for her; by to-morrow she will have become a hostile stranger. The tragedy is always going on under our eyes. On the one hand you see a father who has sacrificed himself to his son, and his daughter-in-law shows him the last degree of insolence. On the other hand, it is the son-in-law who turns his wife's mother out of the house. I sometimes hear it said that there is nothing dramatic about society in these days; but the Drama of the Son-in-law is appalling, to say nothing of our marriages, which have come to be very poor farces. I can explain how it all came about in the old vermicelli maker's case. I think I recollect that Foriot----"

°°°°"Goriot, madame."

°°°°"Yes, that Moriot was once President of his Section during the Revolution. He was in the secret of the famous scarcity of grain, and laid the foundation of his fortune in those days by selling flour for ten times its cost. He had as much flour as he wanted. My grandmother's steward sold him immense quantities. No doubt Noriot shared the plunder with the Committee of Public Salvation, as that sort of person always did. I recollect the steward telling my grandmother that she might live at Grandvilliers in complete security, because her corn was as good as a certificate of civism. Well, then, this Loriot, who sold corn to those butchers, has never had but one passion, they say--he idolizes his daughters. He settled one of them under Restaud's roof, and grafted the other into the Nucingen family tree, the Baron de Nucingen being a rich banker who had turned Royalist. You can quite understand that so long as Bonaparte was Emperor, the two sons-in-law could manage to put up with the old Ninety-three; but after the restoration of the Bourbons, M. de Restaud felt bored by the old man's society, and the banker was still more tired of it. His daughters were still fond of him; they wanted 'to keep the goat and the cabbage,' so they used to see Joriot whenever there was no one there, under pretence of affection. 'Come to- day, papa, we shall have you all to ourselves, and that will be much nicer!' and all that sort of thing. As for me, dear, I believe that love has second-sight: poor Ninety-three; his heart must have bled. He saw that his daughters were ashamed of him, that if they loved their husbands his visits must make mischief. So he immolated himself. He made the sacrifice because he was a father; he went into voluntary exile. His daughters were satisfied, so he thought that he had done the best thing he could; but it was a family crime, and father and daughters were accomplices. You see this sort of thing everywhere. What could this old Doriot have been but a splash of mud in his daughters' drawing-rooms? He would only have been in the way, and bored other people, besides being bored himself. And this that happened between father and daughters may happen to the prettiest woman in

°°°°Paris and the man she loves the best; if her love grows tiresome, he will go; he will descend to the basest trickery to leave her. It is the same with all love and friendship. Our heart is a treasury; if you pour out all its wealth at once, you are bankrupt. We show no more mercy to the affection that reveals its utmost extent than we do to another kind of prodigal who has not a penny left. Their father had given them all he had. For twenty years he had given his whole heart to them; then, one day, he gave them all his fortune too. The lemon was squeezed; the girls left the rest in the gutter."

°°°°"The world is very base," said the Vicomtesse, plucking at the threads of her shawl. She did not raise her head as she spoke; the words that Mme. de Langeais had meant for her in the course of her story had cut her to the quick.

°°°°"Base? Oh, no," answered the Duchess; "the world goes its own way, that is all. If I speak in this way, it is only to show that I am not duped by it. I think as you do," she said, pressing the Vicomtesse's hand. "The world is a slough; let us try to live on the heights above it."

°°°°She rose to her feet and kissed Mme. de Beauseant on the forehead as she said: "You look very charming to-day, dear. I have never seen such a lovely color in your cheeks before."

°°°°Then she went out with a slight inclination of the head to the cousin.

°°°°"Father Goriot is sublime!" said Eugene to himself, as he remembered how he had watched his neighbor work the silver vessel into a shapeless mass that night.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant did not hear him; she was absorbed in her own thoughts. For several minutes the silence remained unbroken till the law student became almost paralyzed with embarrassment, and was equally afraid to go or stay or speak a word.

°°°°"The world is basely ungrateful and ill-natured," said the Vicomtesse at last. "No sooner does a trouble befall you than a friend is ready to bring the tidings and to probe your heart with the point of a dagger while calling on you to admire the handle. Epigrams and sarcasms already! Ah! I will defend myself!"

°°°°She raised her head like the great lady that she was, and lightnings flashed from her proud eyes.

°°°°"Ah!" she said, as she saw Eugene, "are you there?"

°°°°"Still," he said piteously.

°°°°"Well, then, M. de Rastignac, deal with the world as it deserves. You are determined to succeed? I will help you. You shall sound the depths of corruption in woman; you shall measure the extent of man's pitiful vanity. Deeply as I am versed in such learning, there were pages in the book of life that I had not read. Now I know all. The more cold-blooded your calculations, the further you will go. Strike ruthlessly; you will be feared. Men and women for you must be nothing more than post-horses; take a fresh relay, and leave the last to drop by the roadside; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition. You will be nothing here, you see, unless a woman interests herself in you; and she must be young and wealthy, and a woman of the world. Yet, if you have a heart, lock it carefully away like a treasure; do not let any one suspect it, or you will be lost; you would cease to be the executioner, you would take the victim's place. And if ever you should love, never let your secret escape you! Trust no one until you are very sure of the heart to which you open your heart. Learn to mistrust every one; take every precaution for the sake of the love which does not exist as yet. Listen, Miguel"-- the name slipped from her so naturally that she did not notice her mistake--"there is something still more appalling than the ingratitude of daughters who have cast off their old father and wish that he were dead, and that is a rivalry between two sisters. Restaud comes of a good family, his wife has been received into their circle; she has been presented at court; and her sister, her wealthy sister, Mme. Delphine de Nucingen, the wife of a great capitalist, is consumed with envy, and ready to die of spleen. There is gulf set between the sisters--indeed, they are sisters no longer--the two women who refuse to acknowledge their father do not acknowledge each other. So Mme. de Nucingen would lap up all the mud that lies between the Rue Saint-Lazare and the Rue de Grenelle to gain admittance to my salon. She fancied that she should gain her end through de Marsay; she has made herself de Marsay's slave, and she bores him. De Marsay cares very little about her. If you will introduce her to me, you will be her darling, her Benjamin; she will idolize you. If, after that, you can love her, do so; if not, make her useful. I will ask her to come once or twice to one of my great crushes, but I will never receive her here in the morning. I will bow to her when I see her, and that will be quite sufficient. You have shut the Comtesse de Restaud's door against you by mentioning Father Goriot's name. Yes, my good friend, you may call at her house twenty times, and every time out of the twenty you will find that she is not at home. The servants have their orders, and will not admit you. Very well, then, now let Father Goriot gain the right of entry into her sister's house for you. The beautiful Mme. de Nucingen will give the signal for a battle. As soon as she singles you out, other women will begin to lose their heads about you, and her enemies and rivals and intimate friends will all try to take you from her. There are women who will fall in love with a man because another woman has chosen him; like the city madams, poor things, who copy our millinery, and hope thereby to acquire our manners. You will have a success, and in Paris success is everything; it is the key of power. If the women credit you with wit and talent, the men will follow suit so long as you do not undeceive them yourself. There will be nothing you may not aspire to; you will go everywhere, and you will find out what the world is--an assemblage of fools and knaves. But you must be neither the one nor the other. I am giving you my name like Ariadne's clue of thread to take with you into the labyrinth; make no unworthy use of it," she said, with a queenly glance and curve of her throat; "give it back to me unsullied. And now, go; leave me. We women also have our battles to fight."

°°°°"And if you should ever need some one who would gladly set a match to a train for you----"

°°°°"Well?" she asked.

°°°°He tapped his heart, smiled in answer to his cousin's smile, and went.

°°°°It was five o'clock, and Eugene was hungry; he was afraid lest he should not be in time for dinner, a misgiving which made him feel that it was pleasant to be borne so quickly across Paris. This sensation of physical comfort left his mind free to grapple with the thoughts that assailed him. A mortification usually sends a young man of his age into a furious rage; he shakes his fist at society, and vows vengeance when his belief in himself is shaken. Just then Rastignac was overwhelmed by the words, "You have shut the Countess' door against you."

°°°°"I shall call!" he said to himself, "and if Mme. de Beauseant is right, if I never find her at home--I . . . well, Mme. de Restaud shall meet me in every salon in Paris. I will learn to fence and have some pistol practice, and kill that Maxime of hers!"

°°°°"And money?" cried an inward monitor. "How about money, where is that to come from?" And all at once the wealth displayed in the Countess de Restaud's drawing-room rose before his eyes. That was the luxury which Goriot's daughter had loved too well, the gilding, the ostentatious splendor, the unintelligent luxury of the parvenu, the riotous extravagance of a courtesan. Then the attractive vision suddenly went under an eclipse as he remembered the stately grandeur of the Hotel de Beauseant. As his fancy wandered among these lofty regions in the great world of Paris, innumerable dark thoughts gathered in his heart; his ideas widened, and his conscience grew more elastic. He saw the world as it is; saw how the rich lived beyond the jurisdiction of law and public opinion, and found in success the ultima ratio mundi.

°°°°"Vautrin is right, success is virtue!" he said to himself.

°°°°Arrived in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, he rushed up to his room for ten francs wherewith to satisfy the demands of the cabman, and went in to dinner. He glanced round the squalid room, saw the eighteen poverty-stricken creatures about to feed like cattle in their stalls, and the sight filled him with loathing. The transition was too sudden, and the contrast was so violent that it could not but act as a powerful stimulant; his ambition developed and grew beyond all social bounds. On the one hand, he beheld a vision of social life in its most charming and refined forms, of quick-pulsed youth, of fair, impassioned faces invested with all the charm of poetry, framed in a marvelous setting of luxury or art; and, on the other hand, he saw a sombre picture, the miry verge beyond these faces, in which passion was extinct and nothing was left of the drama but the cords and pulleys and bare mechanism. Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, the words uttered in anger by the forsaken lady, her petulant offer, came to his mind, and poverty was a ready expositor. Rastignac determined to open two parallel trenches so as to insure success; he would be a learned doctor of law and a man of fashion. Clearly he was still a child! Those two lines are asymptotes, and will never meet.

°°°°"You are very dull, my lord Marquis," said Vautrin, with one of the shrewd glances that seem to read the innermost secrets of another mind.

°°°°"I am not in the humor to stand jokes from people who call me 'my lord Marquis,' " answered Eugene. "A marquis here in Paris, if he is not the veriest sham, ought to have a hundred thousand livres a year at least; and a lodger in the Maison Vauquer is not exactly Fortune's favorite."

°°°°Vautrin's glance at Rastignac was half-paternal, half- contemptuous. "Puppy!" it seemed to say; "I should make one mouthful of him!" Then he answered:

°°°°"You are in a bad humor; perhaps your visit to the beautiful Comtesse de Restaud was not a success."

°°°°"She has shut her door against me because I told her that her father dined at our table," cried Rastignac.

°°°°Glances were exchanged all round the room; Father Goriot looked down.

°°°°"You have sent some snuff into my eye," he said to his neighbor, turning a little aside to rub his hand over his face.

°°°°"Any one who molests Father Goriot will have henceforward to reckon with me," said Eugene, looking at the old man's neighbor; "he is worth all the rest of us put together.--I am not speaking of the ladies," he added, turning in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer.

°°°°Eugene's remarks produced a sensation, and his tone silenced the dinner-table. Vautrin alone spoke. "If you are going to champion Father Goriot, and set up for his responsible editor into the bargain, you had need be a crack shot and know how to handle the foils," he said, banteringly.

°°°°"So I intend," said Eugene.

°°°°"Then you are taking the field today?"

°°°°"Perhaps," Rastignac answered. "But I owe no account of myself to any one, especially as I do not try to find out what other people do of a night."

°°°°Vautrin looked askance at Rastignac.

°°°°"If you do not mean to be deceived by the puppets, my boy, you must go behind and see the whole show, and not peep through holes in the curtain. That is enough," he added, seeing that Eugene was about to fly into a passion. "We can have a little talk whenever you like."

°°°°There was a general feeling of gloom and constraint. Father Goriot was so deeply dejected by the student's remark that he did not notice the change in the disposition of his fellow-lodgers, nor know that he had met with a champion capable of putting an end to the persecution.

°°°°"Then, M. Goriot sitting there is the father of a countess," said Mme. Vauquer in a low voice.

°°°°"And of a baroness," answered Rastignac.

°°°°"That is about all he is capable of," said Bianchon to Rastignac; "I have taken a look at his head; there is only one bump--the bump of Paternity; he must be an ETERNAL FATHER."

°°°°Eugene was too intent on his thoughts to laugh at Bianchon's joke. He determined to profit by Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, and was asking himself how he could obtain the necessary money. He grew grave. The wide savannas of the world stretched before his eyes; all things lay before him, nothing was his. Dinner came to an end, the others went, and he was left in the dining-room.

°°°°"So you have seen my daughter?" Goriot spoke tremulously, and the sound of his voice broke in upon Eugene's dreams. The young man took the elder's hand, and looked at him with something like kindness in his eyes.

°°°°"You are a good and noble man," he said. "We will have some talk about your daughters by and by."

°°°°He rose without waiting for Goriot's answer, and went to his room. There he wrote the following letter to his mother:--

°°°°"My Dear Mother,--Can you nourish your child from your breast again? I am in a position to make a rapid fortune, but I want twelve hundred francs--I must have them at all costs. Say nothing about this to my father; perhaps he might make objections, and unless I have the money, I may be led to put an end to myself, and so escape the clutches of despair. I will tell you everything when I see you. I will not begin to try to describe my present situation; it would take volumes to put the whole story clearly and fully. I have not been gambling, my kind mother, I owe no one a penny; but if you would preserve the life that you gave me, you must send me the sum I mention. As a matter of fact, I go to see the Vicomtesse de Beauseant; she is using her influence for me; I am obliged to go into society, and I have not a penny to lay out on clean gloves. I can manage to exist on bread and water, or go without food, if need be, but I cannot do without the tools with which they cultivate the vineyards in this country. I must resolutely make up my mind at once to make my way, or stick in the mire for the rest of my days. I know that all your hopes are set on me, and I want to realize them quickly. Sell some of your old jewelry, my kind mother; I will give you other jewels very soon. I know enough of our affairs at home to know all that such a sacrifice means, and you must not think that I would lightly ask you to make it; I should be a monster if I could. You must think of my entreaty as a cry forced from me by imperative necessity. Our whole future lies in the subsidy with which I must begin my first campaign, for life in Paris is one continual battle. If you cannot otherwise procure the whole of the money, and are forced to sell our aunt's lace, tell her that I will send her some still handsomer," and so forth.

°°°°He wrote to ask each of his sisters for their savings--would they despoil themselves for him, and keep the sacrifice a secret from the family? To his request he knew that they would not fail to respond gladly, and he added to it an appeal to their delicacy by touching the chord of honor that vibrates so loudly in young and high-strung natures.

°°°°Yet when he had written the letters, he could not help feeling misgivings in spite of his youthful ambition; his heart beat fast, and he trembled. He knew the spotless nobleness of the lives buried away in the lonely manor house; he knew what trouble and what joy his request would cause his sisters, and how happy they would be as they talked at the bottom of the orchard of that dear brother of theirs in Paris. Visions rose before his eyes; a sudden strong light revealed his sisters secretly counting over their little store, devising some girlish stratagem by which the money could be sent to him incognito, essaying, for the first time in their lives, a piece of deceit that reached the sublime in its unselfishness.

°°°°"A sister's heart is a diamond for purity, a deep sea of tenderness!" he said to himself. He felt ashamed of those letters.

°°°°What power there must be in the petitions put up by such hearts; how pure the fervor that bears their souls to Heaven in prayer! What exquisite joy they would find in self-sacrifice! What a pang for his mother's heart if she could not send him all that he asked for! And this noble affection, these sacrifices made at such terrible cost, were to serve as the ladder by which he meant to climb to Delphine de Nucingen. A few tears, like the last grains of incense flung upon the sacred alter fire of the hearth, fell from his eyes. He walked up and down, and despair mingled with his emotion. Father Goriot saw him through the half-open door.

°°°°"What is the matter, sir?" he asked from the threshold.

°°°°"Ah! my good neighbor, I am as much a son and brother as you are a father. You do well to fear for the Comtesse Anastasie; there is one M. Maxime de Trailles, who will be her ruin."

°°°°Father Goriot withdrew, stammering some words, but Eugene failed to catch their meaning.

°°°°The next morning Rastignac went out to post his letters. Up to the last moment he wavered and doubted, but he ended by flinging them into the box. "I shall succeed!" he said to himself. So says the gambler; so says the great captain; but the three words that have been the salvation of some few, have been the ruin of many more.

°°°°A few days after this Eugene called at Mme. de Restaud's house; she was not at home. Three times he tried the experiment, and three times he found her doors closed against him, though he was careful to choose an hour when M. de Trailles was not there. The Vicomtesse was right.

°°°°The student studied no longer. He put in an appearance at lectures simply to answer to his name, and after thus attesting his presence, departed forthwith. He had been through a reasoning process familiar to most students. He had seen the advisability of deferring his studies to the last moment before going up for his examinations; he made up his mind to cram his second and third years' work into the third year, when he meant to begin to work in earnest, and to complete his studies in law with one great effort. In the meantime he had fifteen months in which to navigate the ocean of Paris, to spread the nets and set the lines that would bring him a protectress and a fortune. Twice during that week he saw Mme. de Beauseant; he did not go to her house until he had seen the Marquis d'Ajuda drive away.

°°°°Victory for yet a few more days was with the great lady, the most poetic figure in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; and the marriage of the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto with Mlle. de Rochefide was postponed. The dread of losing her happiness filled those days with a fever of joy unknown before, but the end was only so much the nearer. The Marquis d'Ajuda and the Rochefides agreed that this quarrel and reconciliation was a very fortunate thing; Mme. de Beauseant (so they hoped) would gradually become reconciled to the idea of the marriage, and in the end would be brought to sacrifice d'Ajuda's morning visits to the exigencies of a man's career, exigencies which she must have foreseen. In spite of the most solemn promises, daily renewed, M. d'Ajuda was playing a part, and the Vicomtesse was eager to be deceived. "Instead of taking a leap heroically from the window, she is falling headlong down the staircase," said her most intimate friend, the Duchesse de Langeais. Yet this after-glow of happiness lasted long enough for the Vicomtesse to be of service to her young cousin. She had a half-superstitious affection for him. Eugene had shown her sympathy and devotion at a crisis when a woman sees no pity, no real comfort in any eyes; when if a man is ready with soothing flatteries, it is because he has an interested motive.

°°°°Rastignac made up his mind that he must learn the whole of Goriot's previous history; he would come to his bearings before attempting to board the Maison de Nucingen. The results of his inquiries may be given briefly as follows:--

°°°°In the days before the Revolution, Jean-Joachim Goriot was simply a workman in the employ of a vermicelli maker. He was a skilful, thrifty workman, sufficiently enterprising to buy his master's business when the latter fell a chance victim to the disturbances of 1789. Goriot established himself in the Rue de la Jussienne, close to the Corn Exchange. His plain good sense led him to accept the position of President of the Section, so as to secure for his business the protection of those in power at that dangerous epoch. This prudent step had led to success; the foundations of his fortune were laid in the time of the Scarcity (real or artificial), when the price of grain of all kinds rose enormously in Paris. People used to fight for bread at the bakers' doors; while other persons went to the grocers' shops and bought Italian paste foods without brawling over it. It was during this year that Goriot made the money, which, at a later time, was to give him all the advantage of the great capitalist over the small buyer; he had, moreover, the usual luck of average ability; his mediocrity was the salvation of him. He excited no one's envy, it was not even suspected that he was rich till the peril of being rich was over, and all his intelligence was concentrated, not on political, but on commercial speculations. Goriot was an authority second to none on all questions relating to corn, flour, and "middlings"; and the production, storage, and quality of grain. He could estimate the yield of the harvest, and foresee market prices; he bought his cereals in Sicily, and imported Russian wheat. Any one who had heard him hold forth on the regulations that control the importation and exportation of grain, who had seen his grasp of the subject, his clear insight into the principles involved, his appreciation of weak points in the way that the system worked, would have thought that here was the stuff of which a minister is made. Patient, active, and persevering, energetic and prompt in action, he surveyed his business horizon with an eagle eye. Nothing there took him by surprise; he foresaw all things, knew all that was happening, and kept his own counsel; he was a diplomatist in his quick comprehension of a situation; and in the routine of business he was as patient and plodding as a soldier on the march. But beyond this business horizon he could not see. He used to spend his hours of leisure on the threshold of his shop, leaning against the framework of the door. Take him from his dark little counting-house, and he became once more the rough, slow-witted workman, a man who cannot understand a piece of reasoning, who is indifferent to all intellectual pleasures, and falls asleep at the play, a Parisian Dolibom in short, against whose stupidity other minds are powerless.

°°°°Natures of this kind are nearly all alike; in almost all of them you will find some hidden depth of sublime affection. Two all- absorbing affections filled the vermicelli maker's heart to the exclusion of every other feeling; into them he seemed to put all the forces of his nature, as he put the whole power of his brain into the corn trade. He had regarded his wife, the only daughter of a rich farmer of La Brie, with a devout admiration; his love for her had been boundless. Goriot had felt the charm of a lovely and sensitive nature, which, in its delicate strength, was the very opposite of his own. Is there any instinct more deeply implanted in the heart of man than the pride of protection, a protection which is constantly exerted for a fragile and defenceless creature? Join love thereto, the warmth of gratitude that all generous souls feel for the source of their pleasures, and you have the explanation of many strange incongruities in human nature.

°°°°After seven years of unclouded happiness, Goriot lost his wife. It was very unfortunate for him. She was beginning to gain an ascendency over him in other ways; possibly she might have brought that barren soil under cultivation, she might have widened his ideas and given other directions to his thoughts. But when she was dead, the instinct of fatherhood developed in him till it almost became a mania. All the affection balked by death seemed to turn to his daughters, and he found full satisfaction for his heart in loving them. More or less brilliant proposals were made to him from time to time; wealthy merchants or farmers with daughters vied with each other in offering inducements to him to marry again; but he determined to remain a widower. His father-in-law, the only man for whom he felt a decided friendship, gave out that Goriot had made a vow to be faithful to his wife's memory. The frequenters of the Corn Exchange, who could not comprehend this sublime piece of folly, joked about it among themselves, and found a ridiculous nickname for him. One of them ventured (after a glass over a bargain) to call him by it, and a blow from the vermicelli maker's fist sent him headlong into a gutter in the Rue Oblin. He could think of nothing else when his children were concerned; his love for them made him fidgety and anxious; and this was so well known, that one day a competitor, who wished to get rid of him to secure the field to himself, told Goriot that Delphine had just been knocked down by a cab. The vermicelli maker turned ghastly pale, left the Exchange at once, and did not return for several days afterwards; he was ill in consequence of the shock and the subsequent relief on discovering that it was a false alarm. This time, however, the offender did not escape with a bruised shoulder; at a critical moment in the man's affairs, Goriot drove him into bankruptcy, and forced him to disappear from the Corn Exchange.

°°°°As might have been expected, the two girls were spoiled. With an income of sixty thousand francs, Goriot scarcely spent twelve hundred on himself, and found all his happiness in satisfying the whims of the two girls. The best masters were engaged, that Anastasie and Delphine might be endowed with all the accomplishments which distinguish a good education. They had a chaperon--luckily for them, she was a woman who had good sense and good taste;--they learned to ride; they had a carriage for their use; they lived as the mistress of a rich old lord might live; they had only to express a wish, their father would hasten to give them their most extravagant desires, and asked nothing of them in return but a kiss. Goriot had raised the two girls to the level of the angels; and, quite naturally, he himself was left beneath them. Poor man! he loved them even for the pain that they gave him.

°°°°When the girls were old enough to be married, they were left free to choose for themselves. Each had half her father's fortune as her dowry; and when the Comte de Restaud came to woo Anastasie for her beauty, her social aspirations led her to leave her father's house for a more exalted sphere. Delphine wished for money; she married Nucingen, a banker of German extraction, who became a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire. Goriot remained a vermicelli maker as before. His daughters and his sons-in-law began to demur; they did not like to see him still engaged in trade, though his whole life was bound up with his business. For five years he stood out against their entreaties, then he yielded, and consented to retire on the amount realized by the sale of his business and the savings of the last few years. It was this capital that Mme. Vauquer, in the early days of his residence with her, had calculated would bring in eight or ten thousand livres in a year. He had taken refuge in her lodging- house, driven there by despair when he knew that his daughters were compelled by their husbands not only to refuse to receive him as an inmate in their houses, but even to see him no more except in private.

°°°°This was all the information which Rastignac gained from a M. Muret who had purchased Goriot's business, information which confirmed the Duchesse de Langeais' suppositions, and herewith the preliminary explanation of this obscure but terrible Parisian tragedy comes to an end.

°°°°Towards the end of the first week in December Rastignac received two letters--one from his mother, and one from his eldest sister. His heart beat fast, half with happiness, half with fear, at the sight of the familiar handwriting. Those two little scraps of paper contained life or death for his hopes. But while he felt a shiver of dread as he remembered their dire poverty at home, he knew their love for him so well that he could not help fearing that he was draining their very life-blood. His mother's letter ran as follows:--

°°°°"My Dear Child,--I am sending you the money that you asked for. Make a good use of it. Even to save your life I could not raise so large a sum a second time without your father's knowledge, and there would be trouble about it. We should be obliged to mortgage the land. It is impossible to judge of the merits of schemes of which I am ignorant; but what sort of schemes can they be, that you should fear to tell me about them? Volumes of explanation would not have been needed; we mothers can understand at a word, and that word would have spared me the anguish of uncertainty. I do not know how to hide the painful impression that your letter has made upon me, my dear son. What can you have felt when you were moved to send this chill of dread through my heart? It must have been very painful to you to write the letter that gave me so much pain as I read it. To what courses are you committed? You are going to appear to be something that you are not, and your whole life and success depends upon this? You are about to see a society into which you cannot enter without rushing into expense that you cannot afford, without losing precious time that is needed for your studies. Ah! my dear Eugene, believe your mother, crooked ways cannot lead to great ends. Patience and endurance are the two qualities most needed in your position. I am not scolding you; I do not want any tinge of bitterness to spoil our offering. I am only talking like a mother whose trust in you is as great as her foresight for you. You know the steps that you must take, and I, for my part, know the purity of heart, and how good your intentions are; so I can say to you without a doubt, 'Go forward, beloved!' If I tremble, it is because I am a mother, but my prayers and blessings will be with you at every step. Be very careful, dear boy. You must have a man's prudence, for it lies with you to shape the destinies of five others who are dear to you, and must look to you. Yes, our fortunes depend upon you, and your success is ours. We all pray to God to be with you in all that you do. Your aunt Marcillac has been most generous beyond words in this matter; she saw at once how it was, even down to your gloves. 'But I have a weakness for the eldest!' she said gaily. You must love your aunt very much, dear Eugene. I shall wait till you have succeeded before telling you all that she has done for you, or her money would burn your fingers. You, who are young, do not know what it is to part with something that is a piece of your past! But what would we not sacrifice for your sakes? Your aunt says that I am to send you a kiss on the forehead from her, and that kiss is to bring you luck again and again, she says. She would have written you herself, the dear kind-hearted woman, but she is troubled with the gout in her fingers just now. Your father is very well. The vintage of 1819 has turned out better than we expected. Good-bye, dear boy; I will say nothing about your sisters, because Laure is writing to you, and I must let her have the pleasure of giving you all the home news. Heaven send that you may succeed! Oh! yes, dear Eugene, you must succeed. I have come, through you, to a knowledge of a pain so sharp that I do not think I could endure it a second time. I have come to know what it is to be poor, and to long for money for my children's sake. There, good-bye! Do not leave us for long without news of you; and here, at the last, take a kiss from your mother."

°°°°By the time Eugene had finished the letter he was in tears. He thought of Father Goriot crushing his silver keepsake into a shapeless mass before he sold it to meet his daughter's bill of exchange.

°°°°"Your mother has broken up her jewels for you," he said to himself; "your aunt shed tears over those relics of hers before she sold them for your sake. What right have you to heap execrations on Anastasie? You have followed her example; you have selfishly sacrificed others to your own future, and she sacrifices her father to her lover; and of you two, which is the worse?"

°°°°He was ready to renounce his attempts; he could not bear to take that money. The fires of remorse burned in his heart, and gave him intolerable pain, the generous secret remorse which men seldom take into account when they sit in judgment upon their fellow-men; but perhaps the angels in heaven, beholding it, pardon the criminal whom our justice condemns. Rastignac opened his sister's letter; its simplicity and kindness revived his heart.

°°°°"Your letter came just at the right time, dear brother. Agathe and I had thought of so many different ways of spending our money, that we did not know what to buy with it; and now you have come in, and, like the servant who upset all the watches that belonged to the King of Spain, you have restored harmony; for, really and truly, we did not know which of all the things we wanted we wanted most, and we were always quarreling about it, never thinking, dear Eugene, of a way of spending our money which would satisfy us completely. Agathe jumped for you. Indeed, we have been like two mad things all day, 'to such a prodigious degree' (as aunt would say), that mother said, with her severe expression, 'Whatever can be the matter with you, mesdemoiselles?' I think if we had been scolded a little, we should have been still better pleased. A woman ought to be very glad to suffer for one she loves! I, however, in my inmost soul, was doleful and cross in the midst of all my joy. I shall make a bad wife, I am afraid, I am too fond of spending. I had bought two sashes and a nice little stiletto for piercing eyelet-holes in my stays, trifles that I really did not want, so that I have less than that slow-coach Agathe, who is so economical, and hoards her money like a magpie. She had two hundred francs! And I have only one hundred and fifty! I am nicely punished; I could throw my sash down the well; it will be painful to me to wear it now. Poor dear, I have robbed you. And Agathe was so nice about it. She said, 'Let us send the three hundred and fifty francs in our two names!' But I could not help telling you everything just as it happened.

°°°°"Do you know how we managed to keep your commandments? We took our glittering hoard, we went out for a walk, and when once fairly on the highway we ran all the way to Ruffec, where we handed over the coin, without more ado, to M. Grimbert of the Messageries Royales. We came back again like swallows on the wing. 'Don't you think that happiness has made us lighter?' Agathe said. We said all sorts of things, which I shall not tell you, Monsieur le Parisien, because they were all about you. Oh, we love you dearly, dear brother; it was all summed up in those few words. As for keeping the secret, little masqueraders like us are capable of anything (according to our aunt), even of holding our tongues. Our mother has been on a mysterious journey to Angouleme, and the aunt went with her, not without solemn councils, from which we were shut out, and M. le Baron likewise. They are silent as to the weighty political considerations that prompted their mission, and conjectures are rife in the State of Rastignac. The Infantas are embroidering a muslin robe with open- work sprigs for her Majesty the Queen; the work progresses in the most profound secrecy. There be but two more breadths to finish. A decree has gone forth that no wall shall be built on the side of Verteuil, but that a hedge shall be planted instead thereof. Our subjects may sustain some disappointment of fruit and espaliers, but strangers will enjoy a fair prospect. Should the heir-presumptive lack pocket-handkerchiefs, be it known unto him that the dowager Lady of Marcillac, exploring the recesses of her drawers and boxes (known respectively as Pompeii and Herculaneum), having brought to light a fair piece of cambric whereof she wotted not, the Princesses Agathe and Laure place at their brother's disposal their thread, their needles, and hands somewhat of the reddest. The two young Princes, Don Henri and Don Gabriel, retain their fatal habits of stuffing themselves with grape-jelly, of teasing their sisters, of taking their pleasure by going a-bird-nesting, and of cutting switches for themselves from the osier-beds, maugre the laws of the realm. Moreover, they list not to learn naught, wherefore the Papal Nuncio (called of the commonalty, M. le Cure) threateneth them with excommunication, since that they neglect the sacred canons of grammatical construction for the construction of other canon, deadly engines made of the stems of elder.

°°°°"Farewell, dear brother, never did letter carry so many wishes for your success, so much love fully satisfied. You will have a great deal to tell us when you come home! You will tell me everything, won't you? I am the oldest. From something the aunt let fall, we think you must have had some success.

°°°°"Something was said of a lady, but nothing more was said . . .

°°°°"Of course not, in our family! Oh, by-the-by, Eugene, would you rather that we made that piece of cambric into shirts for you instead of pocket-handkerchiefs? If you want some really nice shirts at once, we ought to lose no time in beginning upon them; and if the fashion is different now in Paris, send us one for a pattern; we want more particularly to know about the cuffs. Good- bye! Good-bye! Take my kiss on the left side of your forehead, on the temple that belongs to me, and to no one else in the world. I am leaving the other side of the sheet for Agathe, who has solemnly promised not to read a word that I have written; but, all the same, I mean to sit by her side while she writes, so as to be quite sure that she keeps her word.--Your loving sister, "Laure de Rastignac."

°°°°"Yes!" said Eugene to himself. "Yes! Success at all costs now! Riches could not repay such devotion as this. I wish I could give them every sort of happiness! Fifteen hundred and fifty francs," he went on after a pause. "Every shot must go to the mark! Laure is right. Trust a woman! I have only calico shirts. Where some one else's welfare is concerned, a young girl becomes as ingenious as a thief. Guileless where she herself is in question, and full of foresight for me,--she is like a heavenly angel forgiving the strange incomprehensible sins of earth."

°°°°The world lay before him. His tailor had been summoned and sounded, and had finally surrendered. When Rastignac met M. de Trailles, he had seen at once how great a part the tailor plays in a young man's career; a tailor is either a deadly enemy or a staunch friend, with an invoice for a bond of friendship; between these two extremes there is, alack! no middle term. In this representative of his craft Eugene discovered a man who understood that his was a sort of paternal function for young men at their entrance into life, who regarded himself as a stepping- stone between a young man's present and future. And Rastignac in gratitude made the man's fortune by an epigram of a kind in which he excelled at a later period of his life.

°°°°"I have twice known a pair of trousers turned out by him make a match of twenty thousand livres a year!"

°°°°Fifteen hundred francs, and as many suits of clothes as he chose to order! At that moment the poor child of the South felt no more doubts of any kind. The young man went down to breakfast with the indefinable air which the consciousness of the possession of money gives to youth. No sooner are the coins slipped into a student's pocket than his wealth, in imagination at least, is piled into a fantastic column, which affords him a moral support. He begins to hold up his head as he walks; he is conscious that he has a means of bringing his powers to bear on a given point; he looks you straight in the face; his gestures are quick and decided; only yesterday he was diffident and shy, any one might have pushed him aside; to-morrow, he will take the wall of a prime minister. A miracle has been wrought in him. Nothing is beyond the reach of his ambition, and his ambition soars at random; he is light-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic; in short, the fledgling bird has discovered that he has wings. A poor student snatches at every chance pleasure much as a dog runs all sorts of risks to steal a bone, cracking it and sucking the marrow as he flies from pursuit; but a young man who can rattle a few runaway gold coins in his pocket can take his pleasure deliberately, can taste the whole of the sweets of secure possession; he soars far above earth; he has forgotten what the word POVERTY means; all Paris is his. Those are days when the whole world shines radiant with light, when everything glows and sparkles before the eyes of youth, days that bring joyous energy that is never brought into harness, days of debts and of painful fears that go hand in hand with every delight. Those who do not know the left bank of the Seine between the Rue Saint-Jacques and the Rue des Saints-Peres know nothing of life.

°°°°"Ah! if the women of Paris but knew," said Rastignac, as he devoured Mme. Vauquer's stewed pears (at five for a penny), "they would come here in search of a lover."

°°°°Just then a porter from the Messageries Royales appeared at the door of the room; they had previously heard the bell ring as the wicket opened to admit him. The man asked for M. Eugene de Rastignac, holding out two bags for him to take, and a form of receipt for his signature. Vautrin's keen glance cut Eugene like a lash.

°°°°"Now you will be able to pay for those fencing lessons and go to the shooting gallery," he said.

°°°°"Your ship has come in," said Mme. Vauquer, eyeing the bags.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau did not dare to look at the money, for fear her eyes should betray her cupidity.

°°°°"You have a kind mother," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"You have a kind mother, sir," echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, mamma has been drained dry," said Vautrin, "and now you can have your fling, go into society, and fish for heiresses, and dance with countesses who have peach blossom in their hair. But take my advice, young man, and don't neglect your pistol practice."

°°°°Vautrin struck an attitude, as if he were facing an antagonist. Rastignac, meaning to give the porter a tip, felt in his pockets and found nothing. Vautrin flung down a franc piece on the table.

°°°°"Your credit is good," he remarked, eyeing the student, and Rastignac was forced to thank him, though, since the sharp encounter of wits at dinner that day, after Eugene came in from calling on Mme. de Beauseant, he had made up his mind that Vautrin was insufferable. For a week, in fact, they had both kept silence in each other's presence, and watched each other. The student tried in vain to account to himself for this attitude.

°°°°An idea, of course, gains in force by the energy with which it is expressed; it strikes where the brain sends it, by a law as mathematically exact as the law that determines the course of a shell from a mortar. The amount of impression it makes is not to be determined so exactly. Sometimes, in an impressible nature, the idea works havoc, but there are, no less, natures so robustly protected, that this sort of projectile falls flat and harmless on skulls of triple brass, as cannon-shot against solid masonry; then there are flaccid and spongy-fibred natures into which ideas from without sink like spent bullets into the earthworks of a redoubt. Rastignac's head was something of the powder-magazine order; the least shock sufficed to bring about an explosion. He was too quick, too young, not to be readily accessible to ideas; and open to that subtle influence of thought and feeling in others which causes so many strange phenomena that make an impression upon us of which we are all unconscious at the time. Nothing escaped his mental vision; he was lynx-eyed; in him the mental powers of perception, which seem like duplicates of the senses, had the mysterious power of swift projection that astonishes us in intellects of a high order--slingers who are quick to detect the weak spot in any armor.

°°°°In the past month Eugene's good qualities and defects had rapidly developed with his character. Intercourse with the world and the endeavor to satisfy his growing desires had brought out his defects. But Rastignac came from the South side of the Loire, and had the good qualities of his countrymen. He had the impetuous courage of the South, that rushes to the attack of a difficulty, as well as the southern impatience of delay or suspense. These traits are held to be defects in the North; they made the fortune of Murat, but they likewise cut short his career. The moral would appear to be that when the dash and boldness of the South side of the Loire meets, in a southern temperament, with the guile of the North, the character is complete, and such a man will gain (and keep) the crown of Sweden.

°°°°Rastignac, therefore, could not stand the fire from Vautrin's batteries for long without discovering whether this was a friend or a foe. He felt as if this strange being was reading his inmost soul, and dissecting his feelings, while Vautrin himself was so close and secretive that he seemed to have something of the profound and unmoved serenity of a sphinx, seeing and hearing all things and saying nothing. Eugene, conscious of that money in his pocket, grew rebellious.

°°°°"Be so good as to wait a moment," he said to Vautrin, as the latter rose, after slowly emptying his coffee-cup, sip by sip.

°°°°"What for?" inquired the older man, as he put on his large- brimmed hat and took up the sword-cane that he was wont to twirl like a man who will face three or four footpads without flinching.

°°°°"I will repay you in a minute," returned Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he spoke, counted out a hundred and forty francs, and pushed them towards Mme. Vauquer. "Short reckonings make good friends" he added, turning to the widow; "that clears our accounts till the end of the year. Can you give me change for a five-franc piece?"

°°°°"Good friends make short reckonings," echoed Poiret, with a glance at Vautrin.

°°°°"Here is your franc," said Rastignac, holding out the coin to the sphinx in the black wig.

°°°°"Any one might think that you were afraid to owe me a trifle," exclaimed this latter, with a searching glance that seemed to read the young man's inmost thoughts; there was a satirical and cynical smile on Vautrin's face such as Eugene had seen scores of times already; every time he saw it, it exasperated him almost beyond endurance.

°°°°"Well . . . so I am," he answered. He held both the bags in his hand, and had risen to go up to his room.

°°°°Vautrin made as if he were going out through the sitting-room, and the student turned to go through the second door that opened into the square lobby at the foot of the staircase.

°°°°"Do you know, Monsieur le Marquis de Rastignacorama, that what you were saying just now was not exactly polite?" Vautrin remarked, as he rattled his sword-cane across the panels of the sitting-room door, and came up to the student.

°°°°Rastignac looked coolly at Vautrin, drew him to the foot of the staircase, and shut the dining-room door. They were standing in the little square lobby between the kitchen and the dining-room; the place was lighted by an iron-barred fanlight above a door that gave access into the garden. Sylvie came out of her kitchen, and Eugene chose that moment to say:

°°°°MONSIEUR Vautrin, I am not a marquis, and my name is not Rastignacorama."

°°°°"They will fight," said Mlle. Michonneau, in an indifferent tone.

°°°°"Fight!" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Not they," replied Mme. Vauquer, lovingly fingering her pile of coins.

°°°°"But there they are under the lime-trees," cried Mlle. Victorine, who had risen so that she might see out into the garden. "Poor young man! he was in the right, after all."

°°°°"We must go upstairs, my pet," said Mme. Couture; "it is no business of ours."

°°°°At the door, however, Mme. Couture and Victorine found their progress barred by the portly form of Sylvie the cook.

°°°°"What ever can have happened?" she said. "M. Vautrin said to M. Eugene, 'Let us have an explanation!' then he took him by the arm, and there they are, out among the artichokes."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking. "Mamma Vauquer," he said smiling, "don't frighten yourself at all. I am only going to try my pistols under the lime-trees."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur," cried Victorine, clasping her hands as she spoke, "why do you want to kill M. Eugene?"

°°°°Vautrin stepped back a pace or two, and gazed at Victorine.

°°°°"Oh! this is something fresh!" he exclaimed in a bantering tone, that brought the color into the poor girl's face. "That young fellow yonder is very nice, isn't he?" he went on. "You have given me a notion, my pretty child; I will make you both happy."

°°°°Mme. Couture laid her hand on the arm of her ward, and drew the girl away, as she said in her ear:

°°°°"Why, Victorine, I cannot imagine what has come over you this morning."

°°°°"I don't want any shots fired in my garden," said Mme. Vauquer. "You will frighten the neighborhood and bring the police up here all in a moment."

°°°°"Come, keep cool, Mamma Vauquer," answered Vautrin. "There, there; it's all right; we will go to the shooting-gallery."

°°°°He went back to Rastignac, laying his hand familiarly on the young man's arm.

°°°°"When I have given you ocular demonstration of the fact that I can put a bullet through the ace on a card five times running at thirty-five paces," he said, "that won't take away your appetite, I suppose? You look to me to be inclined to be a trifle quarrelsome this morning, and as if you would rush on your death like a blockhead."

°°°°"Do you draw back?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Don't try to raise my temperature," answered Vautrin, "it is not cold this morning. Let us go and sit over there," he added, pointing to the green-painted garden seats; "no one can overhear us. I want a little talk with you. You are not a bad sort of youngster, and I have no quarrel with you. I like you, take Trump--(confound it!)--take Vautrin's word for it. What makes me like you? I will tell you by-and-by. Meantime, I can tell you that I know you as well as if I had made you myself, as I will prove to you in a minute. Put down your bags," he continued, pointing to the round table.

°°°°Rastignac deposited his money on the table, and sat down. He was consumed with curiosity, which the sudden change in the manner of the man before him had excited to the highest pitch. Here was a strange being who, a moment ago, had talked of killing him, and now posed as his protector.

°°°°"You would like to know who I really am, what I was, and what I do now," Vautrin went on. "You want to know too much, youngster. Come! come! keep cool! You will hear more astonishing things than that. I have had my misfortunes. Just hear me out first, and you shall have your turn afterwards. Here is my past in three words. Who am I? Vautrin. What do I do? Just what I please. Let us change the subject. You want to know my character. I am good- natured to those who do me a good turn, or to those whose hearts speak to mine. These last may do anything they like with me; they may bruise my shins, and I shall not tell them to 'mind what they are about'; but, nom d'une pipe, the devil himself is not an uglier customer than I can be if people annoy me, or if I don't happen to take to them; and you may just as well know at once that I think no more of killing a man than of that," and he spat before him as he spoke. "Only when it is absolutely necessary to do so, I do my best to kill him properly. I am what you call an artist. I have read Benvenuto Cellini's Memoirs, such as you see me; and, what is more, in Italian: A fine-spirited fellow he was! From him I learned to follow the example set us by Providence, who strikes us down at random, and to admire the beautiful whenever and wherever it is found. And, setting other questions aside, is it not a glorious part to play, when you pit yourself against mankind, and the luck is on your side? I have thought a good deal about the constitution of your present social Dis- order. A duel is downright childish, my boy! utter nonsense and folly! When one of two living men must be got out of the way, none but an idiot would leave chance to decide which it is to be; and in a duel it is a toss-up--heads or tails--and there you are! Now I, for instance, can hit the ace in the middle of a card five times running, send one bullet after another through the same hole, and at thirty-five paces, moreover! With that little accomplishment you might think yourself certain of killing your man, mightn't you. Well, I have fired, at twenty paces, and missed, and the rogue who had never handled a pistol in his life-- look here!"--(he unbuttoned his waistcoat and exposed his chest, covered, like a bear's back, with a shaggy fell; the student gave a startled shudder)--"he was a raw lad, but he made his mark on me," the extraordinary man went on, drawing Rastignac's fingers over a deep scar on his breast. But that happened when I myself was a mere boy; I was one-and-twenty then (your age), and I had some beliefs left--in a woman's love, and in a pack of rubbish that you will be over head and ears in directly. You and I were to have fought just now, weren't we? You might have killed me. Suppose that I were put under the earth, where would you be? You would have to clear out of this, go to Switzerland, draw on papa's purse--and he has none too much in it as it is. I mean to open your eyes to your real position, that is what I am going to do: but I shall do it from the point of view of a man who, after studying the world very closely, sees that there are but two alternatives--stupid obedience or revolt. I obey nobody; is that clear? Now, do you know how much you will want at the pace you are going? A million; and promptly, too, or that little head of ours will be swaying to and fro in the drag-nets at Saint-Cloud, while we are gone to find out whether or no there is a Supreme Being. I will put you in the way of that million."

°°°°He stopped for a moment and looked at Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! you do not look so sourly at papa Vautrin now! At the mention of the million you look like a young girl when somebody has said, 'I will come for you this evening!' and she betakes herself to her toilette as a cat licks its whiskers over a saucer of milk. All right. Come, now, let us go into the question, young man; all between ourselves, you know. We have a papa and mamma down yonder, a great-aunt, two sisters (aged eighteen and seventeen), two young brothers (one fifteen, and the other ten), that is about the roll-call of the crew. The aunt brings up the two sisters; the cure comes and teaches the boys Latin. Boiled chestnuts are oftener on the table than white bread. Papa makes a suit of clothes last a long while; if mamma has a different dress winter and summer, it is about as much as she has; the sisters manage as best they can. I know all about it; I have lived in the south.

°°°°"That is how things are at home. They send you twelve hundred francs a year, and the whole property only brings in three thousand francs all told. We have a cook and a manservant; papa is a baron, and we must keep up appearances. Then we have our ambitions; we are connected with the Beauseants, and we go afoot through the streets; we want to be rich, and we have not a penny; we eat Mme. Vauquer's messes, and we like grand dinners in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; we sleep on a truckle-bed, and dream of a mansion! I do not blame you for wanting these things. What sort of men do the women run after? Men of ambition. Men of ambition have stronger frames, their blood is richer in iron, their hearts are warmer than those of ordinary men. Women feel that when their power is greatest, they look their best, and that those are their happiest hours; they like power in men, and prefer the strongest even if it is a power that may be their own destruction. I am going to make an inventory of your desires in order to put the question at issue before you. Here it is:--

°°°°"We are as hungry as a wolf, and those newly-cut teeth of ours are sharp; what are we to do to keep the pot boiling? In the first place, we have the Code to browse upon; it is not amusing, and we are none the wiser for it, but that cannot be helped. So far so good. We mean to make an advocate of ourselves with a prospect of one day being made President of a Court of Assize, when we shall send poor devils, our betters, to the galleys with a T.F.* [*Travaux forces.] on their shoulders, so that the rich may be convinced that they can sleep in peace. There is no fun in that; and you are a long while coming to it; for, to begin with, there are two years of nauseous drudgery in Paris, we see all the lollipops that we long for out of our reach. It is tiresome to want things and never to have them. If you were a pallid creature of the mollusk order, you would have nothing to fear, but it is different when you have the hot blood of a lion and are ready to get into a score of scrapes every day of your life. This is the ghastliest form of torture known in this inferno of God's making, and you will give in to it. Or suppose that you are a good boy, drink nothing stronger than milk, and bemoan your hard lot; you, with your generous nature, will endure hardships that would drive a dog mad, and make a start, after long waiting, as deputy to some rascal or other in a hole of a place where the Government will fling you a thousand francs a year like the scraps that are thrown to the butcher's dog. Bark at thieves, plead the cause of the rich, send men of heart to the guillotine, that is your work! Many thanks! If you have no influence, you may rot in your provincial tribunal. At thirty you will be a Justice with twelve hundred francs a year (if you have not flung off the gown for good before then). By the time you are forty you may look to marry a miller's daughter, an heiress with some six thousand livres a year. Much obliged! If you have influence, you may possibly be a Public Prosecutor by the time you are thirty; with a salary of a thousand crowns, you could look to marry the mayor's daughter. Some petty piece of political trickery, such as mistaking Villele for Manuel in a bulletin (the names rhyme, and that quiets your conscience), and you will probably be a Procureur General by the time you are forty, with a chance of becoming a deputy. Please to observe, my dear boy, that our conscience will have been a little damaged in the process, and that we shall endure twenty years of drudgery and hidden poverty, and that our sisters are wearing Dian's livery. I have the honor to call your attention to another fact: to wit, that there are but twenty Procureurs Generaux at a time in all France, while there are some twenty thousand of you young men who aspire to that elevated position; that there are some mountebanks among you who would sell their family to screw their fortunes a peg higher. If this sort of thing sickens you, try another course. The Baron de Rastignac thinks of becoming an advocate, does he? There's a nice prospect for you! Ten years of drudgery straight away. You are obliged to live at the rate of a thousand francs a month; you must have a library of law books, live in chambers, go into society, go down on your knees to ask a solicitor for briefs, lick the dust off the floor of the Palais de Justice. If this kind of business led to anything, I should not say no; but just give me the names of five advocates here in Paris who by the time that they are fifty are making fifty thousand francs a year! Bah! I would sooner turn pirate on the high seas than have my soul shrivel up inside me like that. How will you find the capital? There is but one way, marry a woman who has money. There is no fun in it. Have you a mind to marry? You hang a stone around your neck; for if you marry for money, what becomes of our exalted notions of honor and so forth? You might as well fly in the face of social conventions at once. Is it nothing to crawl like a serpent before your wife, to lick her mother's feet, to descend to dirty actions that would sicken swine--faugh!--never mind if you at least make your fortune. But you will be as doleful as a dripstone if you marry for money. It is better to wrestle with men than to wrangle at home with your wife. You are at the crossway of the roads of life, my boy; choose your way.

°°°°"But you have chosen already. You have gone to see your cousin of Beauseant, and you have had an inkling of luxury; you have been to Mme. de Restaud's house, and in Father Goriot's daughter you have seen a glimpse of the Parisienne for the first time. That day you came back with a word written on your forehead. I knew it, I could read it--'SUCCESS!' Yes, success at any price. 'Bravo,' said I to myself, 'here is the sort of fellow for me.' You wanted money. Where was it all to come from? You have drained your sisters' little hoard (all brothers sponge more or less on their sisters). Those fifteen hundred francs of yours (got together, God knows how! in a country where there are more chestnuts than five-franc pieces) will slip away like soldiers after pillage. And, then, what will you do? Shall you begin to work? Work, or what you understand by work at this moment, means, for a man of Poiret's calibre, an old age in Mamma Vauquer's lodging-house. There are fifty thousand young men in your position at this moment, all bent as you are on solving one and the same problem--how to acquire a fortune rapidly. You are but a unit in that aggregate. You can guess, therefore, what efforts you must make, how desperate the struggle is. There are not fifty thousand good positions for you; you must fight and devour one another like spiders in a pot. Do you know how a man makes his way here? By brilliant genius or by skilful corruption. You must either cut your way through these masses of men like a cannon ball, or steal among them like a plague. Honesty is nothing to the purpose. Men bow before the power of genius; they hate it, and try to slander it, because genius does not divide the spoil; but if genius persists, they bow before it. To sum it all up in a phrase, if they fail to smother genius in the mud, they fall on their knees and worship it. Corruption is a great power in the world, and talent is scarce. So corruption is the weapon of superfluous mediocrity; you will be made to feel the point of it everywhere. You will see women who spend more than ten thousand francs a year on dress, while their husband's salary (his whole income) is six thousand francs. You will see officials buying estates on twelve thousand francs a year. You will see women who sell themselves body and soul to drive in a carriage belonging to the son of a peer of France, who has a right to drive in the middle rank at Longchamp. You have seen that poor simpleton of a Goriot obliged to meet a bill with his daughter's name at the back of it, though her husband has fifty thousand francs a year. I defy you to walk a couple of yards anywhere in Paris without stumbling on some infernal complication. I'll bet my head to a head of that salad that you will stir up a hornet's nest by taking a fancy to the first young, rich, and pretty woman you meet. They are all dodging the law, all at loggerheads with their husbands. If I were to begin to tell you all that vanity or necessity (virtue is not often mixed up in it, you may be sure), all that vanity and necessity drive them to do for lovers, finery, housekeeping, or children, I should never come to an end. So an honest man is the common enemy.

°°°°"But do you know what an honest man is? Here, in Paris, an honest man is the man who keeps his own counsel, and will not divide the plunder. I am not speaking now of those poor bond-slaves who do the work of the world without a reward for their toil--God Almighty's outcasts, I call them. Among them, I grant you, is virtue in all the flower of its stupidity, but poverty is no less their portion. At this moment, I think I see the long faces those good folk would pull if God played a practical joke on them and stayed away at the Last Judgment.

°°°°"Well, then, if you mean to make a fortune quickly, you must either be rich to begin with, or make people believe that you are rich. It is no use playing here except for high stakes; once take to low play, it is all up with you. If in the scores of professions that are open to you, there are ten men who rise very rapidly, people are sure to call them thieves. You can draw your own conclusions. Such is life. It is no cleaner than a kitchen; it reeks like a kitchen; and if you mean to cook your dinner, you must expect to soil your hands; the real art is in getting them clean again, and therein lies the whole morality of our epoch. If I take this tone in speaking of the world to you, I have the right to do so; I know it well. Do you think that I am blaming it? Far from it; the world has always been as it is now. Moralists' strictures will never change it. Mankind are not perfect, but one age is more or less hypocritical than another, and then simpletons say that its morality is high or low. I do not think that the rich are any worse than the poor; man is much the same, high or low, or wherever he is. In a million of these human cattle there may be half a score of bold spirits who rise above the rest, above the laws; I am one of them. And you, if you are cleverer than your fellows, make straight to your end, and hold your head high. But you must lay your account with envy and slander and mediocrity, and every man's hand will be against you. Napoleon met with a Minister of War, Aubry by name, who all but sent him to the colonies.

°°°°"Feel your pulse. Think whether you can get up morning after morning, strengthened in yesterday's purpose. In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline. Listen attentively. You see, I have an idea of my own. My idea is to live a patriarchal life on a vast estate, say a hundred thousand acres, somewhere in the Southern States of America. I mean to be a planter, to have slaves, to make a few snug millions by selling my cattle, timber, and tobacco; I want to live an absolute monarch, and to do just as I please; to lead such a life as no one here in these squalid dens of lath and plaster ever imagines. I am a great poet; I do not write my poems, I feel them, and act them. At this moment I have fifty thousand francs, which might possibly buy forty negroes. I want two hundred thousand francs, because I want to have two hundred negroes to carry out my notions of the patriarachal life properly. Negroes, you see, are like a sort of family ready grown, and there are no inquisitive public prosecutors out there to interfere with you. That investment in ebony ought to mean three or four million francs in ten years' time. If I am successful, no one will ask me who I am. I shall be Mr. Four Millions, an American citizen. I shall be fifty years old by then, and sound and hearty still; I shall enjoy life after my own fashion. In two words, if I find you an heiress with a million, will you give me two hundred thousand francs? Twenty per cent commission, eh? Is that too much? Your little wife will be very much in love with you. Once married, you will show signs of uneasiness and remorse; for a couple of weeks you will be depressed. Then, some night after sundry grimacings, comes the confession, between two kisses, 'Two hundred thousand francs of debts, my darling!' This sort of farce is played every day in Paris, and by young men of the highest fashion. When a young wife has given her heart, she will not refuse her purse. Perhaps you are thinking that you will lose the money for good? Not you. You will make two hundred thousand francs again by some stroke of business. With your capital and your brains you should be able to accumulate as large a fortune as you could wish. ERGO, in six months you will have made your own fortune, and our old friend Vautrin's, and made an amiable woman very happy, to say nothing of your people at home, who must blow on their fingers to warm them, in the winter, for lack of firewood. You need not be surprised at my proposal, nor at the demand I make. Forty-seven out of every sixty great matches here in Paris are made after just such a bargain as this. The Chamber of Notaries compels my gentleman to----"

°°°°"What must I do?" said Rastignac, eagerly interrupting Vautrin's speech.

°°°°"Next to nothing," returned the other, with a slight involuntary movement, the suppressed exultation of the angler when he feels a bite at the end of his line. "Follow me carefully! The heart of a girl whose life is wretched and unhappy is a sponge that will thirstily absorb love; a dry sponge that swells at the first drop of sentiment. If you pay court to a young girl whose existence is a compound of loneliness, despair, and poverty, and who has no suspicion that she will come into a fortune, good Lord! it is quint and quatorze at piquet; it is knowing the numbers of the lottery before-hand; it is speculating in the funds when you have news from a sure source; it is building up a marriage on an indestructible foundation. The girl may come in for millions, and she will fling them, as if they were so many pebbles, at your feet. 'Take it, my beloved! Take it, Alfred, Adolphe, Eugene!' or whoever it was that showed his sense by sacrificing himself for her. And as for sacrificing himself, this is how I understand it. You sell a coat that is getting shabby, so that you can take her to the Cadran bleu, treat her to mushrooms on toast, and then go to the Ambigu-Comique in the evening; you pawn your watch to buy her a shawl. I need not remind you of the fiddle-faddle sentimentality that goes down so well with all women; you spill a few drops of water on your stationery, for instance; those are the tears you shed while far away from her. You look to me as if you were perfectly acquainted with the argot of the heart. Paris, you see, is like a forest in the New World, where you have to deal with a score of varieties of savages--Illinois and Hurons, who live on the proceed of their social hunting. You are a hunter of millions; you set your snares; you use lures and nets; there are many ways of hunting. Some hunt heiresses, others a legacy; some fish for souls, yet others sell their clients, bound hand and foot. Every one who comes back from the chase with his game- bag well filled meets with a warm welcome in good society. In justice to this hospitable part of the world, it must be said that you have to do with the most easy and good-natured of great cities. If the proud aristocracies of the rest of Europe refuse admittance among their ranks to a disreputable millionaire, Paris stretches out a hand to him, goes to his banquets, eats his dinners, and hobnobs with his infamy."

°°°°"But where is such a girl to be found?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Under your eyes; she is yours already."

°°°°"Mlle. Victorine?"

°°°°"Precisely."

°°°°"And what was that you said?"

°°°°"She is in love with you already, your little Baronne de Rastignac!"

°°°°"She has not a penny," Eugene continued, much mystified.

°°°°"Ah! now we are coming to it! Just another word or two, and it will all be clear enough. Her father, Taillefer, is an old scoundrel; it is said that he murdered one of his friends at the time of the Revolution. He is one of your comedians that sets up to have opinions of his own. He is a banker--senior partner in the house of Frederic Taillefer and Company. He has one son, and means to leave all he has to the boy, to the prejudice of Victorine. For my part, I don't like to see injustice of this sort. I am like Don Quixote, I have a fancy for defending the weak against the strong. If it should please God to take that youth away from him, Taillefer would have only his daughter left; he would want to leave his money to some one or other; an absurd notion, but it is only human nature, and he is not likely to have any more children, as I know. Victorine is gentle and amiable; she will soon twist her father round her fingers, and set his head spinning like a German top by plying him with sentiment! She will be too much touched by your devotion to forget you; you will marry her. I mean to play Providence for you, and Providence is to do my will. I have a friend whom I have attached closely to myself, a colonel in the Army of the Loire, who has just been transferred into the garde royale. He has taken my advice and turned ultra-royalist; he is not one of those fools who never change their opinions. Of all pieces of advice, my cherub, I would give you this--don't stick to your opinions any more than to your words. If any one asks you for them, let him have them-- at a price. A man who prides himself on going in a straight line through life is an idiot who believes in infallibility. There are no such things as principles; there are only events, and there are no laws but those of expediency: a man of talent accepts events and the circumstances in which he finds himself, and turns everything to his own ends. If laws and principles were fixed and invariable, nations would not change them as readily as we change our shirts. The individual is not obliged to be more particular than the nation. A man whose services to France have been of the very slightest is a fetich looked on with superstitious awe because he has always seen everything in red; but he is good, at the most, to be put into the Museum of Arts and Crafts, among the automatic machines, and labeled La Fayette; while the prince at whom everybody flings a stone, the man who despises humanity so much that he spits as many oaths as he is asked for in the face of humanity, saved France from being torn in pieces at the Congress of Vienna; and they who should have given him laurels fling mud at him. Oh! I know something of affairs, I can tell you; I have the secrets of many men! Enough. When I find three minds in agreement as to the application of a principle, I shall have a fixed and immovable opinion--I shall have to wait a long while first. In the Tribunals you will not find three judges of the same opinion on a single point of law. To return to the man I was telling you of. He would crucify Jesus Christ again, if I bade him. At a word from his old chum Vautrin he will pick a quarrel with a scamp that will not send so much as five francs to his sister, poor girl, and" (here Vautrin rose to his feet and stood like a fencing-master about to lunge)--"turn him off into the dark!" he added.

°°°°"How frightful!" said Eugene. "You do not really mean it? M. Vautrin, you are joking!"

°°°°"There! there! Keep cool!" said the other. "Don't behave like a baby. But if you find any amusement in it, be indignant, flare up! Say that I am a scoundrel, a rascal, a rogue, a bandit; but do not call me a blackleg nor a spy! There, out with it, fire away! I forgive you; it is quite natural at your age. I was like that myself once. Only remember this, you will do worse things yourself some day. You will flirt with some pretty woman and take her money. You have thought of that, of course," said Vautrin, "for how are you to succeed unless love is laid under contribution? There are no two ways about virtue, my dear student; it either is, or it is not. Talk of doing penance for your sins! It is a nice system of business, when you pay for your crime by an act of contrition! You seduce a woman that you may set your foot on such and such a rung of the social ladder; you sow dissension among the children of a family; you descend, in short, to every base action that can be committed at home or abroad, to gain your own ends for your own pleasure or your profit; and can you imagine that these are acts of faith, hope, or charity? How is it that a dandy, who in a night has robbed a boy of half his fortune, gets only a couple of months in prison; while a poor devil who steals a banknote for a thousand francs, with aggravating circumstances, is condemned to penal servitude? Those are your laws. Not a single provision but lands you in some absurdity. That man with yellow gloves and a golden tongue commits many a murder; he sheds no blood, but he drains his victim's veins as surely; a desperado forces open a door with a crowbar, dark deeds both of them! You yourself will do every one of those things that I suggest to you to-day, bar the bloodshed. Do you believe that there is any absolute standard in this world? Despise mankind and find out the meshes that you can slip through in the net of the Code. The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out, because it was properly executed."

°°°°"Silence, sir! I will not hear any more; you make me doubt myself. At this moment my sentiments are all my science."

°°°°"Just as you please, my fine fellow; I did think you were so weak-minded," said Vautrin, "I shall say no more about it. One last word, however," and he looked hard at the student--"you have my secret," he said.

°°°°"A young man who refuses your offer knows that he must forget it."

°°°°"Quite right, quite right; I am glad to hear you say so. Somebody else might not be so scrupulous, you see. Keep in mind what I want to do for you. I will give you a fortnight. The offer is still open."

°°°°"What a head of iron the man has!" said Eugene to himself, as he watched Vautrin walk unconcernedly away with his cane under his arm. "Yet Mme. de Beauseant said as much more gracefully; he has only stated the case in cruder language. He would tear my heart with claws of steel. What made me think of going to Mme. de Nucingen? He guessed my motives before I knew them myself. To sum it up, that outlaw has told me more about virtue than all I have learned from men and books. If virtue admits of no compromises, I have certainly robbed my sisters," he said, throwing down the bags on the table.

°°°°He sat down again and fell, unconscious of his surroundings, into deep thought.

°°°°"To be faithful to an ideal of virtue! A heroic martyrdom! Pshaw! every one believes in virtue, but who is virtuous? Nations have made an idol of Liberty, but what nation on the face of the earth is free? My youth is still like a blue and cloudless sky. If I set myself to obtain wealth or power, does it mean that I must make up my mind to lie, and fawn, and cringe, and swagger, and flatter, and dissemble? To consent to be the servant of others who have likewise fawned, and lied, and flattered? Must I cringe to them before I can hope to be their accomplice? Well, then, I decline. I mean to work nobly and with a single heart. I will work day and night; I will owe my fortune to nothing but my own exertions. It may be the slowest of all roads to success, but I shall lay my head on the pillow at night untroubled by evil thoughts. Is there a greater thing than this--to look back over your life and know that it is stainless as a lily? I and my life are like a young man and his betrothed. Vautrin has put before me all that comes after ten years of marriage. The devil! my head is swimming. I do not want to think at all; the heart is a sure guide."

°°°°Eugene was roused from his musings by the voice of the stout Sylvie, who announced that the tailor had come, and Eugene therefore made his appearance before the man with the two money bags, and was not ill pleased that it should be so. When he had tried on his dress suit, he put on his new morning costume, which completely metamorphosed him.

°°°°"I am quite equal to M. de Trailles," he said to himself. "In short, I look like a gentleman."

°°°°"You asked me, sir, if I knew the houses where Mme. de Nucingen goes," Father Goriot's voice spoke from the doorway of Eugene's room."

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Very well then, she is going to the Marechale Carigliano's ball on Monday. If you can manage to be there, I shall hear from you whether my two girls enjoyed themselves, and how they were dressed, and all about it in fact."

°°°°"How did you find that out, my good Goriot?" said Eugene, putting a chair by the fire for his visitor.

°°°°"Her maid told me. I hear all about their doings from Therese and Constance," he added gleefully.

°°°°The old man looked like a lover who is still young enough to be made happy by the discovery of some little stratagem which brings him information of his lady-love without her knowledge.

°°°°"YOU will see them both!" he said, giving artless expression to a pang of jealousy.

°°°°"I do not know," answered Eugene. "I will go to Mme. de Beauseant and ask her for an introduction to the Marechale."

°°°°Eugene felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought of appearing before the Vicomtesse, dressed as henceforward he always meant to be. The "abysses of the human heart," in the moralists' phrase, are only insidious thoughts, involuntary promptings of personal interest. The instinct of enjoyment turns the scale; those rapid changes of purpose which have furnished the text for so much rhetoric are calculations prompted by the hope of pleasure. Rastignac beholding himself well dressed and impeccable as to gloves and boots, forgot his virtuous resolutions. Youth, moreover, when bent upon wrongdoing does not dare to behold himself in the mirror of consciousness; mature age has seen itself; and therein lies the whole difference between these two phases of life.

°°°°A friendship between Eugene and his neighbor, Father Goriot, had been growing up for several days past. This secret friendship and the antipathy that the student had begun to entertain for Vautrin arose from the same psychological causes. The bold philosopher who shall investigate the effects of mental action upon the physical world will doubtless find more than one proof of the material nature of our sentiments in other animals. What physiognomist is as quick to discern character as a dog is to discover from a stranger's face whether this is a friend or no? Those by-words--"atoms," "affinities"--are facts surviving in modern languages for the confusion of philosophic wiseacres who amuse themselves by winnowing the chaff of language to find its grammatical roots. We FEEL that we are loved. Our sentiments make themselves felt in everything, even at a great distance. A letter is a living soul, and so faithful an echo of the voice that speaks in it, that finer natures look upon a letter as one of love's most precious treasures. Father Goriot's affection was of the instinctive order, a canine affection raised to a sublime pitch; he had scented compassion in the air, and the kindly respect and youthful sympathy in the student's heart. This friendship had, however, scarcely reached the stage at which confidences are made. Though Eugene had spoken of his wish to meet Mme. de Nucingen, it was not because he counted on the old man to introduce him to her house, for he hoped that his own audacity might stand him in good stead. All that Father Goriot had said as yet about his daughters had referred to the remarks that the student had made so freely in public on that day of the two visits.

°°°°"How could you think that Mme. de Restaud bore you a grudge for mentioning my name?" he had said on the day following that scene at dinner. "My daughters are very fond of me; I am a happy father; but my sons-in-law have behaved badly to me, and rather than make trouble between my darlings and their husbands, I choose to see my daughters secretly. Fathers who can see their daughters at any time have no idea of all the pleasure that all this mystery gives me; I cannot always see mine when I wish, do you understand? So when it is fine I walk out in the Champs- Elysees, after finding out from their waiting-maids whether my daughters mean to go out. I wait near the entrance; my heart beats fast when the carriages begin to come; I admire them in their dresses, and as they pass they give me a little smile, and it seems as if everything was lighted up for me by a ray of bright sunlight. I wait, for they always go back the same way, and then I see them again; the fresh air has done them good and brought color into their cheeks; all about me people say, 'What a beautiful woman that is!' and it does my heart good to hear them.

°°°°"Are they not my own flesh and blood? I love the very horses that draw them; I envy the little lap-dog on their knees. Their happiness is my life. Every one loves after his own fashion, and mine does no one any harm; why should people trouble their heads about me? I am happy in my own way. Is there any law against going to see my girls in the evening when they are going out to a ball? And what a disappointment it is when I get there too late, and am told that 'Madame has gone out!' Once I waited till three o'clock in the morning for Nasie; I had not seen her for two whole days. I was so pleased, that it was almost too much for me! Please do not speak of me unless it is to say how good my daughters are to me. They are always wanting to heap presents upon me, but I will not have it. 'Just keep your money,' I tell them. 'What should I do with it? I want nothing.' And what am I, sir, after all? An old carcase, whose soul is always where my daughters are. When you have seen Mme. de Nucingen, tell me which you like the most," said the old man after a moment's pause, while Eugene put the last touches to his toilette. The student was about to go out to walk in the Garden of the Tuileries until the hour when he could venture to appear in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room.

°°°°That walk was a turning-point in Eugene's career. Several women noticed him; he looked so handsome, so young, and so well dressed. This almost admiring attention gave a new turn to his thoughts. He forgot his sisters and the aunt who had robbed herself for him; he no longer remembered his own virtuous scruples. He had seen hovering above his head the fiend so easy to mistake for an angel, the Devil with rainbow wings, who scatters rubies, and aims his golden shafts at palace fronts, who invests women with purple, and thrones with a glory that dazzles the eyes of fools till they forget the simple origins of royal dominion; he had heard the rustle of that Vanity whose tinsel seems to us to be the symbol of power. However cynical Vautrin's words had been, they had made an impression on his mind, as the sordid features of the old crone who whispers, "A lover, and gold in torrents," remain engraven on a young girl's memory.

°°°°Eugene lounged about the walks till it was nearly five o'clock, then he went to Mme. de Beauseant, and received one of the terrible blows against which young hearts are defenceless. Hitherto the Vicomtesse had received him with the kindly urbanity, the bland grace of manner that is the result of fine breeding, but is only complete when it comes from the heart.

°°°°Today Mme. de Beauseant bowed constrainedly, and spoke curtly:

°°°°"M. de Rastignac, I cannot possibly see you, at least not at this moment. I am engaged . . ."

°°°°An observer, and Rastignac instantly became an observer, could read the whole history, the character and customs of caste, in the phrase, in the tones of her voice, in her glance and bearing. He caught a glimpse of the iron hand beneath the velvet glove-- the personality, the egoism beneath the manner, the wood beneath the varnish. In short, he heard that unmistakable I THE KING that issues from the plumed canopy of the throne, and finds its last echo under the crest of the simplest gentleman.

°°°°Eugene had trusted too implicitly to the generosity of a woman; he could not believe in her haughtiness. Like all the unfortunate, he had subscribed, in all good faith, the generous compact which should bind the benefactor to the recipient, and the first article in that bond, between two large-hearted natures, is a perfect equality. The kindness which knits two souls together is as rare, as divine, and as little understood as the passion of love, for both love and kindness are the lavish generosity of noble natures. Rastignac was set upon going to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball, so he swallowed down this rebuff.

°°°°"Madame," he faltered out, "I would not have come to trouble you about a trifling matter; be so kind as to permit me to see you later, I can wait."

°°°°"Very well, come and dine with me," she said, a little confused by the harsh way in which she had spoken, for this lady was as genuinely kind-hearted as she was high-born.

°°°°Eugene was touched by this sudden relenting, but none the less he said to himself as he went away, "Crawl in the dust, put up with every kind of treatment. What must the rest of the world be like when one of the kindest of women forgets all her promises of befriending me in a moment, and tosses me aside like an old shoe? So it is every one for himself? It is true that her house is not a shop, and I have put myself in the wrong by needing her help. You should cut your way through the world like a cannon ball, as Vautrin said."

°°°°But the student's bitter thoughts were soon dissipated by the pleasure which he promised himself in this dinner with the Vicomtesse. Fate seemed to determine that the smallest accidents in his life should combine to urge him into a career, which the terrible sphinx of the Maison Vauquer had described as a field of battle where you must either slay or be slain, and cheat to avoid being cheated. You leave your conscience and your heart at the barriers, and wear a mask on entering into this game of grim earnest, where, as in ancient Sparta, you must snatch your prize without being detected if you would deserve the crown.

°°°°On his return he found the Vicomtesse gracious and kindly, as she had always been to him. They went together to the dining-room, where the Vicomte was waiting for his wife. In the time of the Restoration the luxury of the table was carried, as is well known, to the highest degree, and M. de Beauseant, like many jaded men of the world, had few pleasures left but those of good cheer; in this matter, in fact, he was a gourmand of the schools of Louis XVIII. and of the Duc d'Escars, and luxury was supplemented by splendor. Eugene, dining for the first time in a house where the traditions of grandeur had descended through many generations, had never seen any spectacle like this that now met his eyes. In the time of the Empire, balls had always ended with a supper, because the officers who took part in them must be fortified for immediate service, and even in Paris might be called upon to leave the ballroom for the battlefield. This arrangement had gone out of fashion under the Monarchy, and Eugene had so far only been asked to dances. The self-possession which pre-eminently distinguished him in later life already stood him in good stead, and he did not betray his amazement. Yet as he saw for the first time the finely wrought silver plate, the completeness of every detail, the sumptuous dinner, noiselessly served, it was difficult for such an ardent imagination not to prefer this life of studied and refined luxury to the hardships of the life which he had chosen only that morning.

°°°°His thoughts went back for a moment to the lodging-house, and with a feeling of profound loathing, he vowed to himself that at New Year he would go; prompted at least as much by a desire to live among cleaner surroundings as by a wish to shake off Vautrin, whose huge hand he seemed to feel on his shoulder at that moment. When you consider the numberless forms, clamorous or mute, that corruption takes in Paris, common-sense begins to wonder what mental aberration prompted the State to establish great colleges and schools there, and assemble young men in the capital; how it is that pretty women are respected, or that the gold coin displayed in the money-changer's wooden saucers does not take to itself wings in the twinkling of an eye; and when you come to think further, how comparatively few cases of crime there are, and to count up the misdemeanors committed by youth, is there not a certain amount of respect due to these patient Tantaluses who wrestle with themselves and nearly always come off victorious? The struggles of the poor student in Paris, if skilfully drawn, would furnish a most dramatic picture of modern civilization.

°°°°In vain Mme. de Beauseant looked at Eugene as if asking him to speak; the student was tongue-tied in the Vicomte's presence.

°°°°"Are you going to take me to the Italiens this evening?" the Vicomtesse asked her husband.

°°°°"You cannot doubt that I should obey you with pleasure," he answered, and there was a sarcastic tinge in his politeness which Eugene did not detect, "but I ought to go to meet some one at the Varietes."

°°°°"His mistress," said she to herself.

°°°°"Then, is not Ajuda coming for you this evening?" inquired the Vicomte.

°°°°"No," she answered, petulantly.

°°°°"Very well, then, if you really must have an arm, take that of M. de Rastignac."

°°°°The Vicomtess turned to Eugene with a smile.

°°°°"That would be a very compromising step for you," she said.

°°°°" 'A Frenchman loves danger, because in danger there is glory,' to quote M. de Chateaubriand," said Rastignac, with a bow.

°°°°A few moments later he was sitting beside Mme. de Beauseant in a brougham, that whirled them through the streets of Paris to a fashionable theatre. It seemed to him that some fairy magic had suddenly transported him into a box facing the stage. All the lorgnettes of the house were pointed at him as he entered, and at the Vicomtesse in her charming toilette. He went from enchantment to enchantment.

°°°°"You must talk to me, you know," said Mme. de Beauseant. "Ah! look! There is Mme. de Nucingen in the third box from ours. Her sister and M. de Trailles are on the other side."

°°°°The Vicomtesse glanced as she spoke at the box where Mlle. de Rochefide should have been; M. d'Ajuda was not there, and Mme. de Beauseant's face lighted up in a marvelous way.

°°°°"She is charming," said Eugene, after looking at Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"She has white eyelashes."

°°°°"Yes, but she has such a pretty slender figure!"

°°°°"Her hands are large."

°°°°"Such beautiful eyes!"

°°°°"Her face is long."

°°°°"Yes, but length gives distinction."

°°°°"It is lucky for her that she has some distinction in her face. Just see how she fidgets with her opera-glass! The Goriot blood shows itself in every movement," said the Vicomtesse, much to Eugene's astonishment.

°°°°Indeed, Mme. de Beauseant seemed to be engaged in making a survey of the house, and to be unconscious of Mme. Nucingen's existence; but no movement made by the latter was lost upon the Vicomtesse. The house was full of the loveliest women in Paris, so that Delphine de Nucingen was not a little flattered to receive the undivided attention of Mme. de Beauseant's young, handsome, and well-dressed cousin, who seemed to have no eyes for any one else.

°°°°"If you look at her so persistently, you will make people talk, M. de Rastignac. You will never succeed if you fling yourself at any one's head like that."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Eugene, "you have protected me indeed so far, and now if you would complete your work, I only ask of you a favor which will cost you but little, and be of very great service to me. I have lost my heart."

°°°°"Already!"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"And to that woman!"

°°°°"How could I aspire to find any one else to listen to me?" he asked, with a keen glance at his cousin. "Her Grace the Duchesse de Carigliano is a friend of the Duchesse de Berri," he went on, after a pause; "you are sure to see her, will you be so kind as to present me to her, and to take me to her ball on Monday? I shall meet Mme. de Nucingen there, and enter into my first skirmish."

°°°°"Willingly," she said. "If you have a liking for her already, your affairs of the heart are like to prosper. That is de Marsay over there in the Princesse Galathionne's box. Mme. de Nucingen is racked with jealousy. There is no better time for approaching a woman, especially if she happens to be a banker's wife. All those ladies of the Chaussee-d'Antin love revenge."

°°°°"Then, what would you do yourself in such a case?"

°°°°"I should suffer in silence."

°°°°At this point the Marquis d'Ajuda appeared in Mme. de Beauseant's box.

°°°°"I have made a muddle of my affairs to come to you," he said, "and I am telling you about it, so that it may not be a sacrifice."

°°°°Eugene saw the glow of joy on the Vicomtesse's face, and knew that this was love, and learned the difference between love and the affectations of Parisian coquetry. He admired his cousin, grew mute, and yielded his place to M. d'Ajuda with a sigh.

°°°°"How noble, how sublime a woman is when she loves like that!" he said to himself. "And HE could forsake her for a doll! Oh! how could any one forsake her?"

°°°°There was a boy's passionate indignation in his heart. He could have flung himself at Mme. de Beauseant's feet; he longed for the power of the devil if he could snatch her away and hide her in his heart, as an eagle snatches up some white yeanling from the plains and bears it to its eyrie. It was humiliating to him to think that in all this gallery of fair pictures he had not one picture of his own. "To have a mistress and an almost royal position is a sign of power," he said to himself. And he looked at Mme. de Nucingen as a man measures another who has insulted him.

°°°°The Vicomtesse turned to him, and the expression of her eyes thanked him a thousand times for his discretion. The first act came to an end just then.

°°°°"Do you know Mme. de Nucingen well enough to present M. de Rastignac to her?" she asked of the Marquis d'Ajuda.

°°°°"She will be delighted," said the Marquis. The handsome Portuguese rose as he spoke and took the student's arm, and in another moment Eugene found himself in Mme. de Nucingen's box.

°°°°"Madame," said the Marquis, "I have the honor of presenting to you the Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac; he is a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's. You have made so deep an impression upon him, that I thought I would fill up the measure of his happiness by bringing him nearer to his divinity."

°°°°Words spoken half jestingly to cover their somewhat disrespectful import; but such an implication, if carefully disguised, never gives offence to a woman. Mme. de Nucingen smiled, and offered Eugene the place which her husband had just left.

°°°°"I do not venture to suggest that you should stay with me, monsieur," she said. "Those who are so fortunate as to be in Mme. de Beauseant's company do not desire to leave it."

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, lowering his voice, "I think that to please my cousin I should remain with you. Before my lord Marquis came we were speaking of you and of your exceedingly distinguished appearance," he added aloud.

°°°°M. d'Ajuda turned and left them.

°°°°"Are you really going to stay with me, monsieur?" asked the Baroness. "Then we shall make each other's acquaintance. Mme. de Restaud told me about you, and has made me anxious to meet you."

°°°°"She must be very insincere, then, for she has shut her door on me."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Madame, I will tell you honestly the reason why; but I must crave your indulgence before confiding such a secret to you. I am your father's neighbor; I had no idea that Mme. de Restaud was his daughter. I was rash enough to mention his name; I meant no harm, but I annoyed your sister and her husband very much. You cannot think how severely the Duchesse de Langeais and my cousin blamed this apostasy on a daughter's part, as a piece of bad taste. I told them all about it, and they both burst out laughing. Then Mme. de Beauseant made some comparison between you and your sister, speaking in high terms of you, and saying how very fond you were of my neighbor, M. Goriot. And, indeed, how could you help loving him? He adores you so passionately that I am jealous already. We talked about you this morning for two hours. So this evening I was quite full of all that your father had told me, and while I was dining with my cousin I said that you could not be as beautiful as affectionate. Mme. de Beauseant meant to gratify such warm admiration, I think, when she brought me here, telling me, in her gracious way, that I should see you."

°°°°"Then, even now, I owe you a debt of gratitude, monsieur," said the banker's wife. "We shall be quite old friends in a little while."

°°°°"Although a friendship with you could not be like an ordinary friendship," said Rastignac; "I should never wish to be your friend."

°°°°Such stereotyped phrases as these, in the mouths of beginners, possess an unfailing charm for women, and are insipid only when read coldly; for a young man's tone, glance and attitude give a surpassing eloquence to the banal phrases. Mme. de Nucingen thought that Rastignac was adorable. Then, woman-like, being at a loss how to reply to the student's outspoken admiration, she answered a previous remark.

°°°°"Yes, it is very wrong of my sister to treat our poor father as she does," she said; "he has been a Providence to us. It was not until M. de Nucingen positively ordered me only to receive him in the mornings that I yielded the point. But I have been unhappy about it for a long while; I have shed many tears over it. This violence to my feelings, with my husband's brutal treatment, have been two causes of my unhappy married life. There is certainly no woman in Paris whose lot seems more enviable than mine, and yet, in reality, there is not one so much to be pitied. You will think I must be out of my senses to talk to you like this; but you know my father, and I cannot regard you as a stranger."

°°°°"You will find no one," said Eugene, "who longs as eagerly as I do to be yours. What do all women seek? Happiness." (He answered his own question in low, vibrating tones.) "And if happiness for a woman means that she is to be loved and adored, to have a friend to whom she can pour out her wishes, her fancies, her sorrows and joys; to whom she can lay bare her heart and soul, and all her fair defects and her gracious virtues, without fear of a betrayal; believe me, the devotion and the warmth that never fails can only be found in the heart of a young man who, at a bare sign from you, would go to his death, who neither knows nor cares to know anything as yet of the world, because you will be all the world to him. I myself, you see (you will laugh at my simplicity), have just come from a remote country district; I am quite new to this world of Paris; I have only known true and loving hearts; and I made up my mind that here I should find no love. Then I chanced to meet my cousin, and to see my cousin's heart from very near; I have divined the inexhaustible treasures of passion, and, like Cherubino, I am the lover of all women, until the day comes when I find THE woman to whom I may devote myself. As soon as I saw you, as soon as I came into the theatre this evening, I felt myself borne towards you as if by the current of a stream. I had so often thought of you already, but I had never dreamed that you would be so beautiful! Mme. de Beauseant told me that I must not look so much at you. She does not know the charm of your red lips, your fair face, nor see how soft your eyes are. . . . I also am beginning to talk nonsense; but let me talk."

°°°°Nothing pleases a woman better than to listen to such whispered words as these; the most puritanical among them listens even when she ought not to reply to them; and Rastignac, having once begun, continued to pour out his story, dropping his voice, that she might lean and listen; and Mme. de Nucingen, smiling, glanced from time to time at de Marsay, who still sat in the Princesse Galathionne's box.

°°°°Rastignac did not leave Mme. de Nucingen till her husband came to take her home.

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, "I shall have the pleasure of calling upon you before the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball."

°°°°"If Matame infites you to come," said the Baron, a thickset Alsatian, with indications of a sinister cunning in his full-moon countenance, "you are quide sure of being well receifed."

°°°°"My affairs seem to be in a promising way," said Eugene to himself.--" 'Can you love me?' I asked her, and she did not resent it. The bit is in the horse's mouth, and I have only to mount and ride;" and with that he went to pay his respects to Mme. de Beauseant, who was leaving the theatre on d'Ajuda's arm.

°°°°The student did not know that the Baroness' thoughts had been wandering; that she was even then expecting a letter from de Marsay, one of those letters that bring about a rupture that rends the soul; so, happy in his delusion, Eugene went with the Vicomtesse to the peristyle, where people were waiting till their carriages were announced.

°°°°"That cousin of yours is hardly recognizable for the same man," said the Portuguese laughingly to the Vicomtesse, when Eugene had taken leave of them. "He will break the bank. He is as supple as an eel; he will go a long way, of that I am sure. Who else could have picked out a woman for him, as you did, just when she needed consolation?"

°°°°"But it is not certain that she does not still love the faithless lover," said Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°The student meanwhile walked back from the Theatre-Italien to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, making the most delightful plans as he went. He had noticed how closely Mme. de Restaud had scrutinized him when he sat beside Mme. de Nucingen, and inferred that the Countess' doors would not be closed in the future. Four important houses were now open to him--for he meant to stand well with the Marechale; he had four supporters in the inmost circle of society in Paris. Even now it was clear to him that, once involved in this intricate social machinery, he must attach himself to a spoke of the wheel that was to turn and raise his fortunes; he would not examine himself too curiously as to the methods, but he was certain of the end, and conscious of the power to gain and keep his hold.

°°°°"If Mme. de Nucingen takes an interest in me, I will teach her how to manage her husband. That husband of hers is a great speculator; he might put me in the way of making a fortune by a single stroke."

°°°°He did not say this bluntly in so many words; as yet, indeed, he was not sufficient of a diplomatist to sum up a situation, to see its possibilities at a glance, and calculate the chances in his favor. These were nothing but hazy ideas that floated over his mental horizon; they were less cynical than Vautrin's notions; but if they had been tried in the crucible of conscience, no very pure result would have issued from the test. It is by a succession of such like transactions that men sink at last to the level of the relaxed morality of this epoch, when there have never been so few of those who square their courses with their theories, so few of those noble characters who do not yield to temptation, for whom the slightest deviation from the line of rectitude is a crime. To these magnificent types of uncompromising Right we owe two masterpieces--the Alceste of Moliere, and, in our own day, the characters of Jeanie Deans and her father in Sir Walter Scott's novel. Perhaps a work which should chronicle the opposite course, which should trace out all the devious courses through which a man of the world, a man of ambitions, drags his conscience, just steering clear of crime that he may gain his end and yet save appearances, such a chronicle would be no less edifying and no less dramatic.

°°°°Rastignac went home. He was fascinated by Mme. de Nucingen; he seemed to see her before him, slender and graceful as a swallow. He recalled the intoxicating sweetness of her eyes, her fair hair, the delicate silken tissue of the skin, beneath which it almost seemed to him that he could see the blood coursing; the tones of her voice still exerted a spell over him; he had forgotten nothing; his walk perhaps heated his imagination by sending a glow of warmth through his veins. He knocked unceremoniously at Goriot's door.

°°°°"I have seen Mme. Delphine, neighbor," said he.

°°°°"Where?"

°°°°"At the Italiens."

°°°°"Did she enjoy it?. . . . Just come inside," and the old man left his bed, unlocked the door, and promptly returned again.

°°°°It was the first time that Eugene had been in Father Goriot's room, and he could not control his feeling of amazement at the contrast between the den in which the father lived and the costume of the daughter whom he had just beheld. The window was curtainless, the walls were damp, in places the varnished wall- paper had come away and gave glimpses of the grimy yellow plaster beneath. The wretched bed on which the old man lay boasted but one thin blanket, and a wadded quilt made out of large pieces of Mme. Vauquer's old dresses. The floor was damp and gritty. Opposite the window stood a chest of drawers made of rosewood, one of the old-fashioned kind with a curving front and brass handles, shaped like rings of twisted vine stems covered with flowers and leaves. On a venerable piece of furniture with a wooden shelf stood a ewer and basin and shaving apparatus. A pair of shoes stood in one corner; a night-table by the bed had neither a door nor marble slab. There was not a trace of a fire in the empty grate; the square walnut table with the crossbar against which Father Goriot had crushed and twisted his posset- dish stood near the hearth. The old man's hat was lying on a broken-down bureau. An armchair stuffed with straw and a couple of chairs completed the list of ramshackle furniture. From the tester of the bed, tied to the ceiling by a piece of rag, hung a strip of some cheap material in large red and black checks. No poor drudge in a garret could be worse lodged than Father Goriot in Mme. Vauquer's lodging-house. The mere sight of the room sent a chill through you and a sense of oppression; it was like the worst cell in a prison. Luckily, Goriot could not see the effect that his surroundings produced on Eugene as the latter deposited his candle on the night-table. The old man turned round, keeping the bedclothes huddled up to his chin.

°°°°"Well," he said, "and which do you like the best, Mme. de Restaud or Mme. de Nucingen?"

°°°°"I like Mme. Delphine the best," said the law student, "because she loves you the best."

°°°°At the words so heartily spoken the old man's hand slipped out from under the bedclothes and grasped Eugene's.

°°°°"Thank you, thank you," he said, gratefully. "Then what did she say about me?"

°°°°The student repeated the Baroness' remarks with some embellishments of his own, the old man listening the while as though he heard a voice from Heaven.

°°°°"Dear child!" he said. "Yes, yes, she is very fond of me. But you must not believe all that she tells you about Anastasie. The two sisters are jealous of each other, you see, another proof of their affection. Mme. de Restaud is very fond of me too. I know she is. A father sees his children as God sees all of us; he looks into the very depths of their hearts; he knows their intentions; and both of them are so loving. Oh! if I only had good sons-in-law, I should be too happy, and I dare say there is no perfect happiness here below. If I might live with them-- simply hear their voices, know that they are there, see them go and come as I used to do at home when they were still with me; why, my heart bounds at the thought. . . . Were they nicely dressed?"

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene. "But, M. Goriot, how is it that your daughters have such fine houses, while you live in such a den as this?"

°°°°"Dear me, why should I want anything better?" he replied, with seeming carelessness. "I can't quite explain to you how it is; I am not used to stringing words together properly, but it all lies there----" he said, tapping his heart. "My real life is in my two girls, you see; and so long as they are happy, and smartly dressed, and have soft carpets under their feet, what does it matter what clothes I wear or where I lie down of a night? I shall never feel cold so long as they are warm; I shall never feel dull if they are laughing. I have no troubles but theirs. When you, too, are a father, and you hear your children's little voices, you will say to yourself, 'That has all come from me.' You will feel that those little ones are akin to every drop in your veins, that they are the very flower of your life (and what else are they?); you will cleave so closely to them that you seem to feel every movement that they make. Everywhere I hear their voices sounding in my ears. If they are sad, the look in their eyes freezes my blood. Some day you will find out that there is far more happiness in another's happiness than in your own. It is something that I cannot explain, something within that sends a glow of warmth all through you. In short, I live my life three times over. Shall I tell you something funny? Well, then, since I have been a father, I have come to understand God. He is everywhere in the world, because the whole world comes from Him. And it is just the same with my children, monsieur. Only, I love my daughters better than God loves the world, for the world is not so beautiful as God Himself is, but my children are more beautiful than I am. Their lives are so bound up with mine that I felt somehow that you would see them this evening. Great Heaven! If any man would make my little Delphine as happy as a wife is when she is loved, I would black his boots and run on his errands. That miserable M. de Marsay is a cur; I know all about him from her maid. A longing to wring his neck comes over me now and then. He does not love her! does not love a pearl of a woman, with a voice like a nightingale and shaped like a model. Where can her eyes have been when she married that great lump of an Alsatian? They ought both of them to have married young men, good-looking and good-tempered--but, after all, they had their own way."

°°°°Father Goriot was sublime. Eugene had never yet seen his face light up as it did now with the passionate fervor of a father's love. It is worthy of remark that strong feeling has a very subtle and pervasive power; the roughest nature, in the endeavor to express a deep and sincere affection, communicates to others the influence that has put resonance into the voice, and eloquence into every gesture, wrought a change in the very features of the speaker; for under the inspiration of passion the stupidest human being attains to the highest eloquence of ideas, if not of language, and seems to move in some sphere of light. In the old man's tones and gesture there was something just then of the same spell that a great actor exerts over his audience. But does not the poet in us find expression in our affections?

°°°°"Well," said Eugene, "perhaps you will not be sorry to hear that she is pretty sure to break with de Marsay before long. That sprig of fashion has left her for the Princesse Galathionne. For my part, I fell in love with Mme. Delphine this evening."

°°°°"Stuff!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"I did indeed, and she did not regard me with aversion. For a whole hour we talked of love, and I am to go to call on her on Saturday, the day after to-morrow."

°°°°"Oh! how I should love you, if she should like you. You are kind- hearted; you would never make her miserable. If you were to forsake her, I would cut your throat at once. A woman does not love twice, you see! Good heavens! what nonsense I am talking, M. Eugene! It is cold; you ought not to stay here. MON DIEU! so you have heard her speak? What message did she give you for me?"

°°°°"None at all," said Eugene to himself; aloud he answered, "She told me to tell you that your daughter sends you a good kiss."

°°°°"Good-night, neighbor! Sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you! I have mine already made for me by that message from her. May God grant you all your desires! You have come in like a good angel on me to-night, and brought with you the air that my daughter breathes."

°°°°"Poor old fellow!" said Eugene as he lay down. "It is enough to melt a heart of stone. His daughter no more thought of him than of the Grand Turk."

°°°°Ever after this conference Goriot looked upon his neighbor as a friend, a confidant such as he had never hoped to find; and there was established between the two the only relationship that could attach this old man to another man. The passions never miscalculate. Father Goriot felt that this friendship brought him closer to his daughter Delphine; he thought that he should find a warmer welcome for himself if the Baroness should care for Eugene. Moreover, he had confided one of his troubles to the younger man. Mme. de Nucingen, for whose happiness he prayed a thousand times daily, had never known the joys of love. Eugene was certainly (to make use of his own expression) one of the nicest young men that he had ever seen, and some prophetic instinct seemed to tell him that Eugene was to give her the happiness which had not been hers. These were the beginnings of a friendship that grew up between the old man and his neighbor; but for this friendship the catastrophe of the drama must have remained a mystery.

°°°°The affection with which Father Goriot regarded Eugene, by whom he seated himself at breakfast, the change in Goriot's face, which as a rule, looked as expressionless as a plaster cast, and a few words that passed between the two, surprised the other lodgers. Vautrin, who saw Eugene for the first time since their interview, seemed as if he would fain read the student's very soul. During the night Eugene had had some time in which to scan the vast field which lay before him; and now, as he remembered yesterday's proposal, the thought of Mlle. Taillefer's dowry came, of course, to his mind, and he could not help thinking of Victorine as the most exemplary youth may think of an heiress. It chanced that their eyes met. The poor girl did not fail to see that Eugene looked very handsome in his new clothes. So much was said in the glance, thus exchanged, that Eugene could not doubt but that he was associated in her mind with the vague hopes that lie dormant in a girl's heart and gather round the first attractive newcomer. "Eight hundred thousand francs!" a voice cried in his ears, but suddenly he took refuge in the memories of yesterday evening, thinking that his extemporized passion for Mme. de Nucingen was a talisman that would preserve him from this temptation.

°°°°"They gave Rossini's Barber of Seville at the Italiens yesterday evening," he remarked. "I never heard such delicious music. Good gracious! how lucky people are to have a box at the Italiens!"

°°°°Father Goriot drank in every word that Eugene let fall, and watched him as a dog watches his master's slightest movement.

°°°°"You men are like fighting cocks," said Mme. Vauquer; "you do what you like."

°°°°"How did you get back?" inquired Vautrin.

°°°°"I walked," answered Eugene.

°°°°"For my own part," remarked the tempter, "I do not care about doing things by halves. If I want to enjoy myself that way, I should prefer to go in my carriage, sit in my own box, and do the thing comfortably. Everything or nothing; that is my motto."

°°°°"And a good one, too," commented Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Perhaps you will see Mme. de Nucingen to-day," said Eugene, addressing Goriot in an undertone. "She will welcome you with open arms, I am sure; she would want to ask you for all sorts of little details about me. I have found out that she will do anything in the world to be known by my cousin Mme. de Beauseant; don't forget to tell her that I love her too well not to think of trying to arrange this."

°°°°Rastignac went at once to the Ecole de Droit. He had no mind to stay a moment longer than was necessary in that odious house. He wasted his time that day; he had fallen a victim to that fever of the brain that accompanies the too vivid hopes of youth. Vautrin's arguments had set him meditating on social life, and he was deep in these reflections when he happened on his friend Bianchon in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

°°°°"What makes you look so solemn?" said the medical student, putting an arm through Eugene's as they went towards the Palais.

°°°°"I am tormented by temptations."

°°°°"What kind? There is a cure for temptation."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Yielding to it."

°°°°"You laugh, but you don't know what it is all about. Have you read Rousseau?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Do you remember that he asks the reader somewhere what he would do if he could make a fortune by killing an old mandarin somewhere in China by mere force of wishing it, and without stirring from Paris?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Well, then?"

°°°°"Pshaw! I am at my thirty-third mandarin."

°°°°"Seriously, though. Look here, suppose you were sure that you could do it, and had only to give a nod. Would you do it?"

°°°°"Is he well stricken in years, this mandarin of yours? Pshaw! after all, young or old, paralytic, or well and sound, my word for it. . . . Well, then. Hang it, no!"

°°°°"You are a good fellow, Bianchon. But suppose you loved a woman well enough to lose your soul in hell for her, and that she wanted money for dresses and a carriage, and all her whims, in fact?"

°°°°"Why, here you are taking away my reason, and want me to reason!"

°°°°"Well, then, Bianchon, I am mad; bring me to my senses. I have two sisters as beautiful and innocent as angels, and I want them to be happy. How am I to find two hundred thousand francs apiece for them in the next five years? Now and then in life, you see, you must play for heavy stakes, and it is no use wasting your luck on low play."

°°°°"But you are only stating the problem that lies before every one at the outset of his life, and you want to cut the Gordian knot with a sword. If that is the way of it, dear boy, you must be an Alexander, or to the hulks you go. For my own part, I am quite contented with the little lot I mean to make for myself somewhere in the country, when I mean to step into my father's shoes and plod along. A man's affections are just as fully satisfied by the smallest circle as they can be by a vast circumference. Napoleon himself could only dine once, and he could not have more mistresses than a house student at the Capuchins. Happiness, old man, depends on what lies between the sole of your foot and the crown of your head; and whether it costs a million or a hundred louis, the actual amount of pleasure that you receive rests entirely with you, and is just exactly the same in any case. I am for letting that Chinaman live."

°°°°"Thank you, Bianchon; you have done me good. We will always be friends."

°°°°"I say," remarked the medical student, as they came to the end of a broad walk in the Jardin des Plantes, "I saw the Michonneau and Poiret a few minutes ago on a bench chatting with a gentleman whom I used to see in last year's troubles hanging about the Chamber of Deputies; he seems to me, in fact, to be a detective dressed up like a decent retired tradesman. Let us keep an eye on that couple; I will tell you why some time. Good-bye; it is nearly four o'clock, and I must be in to answer to my name."

°°°°When Eugene reached the lodging-house, he found Father Goriot waiting for him.

°°°°"Here," cried the old man, "here is a letter from her. Pretty handwriting, eh?"

°°°°Eugene broke the seal and read:--

°°°°"Sir,--I have heard from my father that you are fond of Italian music. I shall be delighted if you will do me the pleasure of accepting a seat in my box. La Fodor and Pellegrini will sing on Saturday, so I am sure that you will not refuse me. M. de Nucingen and I shall be pleased if you will dine with us; we shall be quite by ourselves. If you will come and be my escort, my husband will be glad to be relieved from his conjugal duties. Do not answer, but simply come.--Yours sincerely, D. DE N."

°°°°"Let me see it," said Father Goriot, when Eugene had read the letter. "You are going, aren't you?" he added, when he had smelled the writing-paper. "How nice it smells! Her fingers have touched it, that is certain."

°°°°"A woman does not fling herself at a man's head in this way," the student was thinking. "She wants to use me to bring back de Marsay; nothing but pique makes a woman do a thing like this."

°°°°"Well," said Father Goriot, "what are you thinking about?"

°°°°Eugene did not know the fever or vanity that possessed some women in those days; how should he imagine that to open a door in the Faubourg Saint-Germain a banker's wife would go to almost any length. For the coterie of the Faubourg Saint-Germain was a charmed circle, and the women who moved in it were at that time the queens of society; and among the greatest of these Dames du Petit-Chateau, as they were called, were Mme. de Beauseant and her friends the Duchesse de Langeais and the Duchesse de Maufrigneause. Rastignac was alone in his ignorance of the frantic efforts made by women who lived in the Chausee-d'Antin to enter this seventh heaven and shine among the brightest constellations of their sex. But his cautious disposition stood him in good stead, and kept his judgment cool, and the not altogether enviable power of imposing instead of accepting conditions.

°°°°"Yes, I am going," he replied.

°°°°So it was curiosity that drew him to Mme. de Nucingen; while, if she had treated him disdainfully, passion perhaps might have brought him to her feet. Still he waited almost impatiently for to-morrow, and the hour when he could go to her. There is almost as much charm for a young man in a first flirtation as there is in first love. The certainty of success is a source of happiness to which men do not confess, and all the charm of certain women lies in this. The desire of conquest springs no less from the easiness than from the difficulty of triumph, and every passion is excited or sustained by one or the other of these two motives which divide the empire of love. Perhaps this division is one result of the great question of temperaments; which, after all, dominates social life. The melancholic temperament may stand in need of the tonic of coquetry, while those of nervous or sanguine complexion withdraw if they meet with a too stubborn resistance. In other words, the lymphatic temperament is essentially despondent, and the rhapsodic is bilious.

°°°°Eugene lingered over his toilette with an enjoyment of all its little details that is grateful to a young man's self-love, though he will not own to it for fear of being laughed at. He thought, as he arranged his hair, that a pretty woman's glances would wander through the dark curls. He indulged in childish tricks like any young girl dressing for a dance, and gazed complacently at his graceful figure while he smoothed out the creases of his coat.

°°°°"There are worse figures, that is certain," he said to himself.

°°°°Then he went downstairs, just as the rest of the household were sitting down to dinner, and took with good humor the boisterous applause excited by his elegant appearance. The amazement with which any attention to dress is regarded in a lodging-house is a very characteristic trait. No one can put on a new coat but every one else must say his say about it.

°°°°"Clk! clk! clk!" cried Bianchon, making the sound with his tongue against the roof of his mouth, like a driver urging on a horse.

°°°°"He holds himself like a duke and a peer of France," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Are you going a-courting?" inquired Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried the artist.

°°°°"My compliments to my lady your wife," from the employe at the Museum.

°°°°"Your wife; have you a wife?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, in compartments, water-tight and floats, guaranteed fast color, all prices from twenty-five to forty sous, neat check patterns in the latest fashion and best taste, will wash, half- linen, half-cotton, half-wool; a certain cure for toothache and other complaints under the patronage of the Royal College of Physicians! children like it! a remedy for headache, indigestion, and all other diseases affecting the throat, eyes, and ears!" cried Vautrin, with a comical imitation of the volubility of a quack at a fair. "And how much shall we say for this marvel, gentlemen? Twopence? No. Nothing of the sort. All that is left in stock after supplying the Great Mogul. All the crowned heads of Europe, including the Gr-r-rand Duke of Baden, have been anxious to get a sight of it. Walk up! walk up! gentlemen! Pay at the desk as you go in! Strike up the music there! Brooum, la, la, trinn! la, la, boum! boum! Mister Clarinette, there you are out of tune!" he added gruffly; "I will rap your knuckles for you!"

°°°°"Goodness! what an amusing man!" said Mme. Vauquer to Mme. Couture; "I should never feel dull with him in the house."

°°°°This burlesque of Vautrin's was the signal for an outburst of merriment, and under cover of jokes and laughter Eugene caught a glance from Mlle. Taillefer; she had leaned over to say a few words in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"The cab is at the door," announced Sylvie.

°°°°"But where is he going to dine?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"With Madame la Baronne de Nucingen."

°°°°"M. Goriot's daughter," said the law student.

°°°°At this, all eyes turned to the old vermicelli maker; he was gazing at Eugene with something like envy in his eyes.

°°°°Rastignac reached the house in the Rue Saint-Lazare, one of those many-windowed houses with a mean-looking portico and slender columns, which are considered the thing in Paris, a typical banker's house, decorated in the most ostentatious fashion; the walls lined with stucco, the landings of marble mosaic. Mme. de Nucingen was sitting in a little drawing-room; the room was painted in the Italian fashion, and decorated like a restaurant. The Baroness seemed depressed. The effort that she made to hide her feelings aroused Eugene's interest; it was plain that she was not playing a part. He had expected a little flutter of excitement at his coming, and he found her dispirited and sad. The disappointment piqued his vanity.

°°°°"My claim to your confidence is very small, madame," he said, after rallying her on her abstracted mood; "but if I am in the way, please tell me so frankly; I count on your good faith."

°°°°"No, stay with me," she said; "I shall be all alone if you go. Nucingen is dining in town, and I do not want to be alone; I want to be taken out of myself."

°°°°"But what is the matter?"

°°°°"You are the very last person whom I should tell," she exclaimed.

°°°°"Then I am connected in some way in this secret. I wonder what it is?"

°°°°"Perhaps. Yet, no," she went on; "it is a domestic quarrel, which ought to be buried in the depths of the heart. I am very unhappy; did I not tell you so the day before yesterday? Golden chains are the heaviest of all fetters."

°°°°When a woman tells a young man that she is very unhappy, and when the young man is clever, and well dressed, and has fifteen hundred francs lying idle in his pocket, he is sure to think as Eugene said, and he becomes a coxcomb.

°°°°"What can you have left to wish for?" he answered. "You are young, beautiful, beloved, and rich."

°°°°"Do not let us talk of my affairs," she said shaking her head mournfully. "We will dine together tete-a-tete, and afterwards we will go to hear the most exquisite music. Am I to your taste?" she went on, rising and displaying her gown of white cashmere, covered with Persian designs in the most superb taste.

°°°°"I wish that you were altogether mine," said Eugene; "you are charming."

°°°°"You would have a forlorn piece of property," she said, smiling bitterly. "There is nothing about me that betrays my wretchedness; and yet, in spite of appearances, I am in despair. I cannot sleep; my troubles have broken my night's rest; I shall grow ugly."

°°°°"Oh! that is impossible," cried the law student; "but I am curious to know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface."

°°°°"Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me," she said. "Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else, for pity's sake," she added. "Let me show you my rooms."

°°°°"No; let us stay here," answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen's hand in his. She surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

°°°°"Listen," said Rastignac; "if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end to them, even if I have to kill half-a- dozen men; or I shall go, never to return."

°°°°"Very well," she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of despair, "I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes," she said to herself, "I have no other resource left."

°°°°She rang the bell.

°°°°"Are the horses put in for the master?" she asked of the servant.

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve dinner at seven o'clock."

°°°°"Now, come with me," she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in the banker's carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be dreaming.

°°°°"To the Palais-Royal," she said to the coachman; "stop near the Theatre-Francais."

°°°°She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

°°°°"Another moment and she will escape me," he said to himself.

°°°°When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

°°°°"Is it true that you love me?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes," he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the uneasiness that he felt.

°°°°"You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"Are you ready to do my bidding?"

°°°°"Blindly."

°°°°"Have you ever been to a gaming-house?" she asked in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Never."

°°°°"Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse," she said. "Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my troubles when you come back."

°°°°"Devil take me, I'm sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am about, but I will obey you," he added, with inward exultation, as he thought, "She has gone too far to draw back-- she can refuse me nothing now!"

°°°°Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand clothes-dealer, and hurried to number 9, which happened to be the nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his stakes.

°°°°"If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it turns up, you will win thirty-six louis," said a respectable- looking, white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

°°°°Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number 21 (his own age). There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had won.

°°°°"Take your money off, sir," said the old gentleman; "you don't often win twice running by that system."

°°°°Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once more.

°°°°"You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own," the old gentleman said in his ear. "Take my advice and go away with your winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable, you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck."

°°°°Rastignac's head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the white-haired man's possession, and went down-stairs with his seven thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his luck.

°°°°"So, that is over; and now where will you take me?" he asked, as soon as the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild embrace.

°°°°"You have saved me!" she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

°°°°"I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then," she went on, "I wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over disgracefully. If, at a woman's utmost need, SOMEBODY heaps gold upon her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever! But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept money in such a way? MON DIEU! is it not natural to share everything with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how, then, can our interests be separate?

°°°°"You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I longed to escape, to run away . . . where, I did not know. Half the women in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture. Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think of me as a woman whom he has paid." She tried to conceal her tears from him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

°°°°"It is hideous, is it not," she cried, "to speak in a breath of money and affection. You cannot love me after this," she added.

°°°°The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great, and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution of society, had thrown Eugene's thoughts into confusion; he uttered soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

°°°°"You will not remember this against me?" she asked; "promise me that you will not."

°°°°"Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so," he said. She took his hand and held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep gratitude.

°°°°"I am free and happy once more, thanks to you," she said. "Oh! I have felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this," she went on, as she took only six of the banknotes. "In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns, for I really ought to go halves with you."

°°°°Eugene's maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, "I am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy," he took the money.

°°°°"It shall be a last stake in reserve," he said, "in case of misfortune."

°°°°"That was what I was dreading to hear," she cried, turning pale. "Oh, if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you! I should die of sorrow!"

°°°°They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin's cynical words began to ring in his ears.

°°°°"Seat yourself there," said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside the fire. "I have a difficult letter to write," she added. "Tell me what to say."

°°°°"Say nothing," Eugene answered her. "Put the bills in an envelope, direct it, and send it by your maid."

°°°°"Why, you are a love of a man," she said. "Ah! see what it is to have been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through," she went on, smiling at him.

°°°°"She is charming," thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

°°°°"Do you like it?" she asked, as she rang for the maid.

°°°°"Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me."

°°°°Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

°°°°Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of the table which he had admired in his cousin's house.

°°°°"Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens afterwards," she said.

°°°°"I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am a poor student, and I have my way to make."

°°°°"Oh! you will succeed," she said laughing. "You will see. All that you wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy."

°°°°It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris, believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

°°°°Eugene took the Baroness' hand in his, and by some light pressure of the fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

°°°°"That was gratitude," she said, "for devotion that I did not dare to hope for, but now it would be a promise."

°°°°"And will you give me no promise, ingrate?"

°°°°He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a discontented air that delighted her.

°°°°"I shall see you at the ball on Monday," she said.

°°°°As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections. He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible excuses for appropriating it.

°°°°He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the stairhead he saw a light in Goriot's room; the old man had lighted a candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and go to his room without "telling him all about his daughter," to use his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without reserve.

°°°°"Then they think that I am ruined!" cried Father Goriot, in an agony of jealousy and desperation. "Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a year! MON DIEU! Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why did not YOU come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I had hold of them, I would wring their necks. MON DIEU! CRYING! Did you say she was crying?"

°°°°"With her head on my waistcoat," said Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! give it to me," said Father Goriot. "What! my daughter's tears have fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me have it. By the terms of her marriage- contract, she ought to have the use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth."

°°°°"Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the waistcoat."

°°°°Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student's hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

°°°°"You will succeed," the old man said. "God is just, you see. I know an honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to save one tear to either of them."

°°°°"An honest man!" said Eugene to himself as he lay down. "Upon my word, I think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey the voice of conscience." Perhaps none but believers in God do good in secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

°°°°The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant, who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball. The Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there. Delphine's dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene's eyes; she was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who can guess all that passes in a woman's mind. Who has not refrained from giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure; he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room; all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

°°°°Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

°°°°The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in a diabolical fashion.

°°°°"And do you suppose," cried that cold-blooded logician, "that a young man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, in the Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way, I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but, after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be out of place here, where we only aim at the purely patriarchalorama. If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend," Vautrin continued, with half-paternal jocularity, "you must have three horses, a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further. Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good- bye to your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe going to carry your billets-doux for you? Do you mean to employ the stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom of your elders!" he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each syllable. "Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously, and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way."

°°°°Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by which he had sought to corrupt the student's mind.

°°°°Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve in the small hours. He rose at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew. He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money, and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

°°°°One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in their youth and in the almost frantic eagerness with which youth grasps at pleasure. They are reckless with anything obtained on credit, while everything for which they must pay in ready money is made to last as long as possible; if they cannot have all that they want, they make up for it, it would seem, by squandering what they have. To state the matter simply--a student is far more careful of his hat than of his coat, because the latter being a comparatively costly article of dress, it is in the nature of things that a tailor should be a creditor; but it is otherwise with the hatter; the sums of money spent with him are so modest, that he is the most independent and unmanageable of his tribe, and it is almost impossible to bring him to terms. The young man in the balcony of a theatre who displays a gorgeous waistcoat for the benefit of the fair owners of opera glasses, has very probably no socks in his wardrobe, for the hosier is another of the genus of weevils that nibble at the purse. This was Rastignac's condition. His purse was always empty for Mme. Vauquer, always full at the demand of vanity; there was a periodical ebb and flow in his fortunes, which was seldom favorable to the payment of just debts. If he was to leave that unsavory and mean abode, where from time to time his pretensions met with humiliation, the first step was to pay his hostess for a month's board and lodging, and the second to purchase furniture worthy of the new lodgings he must take in his quality of dandy, a course that remained impossible. Rastignac, out of his winnings at cards, would pay his jeweler exorbitant prices for gold watches and chains, and then, to meet the exigencies of play, would carry them to the pawnbroker, that discreet and forbidding- looking friend of youth; but when it was a question of paying for board or lodging, or for the necessary implements for the cultivation of his Elysian fields, his imagination and pluck alike deserted him. There was no inspiration to be found in vulgar necessity, in debts contracted for past requirements. Like most of those who trust to their luck, he put off till the last moment the payment of debts that among the bourgeoisie are regarded as sacred engagements, acting on the plan of Mirabeau, who never settled his baker's bill until it underwent a formidable transformation into a bill of exchange.

°°°°It was about this time when Rastignac was down on his luck and fell into debt, that it became clear to the law student's mind that he must have some more certain source of income if he meant to live as he had been doing. But while he groaned over the thorny problems of his precarious situation, he felt that he could not bring himself to renounce the pleasures of this extravagant life, and decided that he must continue it at all costs. His dreams of obtaining a fortune appeared more and more chimerical, and the real obstacles grew more formidable. His initiation into the secrets of the Nucingen household had revealed to him that if he were to attempt to use this love affair as a means of mending his fortunes, he must swallow down all sense of decency, and renounce all the generous ideas which redeem the sins of youth. He had chosen this life of apparent splendor, but secretly gnawed by the canker worm of remorse, a life of fleeting pleasure dearly paid for by persistent pain; like Le Distrait of La Bruyere, he had descended so far as to make his bed in a ditch; but (also like Le Distrait) he himself was uncontaminated as yet by the mire that stained his garments.

°°°°"So we have killed our mandarin, have we?" said Bianchon one day as they left the dinner table.

°°°°"Not yet," he answered, "but he is at his last gasp."

°°°°The medical student took this for a joke, but it was not a jest. Eugene had dined in the house that night for the first time for a long while, and had looked thoughtful during the meal. He had taken his place beside Mlle. Taillefer, and stayed through the dessert, giving his neighbor an expressive glance from time to time. A few of the boarders discussed the walnuts at the table, and others walked about the room, still taking part in the conversation which had begun among them. People usually went when they chose; the amount of time that they lingered being determined by the amount of interest that the conversation possessed for them, or by the difficulty of the process of digestion. In winter-time the room was seldom empty before eight o'clock, when the four women had it all to themselves, and made up for the silence previously imposed upon them by the preponderating masculine element. This evening Vautrin had noticed Eugene's abstractedness, and stayed in the room, though he had seemed to be in a hurry to finish his dinner and go. All through the talk afterwards he had kept out of the sight of the law student, who quite believed that Vautrin had left the room. He now took up his position cunningly in the sitting-room instead of going when the last boarders went. He had fathomed the young man's thoughts, and felt that a crisis was at hand. Rastignac was, in fact, in a dilemma, which many another young man must have known.

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen might love him, or might merely be playing with him, but in either case Rastignac had been made to experience all the alternations of hope and despair of genuine passion, and all the diplomatic arts of a Parisienne had been employed on him. After compromising herself by continually appearing in public with Mme. de Beauseant's cousin she still hesitated, and would not give him the lover's privileges which he appeared to enjoy. For a whole month she had so wrought on his senses, that at last she had made an impression on his heart. If in the earliest days the student had fancied himself to be master, Mme. de Nucingen had since become the stronger of the two, for she had skilfully roused and played upon every instinct, good or bad, in the two or three men comprised in a young student in Paris. This was not the result of deep design on her part, nor was she playing a part, for women are in a manner true to themselves even through their grossest deceit, because their actions are prompted by a natural impulse. It may have been that Delphine, who had allowed this young man to gain such an ascendency over her, conscious that she had been too demonstrative, was obeying a sentiment of dignity, and either repented of her concessions, or it pleased her to suspend them. It is so natural to a Parisienne, even when passion has almost mastered her, to hesitate and pause before taking the plunge; to probe the heart of him to whom she intrusts her future. And once already Mme. de Nucingen's hopes had been betrayed, and her loyalty to a selfish young lover had been despised. She had good reason to be suspicious. Or it may have been that something in Eugene's manner (for his rapid success was making a coxcomb of him) had warned her that the grotesque nature of their position had lowered her somewhat in his eyes. She doubtless wished to assert her dignity; he was young, and she would be great in his eyes; for the lover who had forsaken her had held her so cheap that she was determined that Eugene should not think her an easy conquest, and for this very reason--he knew that de Marsay had been his predecessor. Finally, after the degradation of submission to the pleasure of a heartless young rake, it was so sweet to her to wander in the flower-strewn realms of love, that it was not wonderful that she should wish to dwell a while on the prospect, to tremble with the vibrations of love, to feel the freshness of the breath of its dawn. The true lover was suffering for the sins of the false. This inconsistency is unfortunately only to be expected so long as men do not know how many flowers are mown down in a young woman's soul by the first stroke of treachery.

°°°°Whatever her reasons may have been, Delphine was playing with Rastignac, and took pleasure in playing with him, doubtless because she felt sure of his love, and confident that she could put an end to the torture as soon as it was her royal pleasure to do so. Eugene's self-love was engaged; he could not suffer his first passage of love to end in a defeat, and persisted in his suit like a sportsman determined to bring down at least one partridge to celebrate his first Feast of Saint-Hubert. The pressure of anxiety, his wounded self-love, his despair, real or feigned, drew him nearer and nearer to this woman. All Paris credited him with this conquest, and yet he was conscious that he had made no progress since the day when he saw Mme. de Nucingen for the first time. He did not know as yet that a woman's coquetry is sometimes more delightful than the pleasure of secure possession of her love, and was possessed with helpless rage. If, at this time, while she denied herself to love, Eugene gathered the springtide spoils of his life, the fruit, somewhat sharp and green, and dearly bought, was no less delicious to the taste. There were moments when he had not a sou in his pockets, and at such times he thought in spite of his conscience of Vautrin's offer and the possibility of fortune by a marriage with Mlle. Taillefer. Poverty would clamor so loudly that more than once he was on the point of yielding to the cunning temptations of the terrible sphinx, whose glance had so often exerted a strange spell over him.

°°°°Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau went up to their rooms; and Rastignac, thinking that he was alone with the women in the dining-room, sat between Mme. Vauquer and Mme. Couture, who was nodding over the woolen cuffs that she was knitting by the stove, and looked at Mlle. Taillefer so tenderly that she lowered her eyes.

°°°°"Can you be in trouble, M. Eugene?" Victorine said after a pause.

°°°°"Who has not his troubles?" answered Rastignac. "If we men were sure of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should have no troubles."

°°°°For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible to mistake its meaning.

°°°°"You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to- day, but are you sure that it will never change?"

°°°°A smile flitted over the poor girl's lips; it seemed as if a ray of light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

°°°°"Ah! but suppose," he said, "that you should be rich and happy to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of poverty?"

°°°°A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

°°°°"Even if he were very poor?"

°°°°Again the same mute answer.

°°°°"What nonsense are you talking, you two?" exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Never mind," answered Eugene; "we understand each other."

°°°°"So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?" The words were uttered in Vautrin's deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door as he spoke.

°°°°"Oh! how you startled me!" Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed together.

°°°°"I might make a worse choice," said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin's voice had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

°°°°"No bad jokes, gentlemen!" said Mme. Couture. "My dear, let us go upstairs."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene and Vautrin were left alone.

°°°°"I felt sure you would come round to it," said the elder man with the coolness that nothing seemed to shake. "But stay a moment! I have as much delicacy as anybody else. Don't make up your mind on the spur of the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like."

°°°°The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes, which he fluttered before the student's eyes. Eugene was in a most painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis to the Marquis d'Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud's house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

°°°°"You must see," said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor, "that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself under any obligation to you."

°°°°"Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise," answered the tempter. "You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion, and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women. Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you? Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account," Vautrin went on, and a smile stole over his lips. "Take these bits of paper and write across this," he added, producing a piece of stamped paper, "Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day twelvemonth, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful. In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of strength, my boy."

°°°°"What manner of man are you?" cried Eugene. "Were you created to torment me?"

°°°°"Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes, and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your first fright will go off like a conscript's terror on the battlefield. You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, 'Here are a hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,' and you could sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won't compromise you in any way, and you hesitate. 'Tis an effeminate age."

°°°°Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for it.

°°°°"Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally," Vautrin continued. "I mean to leave this country in a few months' time for America, and set about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do; I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look at. What is a man's life to me? Not THAT," he said, and he snapped his thumb-nail against his teeth. "A man, in short, is everything to me, or just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret; you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin, but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A sentiment-- what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part, I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is my passion. I knew Venice Preserved by heart. Have you met many men plucky enough when a comrade says, 'Let us bury a dead body!' to go and do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!"

°°°°Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student's repudiation, he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying their blameworthy actions to themselves.

°°°°"He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is certain," said Eugene to himself.

°°°°He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of Vautrin's ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for his own ends, raised him in the student's eyes; but the thought of a compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de Restaud's.

°°°°For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid Messieurs de Trailles and d'Ajuda, played at whist for part of the evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to consider that his luck was heaven's reward for his perseverance in the right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin whether the bill he had given was still in the other's possession; and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand francs with a not unnatural relief.

°°°°"Everything is going on well," said Vautrin.

°°°°"But I am not your accomplice," said Eugene.

°°°°"I know, I know," Vautrin broke in. "You are still acting like a child. You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset."

°°°°Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not without good reason, his own suspicions.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," this M. Gondureau was saying, "I do not see any cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of Police----"

°°°°"Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter," said Gondureau.

°°°°Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by that word "police," and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers, confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where the BONUS flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature (an illegible scrawl) and by his title--"His Excellency Monseigneur le Ministre," five words which produce as much effect as the il Bondo Cani of the Calife de Bagdad, five words which in the eyes of this low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a moment? Pronounce the words "His Excellency," and these poor folk will forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests. Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences, annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the deus ex machina, the magical words "His Excellency," so as to dazzle Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

°°°°"If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister . . . Ah! that is quite another thing," said Poiret.

°°°°"You seem to be guided by this gentleman's opinion, and you hear what he says," said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau. "Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the nickname Trompe-la-Mort."

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort?" said Pioret. "Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves that nickname."

°°°°"Well, yes," said the detective. "They call him so because he has been so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----"

°°°°"Then is he a man of honor?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man's crime upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler, who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been unexceptionable."

°°°°"But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, why should he want me?" asked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Oh yes," said Poiret, "if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as to tell us, really knows for a certainty----"

°°°°"Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed Trompe-la- Mort, is in the confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing their affairs, which want a MAN OF MARK to see about them."

°°°°"Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?" asked Poiret. "This gentleman calls himself a MAN OF MARK because he is a MARKED MAN-- branded, you know."

°°°°"This so-called Vautrin," said the detective, "receives the money belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for their benefit."

°°°°"Their mistresses! You mean their wives," remarked Poiret.

°°°°"No, sir. A convict's wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We call them concubines."

°°°°"Then they all live in a state of concubinage?"

°°°°"Naturally."

°°°°"Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow. Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society."

°°°°"But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues, my dear sir----"

°°°°"Of course not, sir; but still----"

°°°°"Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie," said Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"You see how it is, mademoiselle," Gondureau continued. "The Government may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the Society of the Ten Thousand----"

°°°°"Ten Thousand Thieves!" cried Pioret in alarm.

°°°°"No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they won't touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society. If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds, we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again; they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, "What is there to hinder Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?"

°°°°"Oh!" said the detective, "a man is told off to follow him everywhere he goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions."

°°°°"You are quite right, sir," said Poiret, "utterly disgraced he would be."

°°°°"But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without more ado," remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but," he added in her ear, "keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.-- Trompe-la-Mort, when he came back here," he went on aloud "slipped into the skin of an honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning, that he is! You don't catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of consequence, who transacts a good deal of business."

°°°°"Naturally," said Poiret to himself.

°°°°"And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of the real Vautrin, he would put every one's back up among the business men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about."

°°°°"Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman," said Mlle. Michonneau briskly.

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him," said the detective. "I will tell you a secret--he does not like them."

°°°°"Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to identify him for two thousand francs."

°°°°"Nothing simpler," said the stranger. "I will send you a little bottle containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder, and PRESTO! the letters will appear."

°°°°"Why, that is just nothing at all," said Poiret.

°°°°"Well, do you agree?" said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

°°°°"But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all," said Mlle. Michonneau; "am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"What will you give me then?"

°°°°"Five hundred francs."

°°°°"It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir."

°°°°"I assure you," said Poiret, "that mademoiselle has a great deal of conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very intelligent."

°°°°"Well, now," Mlle. Michonneau went on, "make it three thousand francs if he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man."

°°°°"Done!" said Gondureau, "but on the condition that the thing is settled to-morrow."

°°°°"Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first."

°°°°"You are a sly one," said the detective as he rose to his feet. "Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M. Gondureau."

°°°°Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier's lecture, overheard the sufficiently striking nickname of Trompe-la-Mort, and caught the celebrated chief detective's "Done!"

°°°°"Why didn't you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a year," said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Why didn't I?" she asked. "Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without paying, and that would be an abominable sell."

°°°°"And suppose you did warn him," Poiret went on, "didn't that gentleman say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything."

°°°°"Anyhow," thought Mlle. Michonneau, "I can't abide him. He says nothing but disagreeable things to me."

°°°°"But you can do better than that," Poiret resumed. "As that gentleman said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief. Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into the bargain!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau's musings did not permit her to listen very closely to the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret's lips like water dripping from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

°°°°By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau versus Dame Morin, when he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

°°°°As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"I knew how it would end," remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. "They have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week past."

°°°°"Yes," he answered. "So she was found guilty."

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. Morin."

°°°°"I am talking about Mlle. Victorine," said Mlle, Michonneau, as she entered Poiret's room with an absent air, "and you answer, 'Mme. Morin.' Who may Mme. Morin be?"

°°°°"What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?" demanded Poiret.

°°°°"Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!"

°°°°That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel's voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac's face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately; he had said to himself that a woman's happiness should atone for this venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face; the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice broke in upon their bliss.

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity,"

°°°°he sang mockingly.

°°°°Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand, the light touch of Rastignac's hair against her cheek, a word whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student's warm breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love's sake in the most famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

°°°°"The thing is arranged," Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. "Our two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half- past eight in the morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father's fortune and affections. A funny way of putting it, isn't it? Taillefer's youngster is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know."

°°°°Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders likewise appeared.

°°°°"That is just as I intended." Vautrin said. "You know quite well what you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you."

°°°°He made as though he would take Eugene's hand, but Rastignac hastily withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

°°°°"Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes of virtue about us!" murmured Vautrin. "But Papa Doliban has three millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride's white dress, even in your own eyes."

°°°°Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, "You look melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me."

°°°°The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

°°°°"Let us go up to your room," the worthy soul remarked, when he had asked Sylvie for the law student's key. "This morning," he resumed, "you thought that SHE did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting ME! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move into it in three days' time. Don't split upon me. She wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn't bear to keep the secret from you. You will be in the Rue d'Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that won't run away."

°°°°Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student's back was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney- piece and set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac's arms stamped in gold on the leather.

°°°°"My dear boy," said the kind soul, "I have been up to the eyes in this business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?"

°°°°"What is it?"

°°°°"There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn't that so? I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say to myself, 'He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.' If I were ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs- Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my little girl again, so light- hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, 'I am very happy, papa!' When they say 'father' stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me 'papa,' it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else."

°°°°The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

°°°°"It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!" he said, raising his head after a pause. "All the time we were going about together she chatted away about you. 'He is so nice-looking, papa; isn't he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?' Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no sign, and he was dying of impatience.

°°°°Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were written:

°°°°"I want you to think of me every hour, BECAUSE . . .   "DELPHINE."

°°°°That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as well as for his daughter's sake.

°°°°"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera- dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me with you, will you not?"

°°°°"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

°°°°"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you! Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

°°°°"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to her this evening, will you not?"

°°°°"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

°°°°"Can I be of any use?"

°°°°"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening; it is a matter of life and death."

°°°°"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance; "are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were saying down below? . . . TONNERRE DE DIEU! you have no notion what a tap A LA GORIOT is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh! the thing is impossible!"

°°°°"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

°°°°"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

°°°°"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to- morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

°°°°"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

°°°°"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting in an appearance----"

°°°°Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing at the threshold of his door and singing:

°°°°"Oh! Richard, oh my king!   All the world abandons thee!   Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

°°°°The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a . . . tra la la."

°°°°"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is waiting for you."

°°°°"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my Bordeaux."

°°°°"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste, hasn't she? Eh?"

°°°°Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and, all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

°°°°Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with consternation.

°°°°"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as merry as a skylark."

°°°°"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

°°°°"Bargain?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on, seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.

°°°°"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules," said the young painter.

°°°°"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

°°°°"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

°°°°"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

°°°°"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and the cheese."

°°°°"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach besides."

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme. Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

°°°°"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

°°°°Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

°°°°"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this, Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right- hand side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

°°°°"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a hundred chestnuts."

°°°°"Oh! oh!"

°°°°"Booououh!"

°°°°"Prrr!"

°°°°These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a set firework.

°°°°"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called Vautrin.

°°°°"Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for it, I have some currant cordial."

°°°°"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered the medical student.

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for it," he added.

°°°°"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little cakes."

°°°°"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out the biscuits."

°°°°The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously struck up with the following variations:

°°°°"Scissors to grind!"

°°°°"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

°°°°"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

°°°°"China to mend!"

°°°°"Boat ahoy!"

°°°°"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

°°°°"Old clo'!"

°°°°"Cherries all ripe!"

°°°°But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

°°°°A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

°°°°"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs. When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer, telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the bread is ready for the oven; to- morrow we will eat it up and whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? . . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

°°°°Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

°°°°"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the widow.

°°°°These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

°°°°"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

°°°°"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two ladies----"

°°°°"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your young lady."

°°°°"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

°°°°"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

°°°°He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead, and began to sing:

°°°°"Sleep, little darlings;   I watch while you slumber."

°°°°"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

°°°°"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. " 'Tis your duty as a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "the young fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife-- there's your fortune for you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I go out and call a cab--all my own self."

°°°°And he started out, singing as he went:

°°°°"Oh! sun! divine sun!   Ripening the pumpkins every one."

°°°°"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over. HE never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't lose what he hadn't got-- Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

°°°°Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just as he was, like a package, across the bed.

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know what dissipation is."

°°°°"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

°°°°"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such things----"

°°°°"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

°°°°"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer. It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

°°°°"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

°°°°"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

°°°°"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

°°°°"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress as she spoke.

°°°°Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.

°°°°"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

°°°°The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face, so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet, austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught something of the golden glory of heaven.

°°°°"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing her fingers through Eugene's hair.

°°°°"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

°°°°There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

°°°°"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though you had nothing on."

°°°°"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

°°°°"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint- Pierre (good soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme. Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now, don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will idolize you."

°°°°The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady; "we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments with all the care of an antiquary."

°°°°"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine. "Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them."

°°°°"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M. Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

°°°°"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

°°°°"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two women were alone together.

°°°°"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady; "just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

°°°°"Oh! mamma."

°°°°"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in for."

°°°°"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life," said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

°°°°"MON DIEU! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

°°°°With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room, Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned, and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

°°°°That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

°°°°But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the scent.

°°°°"A delusion," he said. "Collin's sorbonne is the most dangerous that has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the Place de Greve."

°°°°As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible expressions borrowed from thieves' Latin, thieves, of all people, being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking-- his council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth after the axe has done its work.

°°°°"Collin is playing us off," he continued. "When we come across a man like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la- Mort's paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent crime than to punish it."

°°°°"And you do a service to our country," said Poiret.

°°°°"Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you are," said the head of the department. "Yes, of course, we are serving our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle. I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get it back for you."

°°°°"Well, now," Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, "there are idiots who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as saying 'Good-day.' "

°°°°The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like apparition of the sham Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her boarders so long as she lived.

°°°°In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till close upon eleven o'clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin's first bottle of wine), was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme. Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o'clock, and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested, therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup belonging to Vautrin--it was standing with the others in the bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business. The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen. It ran thus:--

°°°°"I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my friend. Till two o'clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity's sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line will be enough. Say, 'I will hasten to you,' or else, 'I am ill.' But if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have happened? . . ."

°°°°"Yes, indeed, what has happened?" exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any more. "What time is it?"

°°°°"Half-past eleven," said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his coffee.

°°°°The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M. Taillefer's servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," he cried, "your father is asking for you-- something terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious."

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" exclaimed Vautrin. "How can people brawl when they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people have bad manners, and that is a fact."

°°°°"Sir!" cried Eugene.

°°°°"Well, what then, you big baby!" said Vautrin, swallowing down his coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. "Are there not duels every morning in Paris?" added Vautrin.

°°°°"I will go with you, Victorine," said Mme. Couture, and the two women hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance that said--"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me tears!"

°°°°"Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"I am all sorts of things," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Queer, isn't it?" said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession of commonplaces suited to the occasion. "Death takes us off without asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have other complaints that men don't suffer from. We bear children, and it takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her father will have to acknowledge her now!"

°°°°"There!" said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, "yesterday she had not a penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune."

°°°°"I say, M. Eugene!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "you have landed on your feet!"

°°°°At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the crumpled letter still in his hand.

°°°°"You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to be like the rest of them?" he asked.

°°°°"Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine," said Eugene, turning to Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised the onlookers at this scene.

°°°°Father Goriot caught the student's hand and grasped it warmly. He could have kissed it.

°°°°"Oh, ho!" said Vautrin, "the Italians have a good proverb--Col tempo."

°°°°"Is there any answer?" said Mme. de Nucingen's messenger, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Say that I will come directly."

°°°°The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he could not be prudent.

°°°°"What is to be done?" he exclaimed aloud. "There are no proofs!"

°°°°Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, "Luck comes to us while we sleep, young man," and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck dead.

°°°°"So there is a Divine Justice!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?"

°°°°"A stroke!" cried Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor," called the widow. "Oh, M. Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel."

°°°°Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.

°°°°"Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist's and ask for something that's good for the apoplexy."

°°°°Christophe likewise went.

°°°°"Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs."

°°°°Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow staircase, and laid upon his bed.

°°°°"I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter," said M. Goriot.

°°°°"Selfish old thing!" cried Mme. Vauquer. "Yes, go; I wish you may die like a dog."

°°°°"Just go and see if you can find some ether," said Mlle. Michonneau to Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the sick man's clothes.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress of the situation.

°°°°"Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be of some use in sparing my modesty," she said to Poiret, "instead of standing there like a stock."

°°°°Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

°°°°"There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily," exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on the shirt again.--"Ouf! How heavy he is," he added, as he laid the convict down.

°°°°"Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!" said the old maid briskly; her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of the furniture with greedy eyes. "Could we find some excuse for opening that desk?"

°°°°"It mightn't be quite right," responded Poiret to this.

°°°°"Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it doesn't belong to any one now. But we haven't time, there is the Vauquer."

°°°°"Here is the ether," said that lady. "I must say that this is an eventful day. Lord! that man can't have had a stroke; he is as white as curds."

°°°°"White as curds?" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"And his pulse is steady," said the widow, laying her hand on his breast.

°°°°"Steady?" said the astonished Poiret.

°°°°"He is all right."

°°°°"Do you think so?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look, mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears a wig. They say that red- haired people are either the worst or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?"

°°°°"Good to hang," said Poiret.

°°°°"Round a pretty woman's neck, you mean," said Mlle Michonneau, hastily. "Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman's duty to nurse you men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take yourself off," she added. "Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of dear M. Vautrin.

°°°°Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the room by his master.

°°°°Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself might be implicated. Vautrin's coolness still further dismayed him.

°°°°"Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?" Rastignac asked himself.

°°°°He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

°°°°"Well?" shouted Bianchon, "you have seen the Pilote?"

°°°°The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local journals.

°°°°"There is a wonderful history in it," said the house student of the Hopital Cochin. "Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?"

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----"

°°°°"You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master Taillefer's money!"

°°°°"Are all the devils of hell at my heels?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand," said Bianchon, "and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish."

°°°°"Just go to Mother Vauquer's," said Rastignac; "that scoundrel Vautrin has dropped down like one dead."

°°°°"Aha!" said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, "you confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself."

°°°°The law student's long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot's confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue d'Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.

°°°°"Such a love is my anchor of safety," he said to himself. "How the old man's heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!"

°°°°He took out his watch and admired it.

°°°°"I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?"

°°°°Rastignac's battle with himself went on for a long while; and though the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison Vauquer through the gathering dusk.

°°°°Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau's officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer's duel. They were anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the probable change in Victorine's prospects. Father Goriot alone was absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the same look that had read his thoughts before--the look that had such power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.

°°°°"Well, dear boy," said the escaped convict, "I am likely to cheat death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors."

°°°°"A bull you might say," cried the widow.

°°°°"You really might be sorry to see me still alive," said Vautrin in Rastignac's ear, thinking that he guessed the student's thoughts. "You must be mighty sure of yourself."

°°°°"Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort," said Bianchon; "and, upon my word, that name would do very well for you."

°°°°Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle. Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature had dropped from the convict's face; from the unmistakable ferocity of that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the sitting-room.

°°°°"In the name of the King and the Law!" said an officer, but the words were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.

°°°°Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men, who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden, and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin's face was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair, the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines, his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor. Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.

°°°°"You are not in the politest of humors to-day," he remarked to the chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his head.

°°°°"Gentlemen," he said, "put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call on those present to witness that I make no resistance."

°°°°A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally sudden cessation.

°°°°"There's a sell for you, master crusher," the convict added, looking at the famous director of police.

°°°°"Come, strip!" said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.

°°°°"Why?" asked Collin. "There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and surrender."

°°°°He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to overwhelm his audience.

°°°°"Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle," he went on, addressing a little, white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table; and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to draw up a document. "I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin, otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years' penal servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my nickname.--If I had as much as raised my hand," he went on, addressing the other lodgers, "those three sneaking wretches yonder would have drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer's domestic hearth. The rogues have laid their heads together to set a trap for me."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.

°°°°"Good Lord!" she cried, "this does give one a turn; and me at the Gaite with him only last night!" she said to Sylvie.

°°°°"Summon your philosophy, mamma," Collin resumed. "Is it a misfortune to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me." His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his eyes.--"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept any time you like! Do you understand?" And he sang:

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity."

°°°°"Don't you trouble yourself," he went on; "I can get in my money. They are too much afraid of me to swindle me."

°°°°The convicts' prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur, its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the speaker's discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno, wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own evil thoughts.

°°°°"Who betrayed me?" said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"It was you, old cat!" he said. "That sham stroke of apoplexy was your doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs," he shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession of his effects. "The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here," he said tapping his forehead. "Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?" he said, turning to the chief. "It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?" he asked of the police officers. "A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money," he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. "These folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?" he asked proudly. "There is some good there," he said tapping his heart; "I have never betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut," he said to the old maid, "they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them sick. Rake in your gains."

°°°°He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers' faces.

°°°°"What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before? A convict of Collin's stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and I am a match for them all."

°°°°"Ye gods!" cried the painter, "what a magnificent sketch one might make of him!"

°°°°"Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master of ceremonies to the widow" (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given by prisoners to the guillotine), "be a good fellow, and tell me if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don't want him to suffer for some one else, that would not be fair."

°°°°But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Collin, addressing the lodgers, "they will take me away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me to send you figs from Provence."

°°°°He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at Rastignac.

°°°°"Good-bye, Eugene," he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange transition from his previous rough and stern manner. "If you should be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend," and, in spite of his shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, "One, two!" like a fencing-master, and lunged. "If anything goes wrong, apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service."

°°°°The strange speaker's manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the pantomime.

°°°°As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house, Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress' temples with vinegar, looked round at the bewildered lodgers.

°°°°"Well," said she, "he was a man, he was, for all that."

°°°°Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead- alive, mummy-like figure, crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, "If that creature is going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out."

°°°°In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save Poiret, was of the medical student's opinion, so that the latter, strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

°°°°"You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us," he said; "speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at once."

°°°°"At once!" echoed Poiret in amazement.

°°°°Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in her ear.

°°°°"I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here as any one else," she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

°°°°"Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Monsieur is taking Collin's part" she said, with a questioning, malignant glance at the law student; "it is not difficult to guess why."

°°°°Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

°°°°"Let her alone!" cried the boarders.

°°°°Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

°°°°"Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas," said the painter, turning to Mme. Vauquer. "If you don't show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are."

°°°°At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in them.

°°°°"Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness," she cried, interrupting herself, "I can't help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is moving----"

°°°°"Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux's in the Place Sorbonne," cried Bianchon.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Come, now," she said; "you would not be the ruin of my establishment, would you, eh? There's a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening."

°°°°"Never a bit of it!" cried the boarders. "She must go, and go this minute!"

°°°°"But the poor lady has had no dinner," said Poiret, with piteous entreaty.

°°°°"She can go and dine where she likes," shouted several voices.

°°°°"Turn her out, the spy!"

°°°°"Turn them both out! Spies!"

°°°°"Gentlemen," cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love gives to the ovine male, "respect the weaker sex."

°°°°"Spies are of no sex!" said the painter.

°°°°"A precious sexorama!"

°°°°"Turn her into the streetorama!"

°°°°"Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house, it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We have paid our money, and we are not going," said Poiret, putting on his cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer was remonstrating.

°°°°"Naughty boy!" said the painter, with a comical look; "run away, naughty little boy!"

°°°°"Look here," said Bianchon; "if you do not go, all the rest of us will," and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room- door.

°°°°"Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?" cried Mme. Vauquer. "I am a ruined woman. You can't stay here; they will go further, do something violent."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

°°°°"She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn't."

°°°°These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions, borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low voice in her hostess' ear, and then--"I shall go to Mme. Buneaud's," she said, with a threatening look.

°°°°"Go where you please, mademoiselle," said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. "Go and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the food is cheap and nasty."

°°°°The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out laughing at the sight of him.

°°°°"Hist!--st!--st! Poiret," shouted the painter. "Hallo! I say, Poiret, hallo!" The employe from the Museum began to sing:

°°°°"Partant pour la Syrie,   Le jeune et beau Dunois . . ."

°°°°"Get along with you; you must be dying to go, trahit sua quemque voluptas!" said Bianchon.

°°°°"Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil," said the tutor.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret's arm, with an appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together, the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause, followed by peals of laughter.

°°°°"Bravo, Poiret!"

°°°°"Who would have thought it of old Poiret!"

°°°°"Apollo Poiret!"

°°°°"Mars Poiret!"

°°°°"Intrepid Poiret!"

°°°°A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

°°°°"The house might as well be burned down at once," cried she, "if there are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three o'clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those ladies at that poor man's expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me to send their things, because they are going to live with her father. M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone! . . ."

°°°°She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

°°°°"Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think," she cried.

°°°°Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

°°°°"What! another windfall for somebody!" was Sylvie's comment.

°°°°But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

°°°°"Goriot in a cab!" cried the boarders; "the world is coming to an end."

°°°°The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man's arm.

°°°°"Come," he said, with gladness in his eyes.

°°°°"Then you haven't heard the news?" said Eugene. "Vautrin was an escaped convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead."

°°°°"Very well, but what business is it of ours?" replied Father Goriot. "I am going to dine with my daughter in YOUR HOUSE, do you understand? She is expecting you. Come!"

°°°°He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

°°°°"Now, let us have dinner," cried the painter, and every one drew his chair to the table.

°°°°"Well, I never," said the portly Sylvie. "Nothing goes right to- day! The haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it is, more's the pity!"

°°°°Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day's events; but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels, jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day. Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope was the portly Sylvie.

°°°°That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in the cab. The old man's voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears like words spoken in a dream.

°°°°"It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don't know what pretty ways she has; at table she will look after me, 'Here, papa, just try this, it is nice.' And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her."

°°°°"It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down."

°°°°"Upside down?" repeated Father Goriot. "Why, the world has never been so right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood would be as sweet as honey."

°°°°"I feel as if I were coming back to life again," said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, hurry up there!" cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in front. "Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the place I told you of in ten minutes time."

°°°°With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous celerity.

°°°°"How that fellow crawls!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"But where are you taking me?" Eugene asked him.

°°°°"To your own house," said Goriot.

°°°°The cab stopped in the Rue d'Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning to bachelor ways.

°°°°"Come along upstairs," he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard, and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen's maid. Eugene found himself in a charming set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description, the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

°°°°"So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to understand!"

°°°°Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just witnessed was too much for Rastignac's over- wrought nerves, after the day's strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was almost overcome by it.

°°°°"I felt sure myself that he loved you," murmured Father Goriot, while Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring about this final transformation scene.

°°°°"But you must see your rooms," said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed, down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of Delphine's apartment.

°°°°"There is no bed," said Rastignac.

°°°°"No, monsieur," she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene, looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

°°°°"You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for ever," he said in her ear. "Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret."

°°°°"Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose," growled the father.

°°°°"You know quite well that 'we' means you."

°°°°"Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a good idea of mine to say to you, 'There are some nice rooms to let in the Rue d'Artois; let us furnish them for him?' And she would not hear of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers else."

°°°°"Was that how it happened?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----"

°°°°Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low though the sound was.

°°°°The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was wanting there.

°°°°"Have we guessed your wishes rightly?" she asked, as they returned to the drawing-room for dinner.

°°°°"Yes," he said, "only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----"

°°°°"Ah! ah! you say me nay already," she said with arch imperiousness, and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman's way of laughing away scruples.

°°°°But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self- questioning, and Vautrin's arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into abandoning his high- minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled his mind.

°°°°"Do you really mean to refuse?" said Mme. de Nucingen. "And do you know what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying my affection? If you love me, if I-- love you, why should you shrink back from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment, you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this. . . . Ah!" she cried, as Eugene's passionate glance was turned on her, "and you are making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you. Speak!-- Father," she said after a pause, "make him listen to reason. Can he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?"

°°°°Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

°°°°"Child that you are!" she cried again, catching Eugene's hand. "You are just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man finds insurmountable; a woman's hand opens the way and you shrink back! Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to repay me my loan of today? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your garret must be if it is like papa's room! See, dinner is waiting all this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don't you answer?" she said, shaking his hand. "MON DIEU! papa, make up his mind for him, or I will go away and never see him any more."

°°°°"I will make up your mind," said Goriot, coming down from the clouds. "Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews, isn't it?"

°°°°"There is positively no help for it," said Eugene.

°°°°"All right, I will give you credit," said the other, drawing out a cheap leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. "I have turned Jew myself; I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you can return it some time or other."

°°°°Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot's warmly.

°°°°"Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?"

°°°°"Oh! my poor father," said Mme. de Nucingen, "how did you do it?"

°°°°"Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you, and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to myself, 'She will never be able to pay for them.' The attorney says that those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year, and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, 'How happy they are going to be!' and--well, now, are you not happy?"

°°°°"Oh papa! papa!" cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright and radiant.

°°°°"Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel for you now?"

°°°°"Why, children, why Delphinette!" cried Goriot, who had not felt his daughter's heart beat against his breast for ten years, "do you want me to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are quits already." And the old man strained her to his breast with such fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

°°°°"Oh! you are hurting me!" she said.

°°°°"I am hurting you!" He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men. Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his fingers had grasped too roughly.

°°°°"Oh! no, no," he cried. "I have not hurt you, have I?" and his smile seemed to repeat the question. "YOU have hurt me with that cry just now.--The things cost rather more than that," he said in her ear, with another gentle kiss, "but I had to deceive him about it, or he would have been angry."

°°°°Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration which shapes the beliefs of youth.

°°°°"I will be worthy of all this," he cried.

°°°°"Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said," and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law student on the forehead.

°°°°"He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you," said Father Goriot. "Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus."

°°°°"Oh! why did you tell her?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"Eugene," Delphine said in his ear, "I have one regret now this evening. Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!"

°°°°"This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!" cried Goriot. "God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer through you, and I can still say, 'In this short month of February I had more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.'--Look at me, Fifine!" he said to his daughter. "She is very beautiful, is she not? Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell instead. Come, let us have dinner," he added, scarcely knowing what he said, "everything is ours."

°°°°"Poor dear father!"

°°°°He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a kiss on the plaits of hair. "If you only knew, little one, how happy you can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me, say that you will!"

°°°°"Yes, dear father."

°°°°"Say it again."

°°°°"Yes, I will, my kind father."

°°°°"Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed my own wishes. Let us have dinner."

°°°°The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot's spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter's feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more tender.

°°°°"You see!" Delphine said with a look at Eugene, "so long as my father is with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes."

°°°°Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

°°°°"And when will the rooms be ready?" asked Eugene, looking round. "We must all leave them this evening, I suppose."

°°°°"Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me," she answered, with an eloquent glance. "It is our night at the Italiens."

°°°°"I shall go to the pit," said her father.

°°°°It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen's carriage was waiting for her, and Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing that the father's self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her father's adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future of love.

°°°°They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso's lamentations as recorded in Byron's poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force of truth they fall far short of the widow's cry from the depths.

°°°°"Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life, now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people! The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and Christophe will have to go!"

°°°°The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said, "Madame," questioningly.

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Sylvie, "he is like a dog."

°°°°"In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a little dog."

°°°°"Lord!" said Sylvie, flinging up her head, "those old maids are up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"There's that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict," the widow went on. "Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I can't bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny on the nail too."

°°°°"And open-handed he was!" said Christophe.

°°°°"There is some mistake," said Sylvie.

°°°°"Why, no there isn't! he said so himself!" said Mme. Vauquer. "And to think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it's like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap; we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again; there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred, will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that is just what it is!"

°°°°"And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear," cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Don't speak of her, she is a wicked woman!" said Mme. Vauquer. "She is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed and murdered people in her time. SHE ought to be put in jail for life instead of that poor dear----"

°°°°Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

°°°°"Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers," said the widow, sighing.

°°°°But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d'Antin.

°°°°"Sylvie!" cried the widow, "this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There's a weight on my chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow, Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen," and she went.

°°°°"What is the matter now?" Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

°°°°"Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a bit. It's the first time she has cried since I've been with her."

°°°°By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had "made up her mind to it." True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A lover's farewell glance at his lady-love's window is not more mournful than Mme. Vauquer's survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take his (Rastignac's) place; that the official from the Museum had often expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture's rooms; and that in a very few days her household would be on the old footing.

°°°°"God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here. There'll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you'll see," and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining- room. "Whose turn will it be, I wonder?"

°°°°"It is just as well that we are moving out," said Eugene to Father Goriot in a low voice.

°°°°"Madame," said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, "I have not seen Mistigris these three days."

°°°°"Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if HE has gone and left us, I----"

°°°°The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this dreadful portent.

°°°°By twelve o'clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse's great ball, which had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was slipped in with the card.

°°°°"I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to   interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the   card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make   the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud's sister. Pray introduce that   charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your   affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.   "VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT."

°°°°"Well," said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, "Mme. de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de Nucingen."

°°°°He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of Paris--will never have a rival.

°°°°Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country, it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love exist there without that wealth?

°°°°If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water, without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls, waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look with pity upon those of earth.

°°°°Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it. In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one man, but of a whole nation.

°°°°But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a brilliant future.

°°°°So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

°°°°"Madame is in her room," Therese came to tell him. The woman's voice made him start.

°°°°He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid the blossom.

°°°°"Well," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "here you are."

°°°°"Guess what I bring for you," said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He took possession of her arm to kiss her hand

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

°°°°"And I owe this happiness to you--to THEE" (she whispered the more intimate word in his ear); "but Therese is in my dressing- room, let us be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes to me through YOU--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint- Germain, it is because I shall meet you there."

°°°°"Mme. de Beauseant's note seems to say very plainly that she does not expect to see the BARON de Nucingen at her ball; don't you think so?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, yes," said the Baroness as she returned the letter. "Those women have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go. My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully dressed.--Eugene," she went on, lowering her voice, "she will go to dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a woman's character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband's mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant's ball in tissue of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I mean to be perfectly happy."

°°°°At one o'clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In the midst of their lovers' farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to come, she said in a troubled voice, "I am very fearful, superstitious. Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe."

°°°°"Child!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?" she asked, laughingly.

°°°°Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left its sweetness on the lips.

°°°°"Well?" cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene; "I will tell you everything to-morrow."

°°°°"Everything, will you not?" cried the old man. "Go to bed. To- morrow our happy life will begin."

°°°°Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging- house, and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it; but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran lightly upstairs.

°°°°It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d'Artois at four o'clock; but Rastignac's name had been called early on the list at the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this, Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin's signature lying in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot's room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him; but after the first few words, the conversation between the father and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his attention.

°°°°"Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe to talk?" she added.

°°°°"Yes, there is no one in the house," said her father faintly.

°°°°"What is the matter with you?" asked Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!" said the old man. "You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d'Artois."

°°°°"Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the subject with him. Wasn't that what you told me to tell him?"

°°°°"Yes, quite right," answered Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then," Delphine continued, "he told me all about his affairs. He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations; they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes, on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy (in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him."

°°°°"Do you really believe that silly rubbish?" . . . cried her father. "It was all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No, no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them, and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that's holiest in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked! and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers. If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don't give way, don't make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he can't do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once; I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know for certain that your fortune is secure."

°°°°"Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile, it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we drive him to despair, I am lost."

°°°°"Why, then, the man is a rogue?"

°°°°"Well, yes, father," she said, flinging herself into a chair, "I wanted to keep it from you to spare your feelings," and she burst into tears; "I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his stalking- horse."

°°°°"But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons- in-law of that sort," cried her father; "why, I would guillotine him myself if there was no headsman to do it."

°°°°"No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says, stripped of all his circumlocutions--'Take your choice, you and no one else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through myself.' Is that plain speaking? He MUST have my assistance. He is assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to be Eugene's wife in all but name. 'I connive at your errors, and you allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!' Is that sufficiently explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get possession of those bills?"

°°°°Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on his knees.

°°°°"Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child! forgive me!" cried the old man.

°°°°"Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame," said Delphine. "We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us! Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa," she said, kissing him.

°°°°"Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your husband's winding."

°°°°"No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me, well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters. No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant's ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene! . . . Come, let us see his room."

°°°°But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve, and the sound of Mme. de Restaud's voice came from the staircase. "Is my father in?" she asked of Sylvie.

°°°°This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

°°°°"Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?" said Delphine, when she heard her sister speak. "It looks as though some strange things had happened in that family."

°°°°"What sort of things?" asked Goriot. "This is like to be the death of me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune."

°°°°"Good-morning, father," said the Countess from the threshold. "Oh! Delphine, are you here?"

°°°°Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister's presence.

°°°°"Good-morning, Nasie," said the Baroness. "What is there so extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day."

°°°°"Since when?"

°°°°"If you came yourself you would know."

°°°°"Don't tease, Delphine," said the Countess fretfully. "I am very miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!"

°°°°"What is it, Nasie?" cried Goriot. "Tell us all about it, child! How white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will love you even better, if that were possible."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. "We are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see."

°°°°The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

°°°°"This will kill me!" said their father. "There," he went on, stirring the smouldering fire, "come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it, Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----"

°°°°"Well, then, my husband knows everything," said the Countess. "Just imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime's some time ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that. About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled. He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively. Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard; for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I had eaten up all that you had----"

°°°°"No," said Goriot; "I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet."

°°°°The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when the father's love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice, revealed the depths of his despair.

°°°°"I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell," and the Countess burst into tears.

°°°°Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister's shoulder, and cried too.

°°°°"Then it is all true," she said.

°°°°Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her, kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

°°°°"I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie," she said.

°°°°"My angels," murmured Goriot faintly. "Oh, why should it be trouble that draws you together?"

°°°°This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

°°°°"To save Maxime's life," she said, "to save all my own happiness, I went to the money-lender you know of, a man of iron forged in hell-fire; nothing can melt him; I took all the family diamonds that M. de Restaud is so proud of--his and mine too--and sold them to that M. Gobseck. SOLD THEM! Do you understand? I saved Maxime, but I am lost. Restaud found it all out."

°°°°"How? Who told him? I will kill him," cried Goriot.

°°°°"Yesterday he sent to tell me to come to his room. I went. . . . 'Anastasie,' he said in a voice--oh! such a voice; that was enough, it told me everything--'where are your diamonds?'--'In my room----'--'No,' he said, looking straight at me, 'there they are on that chest of drawers----' and he lifted his handkerchief and showed me the casket. 'Do you know where they came from?' he said. I fell at his feet. . . . I cried; I besought him to tell me the death he wished to see me die."

°°°°"You said that!" cried Goriot. "By God in heaven, whoever lays a hand on either of you so long as I am alive may reckon on being roasted by slow fires! Yes, I will cut him in pieces like . . ."

°°°°Goriot stopped; the words died away in his throat.

°°°°"And then, dear, he asked something worse than death of me. Oh! heaven preserve all other women from hearing such words as I heard then!"

°°°°"I will murder that man," said Goriot quietly. "But he has only one life, and he deserves to die twice.--And then, what next?" he added, looking at Anastasie.

°°°°"Then," the Countess resumed, "there was a pause, and he looked at me. 'Anastasie,' he said, 'I will bury this in silence; there shall be no separation; there are the children. I will not kill M. de Trailles. I might miss him if we fought, and as for other ways of getting rid of him, I should come into collision with the law. If I killed him in your arms, it would bring dishonor on THOSE children. But if you do not want to see your children perish, nor their father nor me, you must first of all submit to two conditions. Answer me. Have I a child of my own?' I answered, 'Yes,'--'Which?'--'Ernest, our eldest boy.'--'Very well,' he said, 'and now swear to obey me in this particular from this time forward.' I swore. 'You will make over your property to me when I require you to do so.' "

°°°°"Do nothing of the kind!" cried Goriot. "Aha! M. de Restaud, you could not make your wife happy; she has looked for happiness and found it elsewhere, and you make her suffer for your own ineptitude? He will have to reckon with me. Make yourself easy, Nasie. Aha! he cares about his heir! Good, very good. I will get hold of the boy; isn't he my grandson? What the blazes! I can surely go to see the brat! I will stow him away somewhere; I will take care of him, you may be quite easy. I will bring Restaud to terms, the monster! I shall say to him, 'A word or two with you! If you want your son back again, give my daughter her property, and leave her to do as she pleases.' "

°°°°"Father!"

°°°°"Yes. I am your father, Nasie, a father indeed! That rogue of a great lord had better not ill-treat my daughter. Tonnerre! What is it in my veins? There is the blood of a tiger in me; I could tear those two men to pieces! Oh! children, children! so this is what your lives are! Why, it is death! . . . What will become of you when I shall be here no longer? Fathers ought to live as long as their children. Ah! Lord God in heaven! how ill Thy world is ordered! Thou hast a Son, if what they tell us is true, and yet Thou leavest us to suffer so through our children. My darlings, my darlings! to think that trouble only should bring you to me, that I should only see you with tears on your faces! Ah! yes, yes, you love me, I see that you love me. Come to me and pour out your griefs to me; my heart is large enough to hold them all. Oh! you might rend my heart in pieces, and every fragment would make a father's heart. If only I could bear all your sorrows for you! . . . Ah! you were so happy when you were little and still with me. . . ."

°°°°"We have never been happy since," said Delphine. "Where are the old days when we slid down the sacks in the great granary?"

°°°°"That is not all, father," said Anastasie in Goriot's ear. The old man gave a startled shudder. "The diamonds only sold for a hundred thousand francs. Maxime is hard pressed. There are twelve thousand francs still to pay. He has given me his word that he will be steady and give up play in future. His love is all that I have left in the world. I have paid such a fearful price for it that I should die if I lose him now. I have sacrificed my fortune, my honor, my peace of mind, and my children for him. Oh! do something, so that at the least Maxime may be at large and live undisgraced in the world, where he will assuredly make a career for himself. Something more than my happiness is at stake; the children have nothing, and if he is sent to Sainte-Pelagie all his prospects will be ruined."

°°°°"I haven't the money, Nasie. I have NOTHING--nothing left. This is the end of everything. Yes, the world is crumbling into ruin, I am sure. Fly! Save yourselves! Ah!--I have still my silver buckles left, and half-a-dozen silver spoons and forks, the first I ever had in my life. But I have nothing else except my life annuity, twelve hundred francs . . ."

°°°°"Then what has become of your money in the funds?"

°°°°"I sold out, and only kept a trifle for my wants. I wanted twelve thousand francs to furnish some rooms for Delphine."

°°°°"In your own house?" asked Mme. de Restaud, looking at her sister.

°°°°"What does it matter where they were?" asked Goriot. "The money is spent now."

°°°°"I see how it is," said the Countess. "Rooms for M. de Rastignac. Poor Delphine, take warning by me!"

°°°°"M. de Rastignac is incapable of ruining the woman he loves, dear."

°°°°"Thanks! Delphine. I thought you would have been kinder to me in my troubles, but you never did love me."

°°°°"Yes, yes, she loves you, Nasie," cried Goriot; "she was saying so only just now. We were talking about you, and she insisted that you were beautiful, and that she herself was only pretty!"

°°°°"Pretty!" said the Countess. "She is as hard as a marble statue."

°°°°"And if I am?" cried Delphine, flushing up, "how have you treated me? You would not recognize me; you closed the doors of every house against me; you have never let an opportunity of mortifying me slip by. And when did I come, as you were always doing, to drain our poor father, a thousand francs at a time, till he is left as you see him now? That is all your doing, sister! I myself have seen my father as often as I could. I have not turned him out of the house, and then come and fawned upon him when I wanted money. I did not so much as know that he had spent those twelve thousand francs on me. I am economical, as you know; and when papa has made me presents, it has never been because I came and begged for them."

°°°°"You were better off than I. M. de Marsay was rich, as you have reason to know. You always were as slippery as gold. Good-bye; I have neither sister nor----"

°°°°"Oh! hush, hush, Nasie!" cried her father.

°°°°"Nobody else would repeat what everybody has ceased to believe. You are an unnatural sister!" cried Delphine.

°°°°"Oh, children, children! hush! hush! or I will kill myself before your eyes."

°°°°"There, Nasie, I forgive you," said Mme. de Nucingen; "you are very unhappy. But I am kinder than you are. How could you say THAT just when I was ready to do anything in the world to help you, even to be reconciled with my husband, which for my own sake I---- Oh! it is just like you; you have behaved cruelly to me all through these nine years."

°°°°"Children, children, kiss each other!" cried the father. "You are angels, both of you."

°°°°"No. Let me alone," cried the Countess shaking off the hand that her father had laid on her arm. "She is more merciless than my husband. Any one might think she was a model of all the virtues herself!"

°°°°"I would rather have people think that I owed money to M. de Marsay than own that M. de Trailles had cost me more than two hundred thousand francs," retorted Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"DELPHINE!" cried the Countess, stepping towards her sister.

°°°°"I shall tell you the truth about yourself if you begin to slander me," said the Baroness coldly.

°°°°"Delphine! you are a ----"

°°°°Father Goriot sprang between them, grasped the Countess' hand, and laid his own over her mouth.

°°°°"Good heavens, father! What have you been handling this morning?" said Anastasie.

°°°°"Ah! well, yes, I ought not to have touched you," said the poor father, wiping his hands on his trousers, "but I have been packing up my things; I did not know that you were coming to see me."

°°°°He was glad that he had drawn down her wrath upon himself.

°°°°"Ah!" he sighed, as he sat down, "you children have broken my heart between you. This is killing me. My head feels as if it were on fire. Be good to each other and love each other! This will be the death of me! Delphine! Nasie! come, be sensible; you are both in the wrong. Come, Dedel," he added, looking through his tears at the Baroness, "she must have twelve thousand francs, you see; let us see if we can find them for her. Oh, my girls, do not look at each other like that!" and he sank on his knees beside Delphine. "Ask her to forgive you--just to please me," he said in her ear. "She is more miserable than you are. Come now, Dedel."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Delphine, alarmed at the wild extravagant grief in her father's face, "I was in the wrong, kiss me----"

°°°°"Ah! that is like balm to my heart," cried Father Goriot. "But how are we to find twelve thousand francs? I might offer myself as a substitute in the army----"

°°°°"Oh! father dear!" they both cried, flinging their arms about him. "No, no!"

°°°°"God reward you for the thought. We are not worth it, are we, Nasie?" asked Delphine.

°°°°"And besides, father dear, it would only be a drop in the bucket," observed the Countess.

°°°°"But is flesh and blood worth nothing?" cried the old man in his despair. "I would give body and soul to save you, Nasie. I would do a murder for the man who would rescue you. I would do, as Vautrin did, go to the hulks, go----" he stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and put both hands to his head. "Nothing left!" he cried, tearing his hair. "If I only knew of a way to steal money, but it is so hard to do it, and then you can't set to work by yourself, and it takes time to rob a bank. Yes, it is time I was dead; there is nothing left me to do but to die. I am no good in the world; I am no longer a father! No. She has come to me in her extremity, and, wretch that I am, I have nothing to give her. Ah! you put your money into a life annuity, old scoundrel; and had you not daughters? You did not love them. Die, die in a ditch, like the dog that you are! Yes, I am worse than a dog; a beast would not have done as I have done! Oh! my head . . . it throbs as if it would burst."

°°°°"Papa!" cried both the young women at once, "do, pray, be reasonable!" and they clung to him to prevent him from dashing his head against the wall. There was a sound of sobbing.

°°°°Eugene, greatly alarmed, took the bill that bore Vautrin's signature, saw that the stamp would suffice for a larger sum, altered the figures, made it into a regular bill for twelve thousand francs, payable to Goriot's order, and went to his neighbor's room.

°°°°"Here is the money, madame," he said, handing the piece of paper to her. "I was asleep; your conversation awoke me, and by this means I learned all that I owed to M. Goriot. This bill can be discounted, and I shall meet it punctually at the due date."

°°°°The Countess stood motionless and speechless, but she held the bill in her fingers.

°°°°"Delphine," she said, with a white face, and her whole frame quivering with indignation, anger, and rage, "I forgave you everything; God is my witness that I forgave you, but I cannot forgive this! So this gentleman was there all the time, and you knew it! Your petty spite has let you to wreak your vengeance on me by betraying my secrets, my life, my children's lives, my shame, my honor! There, you are nothing to me any longer. I hate you. I will do all that I can to injure you. I will . . ."

°°°°Anger paralyzed her; the words died in her dry parched throat.

°°°°"Why, he is my son, my child; he is your brother, your preserver!" cried Goriot. "Kiss his hand, Nasie! Stay, I will embrace him myself," he said, straining Eugene to his breast in a frenzied clasp. "Oh my boy! I will be more than a father to you; if I had God's power, I would fling worlds at your feet. Why don't you kiss him, Nasie? He is not a man, but an angel, a angel out of heaven."

°°°°"Never mind her, father; she is mad just now."

°°°°"Mad! am I? And what are you?" cried Mme. de Restaud.

°°°°"Children, children, I shall die if you go on like this," cried the old man, and he staggered and fell on the bed as if a bullet had struck him.--"They are killing me between them," he said to himself.

°°°°The Countess fixed her eyes on Eugene, who stood stock still; all his faculties were numbed by this violent scene.

°°°°"Sir? . . ." she said, doubt and inquiry in her face, tone, and bearing; she took no notice now of her father nor of Delphine, who was hastily unfastening his waistcoat.

°°°°"Madame," said Eugene, answering the question before it was asked, "I will meet the bill, and keep silence about it."

°°°°"You have killed our father, Nasie!" said Delphine, pointing to Goriot, who lay unconscious on the bed. The Countess fled.

°°°°"I freely forgive her," said the old man, opening his eyes; "her position is horrible; it would turn an older head than hers. Comfort Nasie, and be nice to her, Delphine; promise it to your poor father before he dies," he asked, holding Delphine's hand in a convulsive clasp.

°°°°"Oh! what ails you, father?" she cried in real alarm.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing," said Goriot; "it will go off. There is something heavy pressing on my forehead, a little headache. . . . Ah! poor Nasie, what a life lies before her!"

°°°°Just as he spoke, the Countess came back again and flung herself on her knees before him. "Forgive me!" she cried.

°°°°"Come," said her father, "you are hurting me still more."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Countess said, turning to Rastignac, "misery made me unjust to you. You will be a brother to me, will you not?" and she held out her hand. Her eyes were full of tears as she spoke.

°°°°"Nasie," cried Delphine, flinging her arms round her sister, "my little Nasie, let us forget and forgive."

°°°°"No, no," cried Nasie; "I shall never forget!"

°°°°"Dear angels," cried Goriot, "it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won't it?"

°°°°"I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?"

°°°°"There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No, after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in future."

°°°°Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

°°°°"Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper," said Mme. de Nucingen, "but she has a good heart."

°°°°"She came back for the endorsement," said Eugene in Delphine's ear.

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her," he answered, raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did not venture to express.

°°°°"Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent."

°°°°"How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"I should like to go to sleep," he replied.

°°°°Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

°°°°"This evening at the Italiens," she said to Eugene, "and you can let me know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go into your room.--Oh! how frightful!" she cried on the threshold. "Why, you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps of gold."

°°°°A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot's bedside; to all appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, "They are not happy!" Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they were spoken went to his daughter's heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

°°°°"Ah! Delphine!" he said.

°°°°"How are you now?" she asked.

°°°°"Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently. Don't stay with me, children; go, go and be happy."

°°°°Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room, and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

°°°°"Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin," said Eugene.

°°°°Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him next to the old lodger.

°°°°"What is wrong with him?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning."

°°°°"Is there any cure for it?"

°°°°"None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on? There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way."

°°°°"Yes, there was," said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had struck blow on blow at their father's heart.

°°°°"But Delphine at any rate loves her father," he said to himself.

°°°°That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

°°°°"Do not be anxious about him," she said, however, as soon as Eugene began, "our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear. At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake. To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me; what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh! no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in life when everything turns to bitterness."

°°°°Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression on him.

°°°°Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love, they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme. de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

°°°°"What are you thinking about?" she asked.

°°°°"I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me."

°°°°She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more words, and she feared for her self- control.

°°°°"Eugene," she said, changing the conversation, "I wonder whether you know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant's to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d'Ajuda have agreed to keep the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be there. People are wondering what will happen?"

°°°°"The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill Mme. de Beauseant."

°°°°"Oh, no," said Delphine, smiling, "you do not know that kind of woman. Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for your sake."

°°°°"Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set in circulation here."

°°°°"We shall know the truth to-morrow."

°°°°Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d'Artois. Yesterday evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o'clock in the morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot's existence. The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four o'clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

°°°°"Aha!" said the painter as Eugene came in, "Father Goriot has broken down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of its brightest ornaments."

°°°°Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

°°°°"Hey! Monsieur Eugene!"

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you," shouted Sylvie.

°°°°"It is this, sir," said the widow. "You and M. Goriot should by rights have moved out on the 15th of February. That was three days ago; to-day is the 18th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied."

°°°°"Why can't you trust him?"

°°°°"Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died, those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won't fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and forks he has left, I don't know why. He had got himself up to look quite young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks; he looked quite young again."

°°°°"I will be responsible," said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he foresaw the end.

°°°°He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot's room. The old man was tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

°°°°"Good-evening, father," said Eugene.

°°°°The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

°°°°"How is SHE?"

°°°°"She is quite well. But how are you?"

°°°°"There is nothing much the matter."

°°°°"Don't tire him," said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the room.

°°°°"Well?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in; I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are acting."

°°°°"Is it possible to move him?"

°°°°"Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as quiet as possible----"

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," said Eugene, "we will nurse him between us."

°°°°"I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him."

°°°°"And what did he say?"

°°°°"He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went, and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his strength. One of his daughters has been here."

°°°°"Was it the Countess?" asked Eugene. "A tall, dark-haired woman, with large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Leave him to me for a bit," said Rastignac. "I will make him confess; he will tell me all about it."

°°°°"And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is still some hope left."

°°°°"All right."

°°°°"How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow," said Father Goriot when they were alone. "They are going to a grand ball."

°°°°"What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this evening that you have to stop in bed?"

°°°°"Nothing."

°°°°"Did not Anastasie come to see you?" demanded Rastignac.

°°°°"Yes," said Father Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then, don't keep anything from me. What more did she want of you?"

°°°°"Oh, she was very miserable," he answered, gathering up all his strength to speak. "It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds, Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie's waiting-woman advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie's maid saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair. She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that heartless scoundrel and say, 'I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker; pay her for me!' She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there too in a superb toilette, and Anastasie ought not to be outshone by her younger sister. And then--she was drowned in tears, poor girl! I felt so humbled yesterday when I had not the twelve thousand francs, that I would have given the rest of my miserable life to wipe out that wrong. You see, I could have borne anything once, but latterly this want of money has broken my heart. Oh! I did not do it by halves; I titivated myself up a bit, and went out and sold my spoons and forks and buckles for six hundred francs; then I went to old Daddy Gobseck, and sold a year's interest on my annuity for four hundred francs down. Pshaw! I can live on dry bread, as I did when I was a young man; if I have done it before, I can do it again. My Nasie shall have one happy evening, at any rate. She shall be smart. The banknote for a thousand francs is under my pillow; it warms me to have it lying there under my head, for it is going to make my poor Nasie happy. She can turn that bad girl Victoire out of the house. A servant that cannot trust her mistress, did any one ever hear the like! I shall be quite well to-morrow. Nasie is coming at ten o'clock. They must not think that I am ill, or they will not go to the ball; they will stop and take care of me. To-morrow Nasie will come and hold me in her arms as if I were one of her children; her kisses will make me well again. After all, I might have spent the thousand francs on physic; I would far rather give them to my little Nasie, who can charm all the pain away. At any rate, I am some comfort to her in her misery; and that makes up for my unkindness in buying an annuity. She is in the depths, and I cannot draw her out of them now. Oh! I will go into business again, I will buy wheat in Odessa; out there, wheat fetches a quarter of the price it sells for here. There is a law against the importation of grain, but the good folk who made the law forgot to prohibit the introduction of wheat products and food stuffs made from corn. Hey! hey! . . . That struck me this morning. There is a fine trade to be done in starch."

°°°°Eugene, watching the old man's face, thought that his friend was light-headed.

°°°°"Come," he said, "do not talk any more, you must rest----" Just then Bianchon came up, and Eugene went down to dinner.

°°°°The two students sat up with him that night, relieving each other in turn. Bianchon brought up his medical books and studied; Eugene wrote letters home to his mother and sisters. Next morning Bianchon thought the symptoms more hopeful, but the patient's condition demanded continual attention, which the two students alone were willing to give--a task impossible to describe in the squeamish phraseology of the epoch. Leeches must be applied to the wasted body, the poultices and hot foot-baths, and other details of the treatment required the physical strength and devotion of the two young men. Mme. de Restaud did not come; but she sent a messenger for the money.

°°°°"I expected she would come herself; but it would have been a pity for her to come, she would have been anxious about me," said the father, and to all appearances he was well content.

°°°°At seven o'clock that evening Therese came with a letter from Delphine.

°°°°"What are you doing, dear friend? I have been loved for a very   little while, and I am neglected already? In the confidences of   heart and heart, I have learned to know your soul--you are too   noble not to be faithful for ever, for you know that love with   all its infinite subtle changes of feeling is never the same.   Once you said, as we were listening to the Prayer in Mose in   Egitto, 'For some it is the monotony of a single note; for   others, it is the infinite of sound.' Remember that I am   expecting you this evening to take me to Mme. de Beauseant's   ball. Every one knows now that the King signed M. d'Ajuda's   marriage-contract this morning, and the poor Vicomtesse knew   nothing of it until two o'clock this afternoon. All Paris will   flock to her house, of course, just as a crowd fills the Place de   Greve to see an execution. It is horrible, is it not, to go out   of curiosity to see if she will hide her anguish, and whether she   will die courageously? I certainly should not go, my friend, if I   had been at her house before; but, of course, she will not   receive society any more after this, and all my efforts would be   in vain. My position is a very unusual one, and besides, I am   going there partly on your account. I am waiting for you. If you   are not beside me in less than two hours, I do not know whether I   could forgive such treason."

°°°°Rastignac took up a pen and wrote:

°°°°"I am waiting till the doctor comes to know if there is any hope   of your father's life. He is lying dangerously ill. I will come   and bring you the news, but I am afraid it may be a sentence of   death. When I come you can decide whether you can go to the   ball.--Yours a thousand times."

°°°°At half-past eight the doctor arrived. He did not take a very hopeful view of the case, but thought that there was no immediate danger. Improvements and relapses might be expected, and the good man's life and reason hung in the balance.

°°°°"It would be better for him to die at once," the doctor said as he took leave.

°°°°Eugene left Goriot to Bianchon's care, and went to carry the sad news to Mme. de Nucingen. Family feeling lingered in her, and this must put an end for the present to her plans of amusement.

°°°°"Tell her to enjoy her evening as if nothing had happened," cried Goriot. He had been lying in a sort of stupor, but he suddenly sat upright as Eugene went out.

°°°°Eugene, half heartbroken, entered Delphine's. Her hair had been dressed; she wore her dancing slippers; she had only to put on her ball-dress; but when the artist is giving the finishing stroke to his creation, the last touches require more time than the whole groundwork of the picture.

°°°°"Why, you are not dressed!" she cried.

°°°°"Madame, your father----"

°°°°"My father again!" she exclaimed, breaking in upon him. "You need not teach me what is due to my father, I have known my father this long while. Not a word, Eugene. I will hear what you have to say when you are dressed. My carriage is waiting, take it, go round to your rooms and dress, Therese has put out everything in readiness for you. Come back as soon as you can; we will talk about my father on the way to Mme. de Beauseant's. We must go early; if we have to wait our turn in a row of carriages, we shall be lucky if we get there by eleven o'clock."

°°°°"Madame----"

°°°°"Quick! not a word!" she cried, darting into her dressing-room for a necklace.

°°°°"Do go, Monsieur Eugene, or you will vex madame," said Therese, hurrying him away; and Eugene was too horror-stricken by this elegant parricide to resist.

°°°°He went to his rooms and dressed, sad, thoughtful, and dispirited. The world of Paris was like an ocean of mud for him just then; and it seemed that whoever set foot in that black mire must needs sink into it up to the chin.

°°°°"Their crimes are paltry," said Eugene to himself. "Vautrin was greater."

°°°°He had seen society in its three great phases--Obedience, Struggle, and Revolt; the Family, the World, and Vautrin; and he hesitated in his choice. Obedience was dull, Revolt impossible, Struggle hazardous. His thoughts wandered back to the home circle. He thought of the quiet uneventful life, the pure happiness of the days spent among those who loved him there. Those loving and beloved beings passed their lives in obedience to the natural laws of the hearth, and in that obedience found a deep and constant serenity, unvexed by torments such as these. Yet, for all his good impulses, he could not bring himself to make profession of the religion of pure souls to Delphine, nor to prescribe the duties of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was capable of stepping over her father's corpse to go to the ball; and within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the courage to leave her to go alone.

°°°°"She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it," he said to himself. Then he turned the doctor's dictum over in his mind; he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of traitorous excuses for Delphine's conduct. She did not know how ill her father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations; and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family life that excuse the apparent offence.

°°°°Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his, and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, "how is my father?"

°°°°"Very dangerously ill," he answered; "if you will grant me a proof of your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way."

°°°°"Very well," she said. "Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice, and don't preach to me. Come."

°°°°They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

°°°°"What is it now?" she asked.

°°°°"I can hear the death-rattle in your father's throat," he said almost angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of Mme. de Restaud's vanity and cruelty, of her father's final act of self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie's golden embroideries. Delphine cried.

°°°°"I shall look frightful," she thought. She dried her tears.

°°°°"I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside," she said aloud.

°°°°"Ah! now you are as I would have you," exclaimed Rastignac.

°°°°The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the Vicomtesse.

°°°°The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

°°°°Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a last audience of one of its sovereigns.

°°°°"I was afraid that you would not come," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°"Madame," he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a reproach, "I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here."

°°°°"Good," she said, and she took his hand. "You are perhaps the only one I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a woman."

°°°°She took Rastignac's arm, and went towards a sofa in the card- room.

°°°°"I want you to go to the Marquis," she said. "Jacques, my footman, will go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one shall bring me word."

°°°°She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

°°°°Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d'Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide, feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave a casket to the student, saying as he did so, "They are all there."

°°°°He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes, and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

°°°°"Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene." He grasped Rastignac's hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him. Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the Vicomtesse's room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey. He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

°°°°"Ah! my friend! . . ." said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid her hand on Rastignac's shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin's uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it in the fire, and watched it burn.

°°°°"They are dancing," she said. "They all came very early; but death will be long in coming. Hush! my friend," and she laid a finger on Rastignac's lips, seeing that he was about to speak. "I shall never see Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o'clock this morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my arrangements; since three o'clock this afternoon I have been busy signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I could send to . . ."

°°°°She broke off.

°°°°"He was sure to be . . ."

°°°°Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are impossible to utter.

°°°°"And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service this evening," she said. "I should like to give you some pledge of friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay," she said, glancing about her, "there is this box that has held my gloves. Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer. Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to you in the Rue d'Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my tears. One last look round first."

°°°°She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and took the student's arm.

°°°°"Let us go!" she said.

°°°°This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene's arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her husband's eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten Rastignac's sad thougths; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

°°°°"Come," she said, "I must not deprive you of a pleasure."

°°°°Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover's feet the homage she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move henceforth.

°°°°"What do you think of Nasie?" she asked him.

°°°°"She has discounted everything, even her own father's death," said Rastignac.

°°°°Towards four o'clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M. de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, "It is a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among us."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an exclamation broke from her.

°°°°"I saw how it was, Clara," said Mme. de Langeais. "You are going from among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you have heard me, until we have understood each other."

°°°°She took her friend's arm, and they went together into the next room. There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

°°°°"I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself. You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words. One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night; do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night, Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail, I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?"

°°°°"Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!" called the Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was waiting there.

°°°°The student knelt to kiss his cousin's hand.

°°°°"Good-bye, Antoinette!" said Mme. de Beauseant. "May you be happy."--She turned to the student. "You are young," she said; "you have some beliefs still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of this world."

°°°°It was nearly five o'clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

°°°°"There is no hope for poor Father Goriot," said Bianchon, as Rastignac came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then he turned to his friend. "Dear fellow, you are content with the modest career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world, nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden away under the covering of gems and gold."

°°°°At two o'clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

°°°°"Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours," he said; "but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result, nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he had not a farthing of his own. What have you?"

°°°°"I have twenty francs left," said Rastignac; "but I will take them to the roulette table, I shall be sure to win."

°°°°"And if you lose?"

°°°°"Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for money."

°°°°"And suppose they refuse?" Bianchon retorted. "The most pressing thing just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides, Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him till I come back."

°°°°The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying. Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot's face, so livid, distorted, and feeble.

°°°°"How are you, papa?" he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came into his eyes.

°°°°"Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?"

°°°°"No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the smell was something horrible.

°°°°"MON DIEU!" said Rastignac. "To think of those daughters of his."

°°°°"One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this," said the house student, pointing to a large white jar. "If he begins to groan, and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon, a pupil of Gall's came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised; whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here," said Bianchon, touching the back of the head, "very strange things have been known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives."

°°°°"Did they enjoy themselves?" It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had recognized Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters," said Bianchon. "Scores of times last night he said to me, 'They are dancing now! She has her dress.' He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take it, calling with that tone in his voice, for 'Delphine! my little Delphine! and Nasie!' Upon my word," said the medical student, "it was enough to make any one burst out crying."

°°°°"Delphine," said the old man, "she is there, isn't she? I knew she was there," and his eyes sought the door.

°°°°"I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready," said Bianchon. "They ought to go on at once."

°°°°Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was shocking to see.

°°°°"Noble natures cannot dwell in this world," he said; "Mme de Beauseant has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and feelings?"

°°°°Pictures of yesterday's ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

°°°°"I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to the base of the spine, and send round for us."

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," exclaimed Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view," said the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

°°°°"So!" said Eugene. "Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old man for his own sake?"

°°°°"You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning," returned Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. "Doctors who have seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my dear fellow, I can see the patient still."

°°°°He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

°°°°"Ah! dear boy, is that you?" said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

°°°°"Do you feel better?" asked the law student, taking his hand.

°°°°"Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man here, who has burned up all my bark fuel."

°°°°"I can hear Christophe coming upstairs," Eugene answered. "He is bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you."

°°°°"Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!) Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left now."

°°°°Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man's ear, "I will pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble."

°°°°"My daughters told you that they were coming, didn't they, Christophe? Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once again before I die. Tell them that, but don't alarm them more than you can help."

°°°°Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

°°°°"They will come before long," the old man went on. "I know them so well. My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die; and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning. 'Good-morning, papa!' they used to say, and I would take them on my knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they loved me with all their hearts. MON DIEU! why could they not always be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah! forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for you have used me to endure pain. MON DIEU! if only I held their hands in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. HE will see them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked. They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this is! what pain this is! . . . ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they MUST have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make millions. (Oh! this is agony!)"

°°°°Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength to endure the pain.

°°°°"If they were here, I should not complain," he said. "So why should I complain now?"

°°°°He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

°°°°"First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse," he said; "but she and her husband were so busy that I couldn't get to speak to her. When I insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and went on like this: 'M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important business, when it is all finished she can go.' The gentleman looked angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said, 'Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.' As for Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, 'Ah yes, but madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It will be time enough then to tell her bad news!' I begged and I prayed, but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was out."

°°°°"To think that neither of his daughters should come!" exclaimed Rastignac. "I will write to them both."

°°°°"Neither of them!" cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. "They are busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not. Not until you are dying do you know your children. . . . Oh! my friend, do not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it. No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it."

°°°°The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

°°°°"Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and THEY would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money? If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God! who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh! this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was 'My kind father' here, 'My dear father' there. There was always a place for me at their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought. How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening parties. In fact, they acknowleged me their father; publicly they owned that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see, and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence, but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law's ear, 'Who may that gentleman be?'--'The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very rich.'--'The devil, e is!' they would say, and look again at me with the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one thing I did learn thoroughly --I knew that I was not wanted here on earth.

°°°°"The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that was how they both turned me out of the house.

°°°°"Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured; Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to- day? Have I not more than expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

°°°°"Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see, my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! MON DIEU! These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie! Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to ruin if a father's rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see. The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them, my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know what it means to trample on a father's corpse? There is a God in heaven who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

°°°°"Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss; one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault. I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so. It is no one's affair but mine; man's justice and God's justice have nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly; I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch, I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through love.

°°°°"My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should be present at their father's deathbed; the law is on my side. It would only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit, as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine, mine!" and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak spoke of menace.

°°°°"There, there, dear father," said Eugene, "lie down again; I will write to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them myself, if they do not come before."

°°°°"If they do not come?" repeated the old man, sobbing. "Why, I shall be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life; they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one. . . . Go to them; just tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud as I do now, 'Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who has been so kind to you is lying ill!'--Not a sound; no one comes! Then am I do die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them. I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all, my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh? . . . What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister. . . . Eugene, you are my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me nothing but my heart."

°°°°"Christophe!" shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man moaned, and by his cries, "go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to you."

°°°°"Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military, anything and everything, but make them come!" He looked at Eugene, and a last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. "Go to the authorities, to the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!"

°°°°"But you have cursed them."

°°°°"Who said that!" said the old man in dull amazement. "You know quite well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I can see them. . . . Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay their hands there, I think I should get better. . . . MON DIEU! who will recover their money for them when I am gone? . . . I will manufacture vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes."

°°°°"Here is something to drink," said Eugene, supporting the dying man on his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot's lips.

°°°°"How you must love your own father and mother!" said the old man, and grasped the student's hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling grasp. "I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that has been my life for the last ten years. . . . I have no daughters, my sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl's mind and contaminates her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid them! . . . Kill them! . . . Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They have murdered me between them! . . . Death or my daughters! . . . Ah! it is too late, I am dying, and they are not here! . . . Dying without them! . . . Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----"

°°°°"Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest; don't worry yourself, don't think."

°°°°"I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!"

°°°°"You SHALL see them."

°°°°"Really?" cried the old man, still wandering. "Oh! shall I see them; I shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my fingers . . . their hair . . ."

°°°°His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his daughters' hair.

°°°°"My blessing on them . . ." he said, making an effort, "my blessing . . ."

°°°°His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

°°°°"I met Christophe," he said; "he is gone for your cab."

°°°°Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath had grown.

°°°°"He will not get over this, I am sure," said Bianchon. He felt the old man's pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

°°°°"The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be better for him to die."

°°°°"Ah! my word, it would!"

°°°°"What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death."

°°°°"Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard. . . . There is a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

°°°°"We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come from?"

°°°°Rastignac took out his watch.

°°°°"There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall have to pay the cabman when I get home again."

°°°°Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder. The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de Restaud's house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could see no one.

°°°°"But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying," Rastignac told the man.

°°°°"The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----"

°°°°"If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at once."

°°°°The man went out.

°°°°Eugene waited for a long while. "Perhaps her father is dying at this moment," he thought.

°°°°Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte," said Rastignac, "M. Goriot, your father-in- law, is lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter. He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----"

°°°°"I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are aware," the Count answered coolly. "His character has been compromised in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much more important matters to think about than the things that fools and chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a few seconds; it lies entirely with her----"

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct; you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her, and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I ask."

°°°°"You can tell her yourself," the Count answered, impressed by the thrill of indignation in Eugene's voice.

°°°°The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her. Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to speak.

°°°°"I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all he would forgive me. . . . I did not think there was such torture in the world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not give way as long as I live," she said, turning to her husband. "I am a mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of appearances!" she cried aloud in her despair.

°°°°Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess' life. M. de Restaud's manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in bed.

°°°°"Poor dear Eugene, I am ill," she said. "I caught cold after the ball, and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come."

°°°°"If you were at death's door," Eugene broke in, "you must be carried somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer."

°°°°"Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just as you wish. As for HIM, he would die of grief I know if I went out to see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as I have seen the doctor.--Ah!" she cried out, "you are not wearing your watch, how is that?"

°°°°Eugene reddened.

°°°°"Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it. . . . Oh! it would be very wrong of you!"

°°°°The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, "Do you want to know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch has been pawned, for I had nothing either."

°°°°Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

°°°°"I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why, I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before you.--Therese," she called to the waiting-woman, "ask M. de Nucingen to come upstairs at once and speak to me."

°°°°Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve; he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine's purse for money, so as to dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse. He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient's back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of science, and it was tried in vain.

°°°°"Can you feel them?" asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of Rastignac, and answered, "They are coming, are they not?"

°°°°"There is hope yet," said the surgeon; "he can speak."

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene, "Delphine is coming."

°°°°"Oh! that is nothing!" said Bianchon; "he has been talking about his daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for water, they say----"

°°°°"We may as well give up," said the physician, addressing the surgeon. "Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless."

°°°°Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his loathsome bed.

°°°°"But the sheets ought to be changed," added the physician. "Even if there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come back again, Bianchon," he said, turning to the medical student. "If he complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm."

°°°°He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

°°°°"Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy," said Bianchon, as soon as they were alone; "we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help us to make the bed."

°°°°Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a customer.

°°°°"My dear Monsieur Eugene," she said, when he had spoken, "you know quite as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes, you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you; altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make."

°°°°Eugene hurried up to Goriot's room.

°°°°"Bianchon," he cried, "the money or the watch?"

°°°°"There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money."

°°°°Rastignac hurried downstairs.

°°°°"Here, madame" he said in disgust, "let us square accounts. M. Goriot will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----"

°°°°"Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman," she said, counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

°°°°"Let us get this over," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen."

°°°°"You won't forget Sylvie," said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene's ear; "she has been sitting up these two nights."

°°°°As soon as Eugene's back was turned, the old woman hurried after her handmaid.

°°°°"Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number 7. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse," she said in Sylvie's ear.

°°°°Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear the elderly economist.

°°°°"Quick," said Bianchon, "let us change his shirt. Hold him upright."

°°°°Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

°°°°"Ah! yes!" cried Bianchon. "It is the little locket and the chain made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on the chimney-piece."

°°°°Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded golden hair--Mme. Goriot's hair, no doubt. He read the name on the little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other. It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes, the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students, that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a shrill cry of delight.

°°°°"Nasie! Fifine!"

°°°°"There is life in him yet," said Bianchon.

°°°°"What does he go on living for?" said Sylvie.

°°°°"To suffer," answered Rastignac.

°°°°Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the students' heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair, they heard a faint whisper:

°°°°"Ah! my angels!"

°°°°Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which fled forth with them as they left his lips.

°°°°"Poor dear!" cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most ghastly and involuntary of lies.

°°°°The father's last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

°°°°"He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last, that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the throat. The brain must be completely suffused."

°°°°As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman hastened up, panting for breath.

°°°°"She has come too late," said Rastignac.

°°°°But it was not Delphine; it was Therese, her waiting-woman, who stood in the doorway.

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene," she said, "monsieur and madame have had a terrible scene about some money that Madame (poor thing!) wanted for her father. She fainted, and the doctor came, and she had to be bled, calling out all the while, 'My father is dying; I want to see papa!' It was heartbreaking to hear her----"

°°°°"That will do, Therese. If she came now, it would be trouble thrown away. M. Goriot cannot recognize any one now."

°°°°"Poor, dear gentleman, is he as bad at that?" said Therese.

°°°°"You don't want me now, I must go and look after my dinner; it is half-past four," remarked Sylvie. The next instant she all but collided with Mme. de Restaud on the landing outside.

°°°°There was something awful and appalling in the sudden apparition of the Countess. She saw the bed of death by the dim light of the single candle, and her tears flowed at the sight of her father's passive features, from which the life had almost ebbed. Bianchon with thoughtful tact left the room.

°°°°"I could not escape soon enough," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°The student bowed sadly in reply. Mme. de Restaud took her father's hand and kissed it.

°°°°"Forgive me, father! You used to say that my voice would call you back from the grave; ah! come back for one moment to bless your penitent daughter. Do you hear me? Oh! this is fearful! No one on earth will ever bless me henceforth; every one hates me; no one loves me but you in all the world. My own children will hate me. Take me with you, father; I will love you, I will take care of you. He does not hear me . . . I am mad . . ."

°°°°She fell on her knees, and gazed wildly at the human wreck before her.

°°°°"My cup of misery is full," she said, turning her eyes upon Eugene. "M. de Trailles has fled, leaving enormous debts behind him, and I have found out that he was deceiving me. My husband will never forgive me, and I have left my fortune in his hands. I have lost all my illusions. Alas! I have forsaken the one heart that loved me (she pointed to her father as she spoke), and for whom? I have held his kindness cheap, and slighted his affection; many and many a time I have given him pain, ungrateful wretch that I am!"

°°°°"He knew it," said Rastignac.

°°°°Just then Goriot's eyelids unclosed; it was only a muscular contraction, but the Countess' sudden start of reviving hope was no less dreadful than the dying eyes.

°°°°"Is it possible that he can hear me?" cried the Countess. "No," she answered herself, and sat down beside the bed. As Mme. de Restaud seemed to wish to sit by her father, Eugene went down to take a little food. The boarders were already assembled.

°°°°"Well," remarked the painter, as he joined them, "it seems that there is to be a death-orama upstairs."

°°°°"Charles, I think you might find something less painful to joke about," said Eugene.

°°°°"So we may not laugh here?" returned the painter. "What harm does it do? Bianchon said that the old man was quite insensible."

°°°°"Well, then," said the employe from the Museum, "he will die as he has lived."

°°°°"My father is dead!" shrieked the Countess.

°°°°The terrible cry brought Sylvie, Rastignac, and Bianchon; Mme. de Restaud had fainted away. When she recovered they carried her downstairs, and put her into the cab that stood waiting at the door. Eugene sent Therese with her, and bade the maid take the Countess to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Bianchon came down to them.

°°°°"Yes, he is dead," he said.

°°°°"Come, sit down to dinner, gentlemen," said Mme. Vauquer, "or the soup will be cold."

°°°°The two students sat down together.

°°°°"What is the next thing to be done?" Eugene asked of Bianchon.

°°°°"I have closed his eyes and composed his limbs," said Bianchon. "When the certificate has been officially registered at the Mayor's office, we will sew him in his winding sheet and bury him somewhere. What do you think we ought to do?"

°°°°"He will not smell at his bread like this any more," said the painter, mimicking the old man's little trick.

°°°°"Oh, hang it all!" cried the tutor, "let Father Goriot drop, and let us have something else for a change. He is a standing dish, and we have had him with every sauce this hour or more. It is one of the privileges of the good city of Paris that anybody may be born, or live, or die there without attracting any attention whatsoever. Let us profit by the advantages of civilization. There are fifty or sixty deaths every day; if you have a mind to do it, you can sit down at any time and wail over whole hecatombs of dead in Paris. Father Goriot has gone off the hooks, has he? So much the better for him. If you venerate his memory, keep it to yourselves, and let the rest of us feed in peace."

°°°°"Oh, to be sure," said the widow, "it is all the better for him that he is dead. It looks as though he had had trouble enough, poor soul, while he was alive."

°°°°And this was all the funeral oration delivered over him who had been for Eugene the type and embodiment of Fatherhood.

°°°°The fifteen lodgers began to talk as usual. When Bianchon and Eugene had satisfied their hunger, the rattle of spoons and forks, the boisterous conversation, the expressions on the faces that bespoke various degrees of want of feeling, gluttony, or indifference, everything about them made them shiver with loathing. They went out to find a priest to watch that night with the dead. It was necessary to measure their last pious cares by the scanty sum of money that remained. Before nine o'clock that evening the body was laid out on the bare sacking of the bedstead in the desolate room; a lighted candle stood on either side, and the priest watched at the foot. Rastignac made inquiries of this latter as to the expenses of the funeral, and wrote to the Baron de Nucingen and the Comte de Restaud, entreating both gentlemen to authorize their man of business to defray the charges of laying their father-in-law in the grave. He sent Christophe with the letters; then he went to bed, tired out, and slept.

°°°°Next day Bianchon and Rastignac were obliged to take the certificate to the registrar themselves, and by twelve o'clock the formalities were completed. Two hours went by, no word came from the Count nor from the Baron; nobody appeared to act for them, and Rastignac had already been obliged to pay the priest. Sylvie asked ten francs for sewing the old man in his winding- sheet and making him ready for the grave, and Eugene and Bianchon calculated that they had scarcely sufficient to pay for the funeral, if nothing was forthcoming from the dead man's family. So it was the medical student who laid him in a pauper's coffin, despatched from Bianchon's hospital, whence he obtained it at a cheaper rate.

°°°°"Let us play those wretches a trick," said he. "Go to the cemetery, buy a grave for five years at Pere-Lachaise, and arrange with the Church and the undertaker to have a third-class funeral. If the daughters and their husbands decline to repay you, you can carve this on the headstone--'HERE LIES M. GORIOT, FATHER OF THE COMTESSE DE RESTAUD AND THE BARONNE DE NUCINGEN, INTERRED AT THE EXPENSE OF TWO STUDENTS.' "

°°°°Eugene took part of his friend's advice, but only after he had gone in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

°°°°"Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their father, and are in deep grief over their loss."

°°°°Eugene's Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was impossible to reach Delphine.

°°°°"Sell some of your ornaments," he wrote hastily in the porter's room, "so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place."

°°°°He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the lodging-house about three o'clock. In spite of himself, the tears came into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth, was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs. A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

°°°°Bianchon's duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he had made for the burial service. The house student's note told Rastignac that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading Bianchon's scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot's two daughters in Mme. Vauquer's hands.

°°°°"How dared you take it?" he asked.

°°°°"Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?" retorted Sylvie. "It is gold."

°°°°"Of course it shall!" Eugene answered indignantly; "he shall at any rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with him."

°°°°When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man's breast the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were innocent little maidens, before they began "to think for themselves," as he had moaned out in his agony.

°°°°Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker's men were the only followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. When the coffin had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked round in vain for Goriot's two daughters or their husbands. Christophe was his only fellow- mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe's hand. He could not utter a word just then.

°°°°"Yes, Monsieur Eugene," said Christophe, "he was a good and worthy man, who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any harm, and gave nobody any trouble."

°°°°The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

°°°°The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the Libera nos and the De profundis. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with Eugene and Christophe.

°°°°"There is no one else to follow us," remarked the priest, "so we may as well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five."

°°°°But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen, arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o'clock Goriot's coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters' servants standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that fell on Father Goriot's grave, Eugene Rastignac's youth ended. He folded his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

°°°°He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste of its honey, and said magniloquently:

°°°°"Henceforth there is war between us."

°°°°And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine with Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°ADDENDUM

°°°°The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

°°°°Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d'   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Secrets of a Princess   Beatrix

°°°°Beauseant, Marquis   An Episode under the Terror

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomte de   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomtesse de   The Deserted Woman   Albert Savarus

°°°°Bianchon, Horace   The Atheist's Mass   Cesar Birotteau   The Commission in Lunacy   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   A Bachelor's Establishment   The Secrets of a Princess   The Government Clerks   Pierrette   A Study of Woman   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Honorine   The Seamy Side of History   The Magic Skin   A Second Home   A Prince of Bohemia   Letters of Two Brides   The Muse of the Department   The Imaginary Mistress   The Middle Classes   Cousin Betty   The Country Parson In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:   Another Study of Woman   La Grande Breteche

°°°°Bibi-Lupin (chief of secret police, called himself Gondureau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de   Sarrasine

°°°°Collin, Jacques   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Derville   Gobseck   A Start in Life   The Gondreville Mystery   Colonel Chabert   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Franchessini, Colonel   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Galathionne, Princess   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van   Gobseck   Cesar Birotteau   The Government Clerks   The Unconscious Humoriists

°°°°Jacques (M. de Beauseant's butler)   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Langeais, Duchesse Antoinette de   The Thirteen

°°°°Marsay, Henri de   The Thirteen   The Unconscious Humorists   Another Study of Woman   The Lily of the Valley   Jealousies of a Country Town   Ursule Mirouet   A Marriage Settlement   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Letters of Two Brides   The Ball at Sceaux   Modest Mignon   The Secrets of a Princess   The Gondreville Mystery   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Maurice (de Restaud's valet)   Gobseck

°°°°Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de   The Thirteen   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Another Study of Woman   Pierrette   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Nucingen, Baron Frederic de   The Firm of Nucingen   Pierrette   Cesar Birotteau   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Another Study of Woman   The Secrets of a Princess   A Man of Business   Cousin Betty   The Muse of the Department   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de   The Thirteen   Eugenie Grandet   Cesar Birotteau   Melmoth Reconciled   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   The Commission in Lunacy   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Modeste Mignon   The Firm of Nucingen   Another Study of Woman   A Daughter of Eve   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Poiret   The Government Clerks   A Start in Life   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Poiret, Madame (nee Christine-Michelle Michonneau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de (Eugene's parents)   Lost Illusions

°°°°Rastignac, Eugene de   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Ball at Sceaux   The Interdiction   A Study of Woman   Another Study of Woman   The Magic Skin   The Secrets of a Princess   A Daughter of Eve   The Gondreville Mystery   The Firm of Nucingen   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Rastignac, Laure-Rose and Agathe de   Lost Illusions   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Rastignac, Monseigneur Gabriel de   The Country Parson   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Restaud, Comte de   Gobseck

°°°°Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de   Gobseck

°°°°Selerier   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Taillefer, Jean-Frederic   The Firm of Nucingen   The Magic Skin   The Red Inn

°°°°Taillefer, Victorine   The Red Inn

°°°°Therese   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Tissot, Pierre-Francois   A Prince of Bohemia

°°°°Trailles, Comte Maxime de   Cesar Birotteau   Gobseck   Ursule Mirouet   A Man of Business   The Member for Arcis   The Secrets of a Princess   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   Beatrix   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°End

°°°°Eugenie Grandet

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Maria.

°°°°May your name, that of one whose portrait is the noblest ornament

°°°°of this work, lie on its opening pages like a branch of sacred

°°°°box, taken from an unknown tree, but sanctified by religion, and

°°°°kept ever fresh and green by pious hands to bless the house.De Balzac.

°°°°EUGENIE GRANDET

°°°°I

°°°°There are houses in certain provincial towns whose aspect inspiresmelancholy, akin to that called forth by sombre cloisters, drearymoorlands, or the desolation of ruins. Within these houses there is,perhaps, the silence of the cloister, the barrenness of moors, theskeleton of ruins; life and movement are so stagnant there that astranger might think them uninhabited, were it not that he encounterssuddenly the pale, cold glance of a motionless person, whose half-monastic face peers beyond the window-casing at the sound of anunaccustomed step.

°°°°Such elements of sadness formed the physiognomy, as it were, of adwelling-house in Saumur which stands at the end of the steep streetleading to the chateau in the upper part of the town. This street--nowlittle frequented, hot in summer, cold in winter, dark in certainsections--is remarkable for the resonance of its little pebblypavement, always clean and dry, for the narrowness of its tortuousroad-way, for the peaceful stillness of its houses, which belong tothe Old town and are over-topped by the ramparts. Houses threecenturies old are still solid, though built of wood, and their diversaspects add to the originality which commends this portion of Saumurto the attention of artists and antiquaries.

°°°°It is difficult to pass these houses without admiring the enormousoaken beams, their ends carved into fantastic figures, which crownwith a black bas-relief the lower floor of most of them. In one placethese transverse timbers are covered with slate and mark a bluish linealong the frail wall of a dwelling covered by a roof /en colombage/which bends beneath the weight of years, and whose rotting shinglesare twisted by the alternate action of sun and rain. In another placeblackened, worn-out window-sills, with delicate sculptures nowscarcely discernible, seem too weak to bear the brown clay pots fromwhich springs the heart's-ease or the rose-bush of some poor working-woman. Farther on are doors studded with enormous nails, where thegenius of our forefathers has traced domestic hieroglyphics, of whichthe meaning is now lost forever. Here a Protestant attested hisbelief; there a Leaguer cursed Henry IV.; elsewhere some bourgeois hascarved the insignia of his /noblesse de cloches/, symbols of his long-forgotten magisterial glory. The whole history of France is there.Next to a tottering house with roughly plastered walls, where anartisan enshrines his tools, rises the mansion of a country gentleman,on the stone arch of which above the door vestiges of armorialbearings may still be seen, battered by the many revolutions that haveshaken France since 1789. In this hilly street the ground-floors ofthe merchants are neither shops nor warehouses; lovers of the MiddleAges will here find the /ouvrouere/ of our forefathers in all itsnaive simplicity. These low rooms, which have no shop-frontage, noshow-windows, in fact no glass at all, are deep and dark and withoutinterior or exterior decoration. Their doors open in two parts, eachroughly iron-bound; the upper half is fastened back within the room,the lower half, fitted with a spring-bell, swings continually to andfro. Air and light reach the damp den within, either through the upperhalf of the door, or through an open space between the ceiling and alow front wall, breast-high, which is closed by solid shutters thatare taken down every morning, put up every evening, and held in placeby heavy iron bars.

°°°°This wall serves as a counter for the merchandise. No delusive displayis there; only samples of the business, whatever it may chance to be,--such, for instance, as three or four tubs full of codfish and salt,a few bundles of sail-cloth, cordage, copper wire hanging from thejoists above, iron hoops for casks ranged along the wall, or a fewpieces of cloth upon the shelves. Enter. A neat girl, glowing withyouth, wearing a white kerchief, her arms red and bare, drops herknitting and calls her father or her mother, one of whom comes forwardand sells you what you want, phlegmatically, civilly, or arrogantly,according to his or her individual character, whether it be a matterof two sous' or twenty thousand francs' worth of merchandise. You maysee a cooper, for instance, sitting in his doorway and twirling histhumbs as he talks with a neighbor. To all appearance he owns nothingmore than a few miserable boat-ribs and two or three bundles of laths;but below in the port his teeming wood-yard supplies all the cooperagetrade of Anjou. He knows to a plank how many casks are needed if thevintage is good. A hot season makes him rich, a rainy season ruinshim; in a single morning puncheons worth eleven francs have been knownto drop to six. In this country, as in Touraine, atmosphericvicissitudes control commercial life. Wine-growers, proprietors, wood-merchants, coopers, inn-keepers, mariners, all keep watch of the sun.They tremble when they go to bed lest they should hear in the morningof a frost in the night; they dread rain, wind, drought, and wantwater, heat, and clouds to suit their fancy. A perpetual duel goes onbetween the heavens and their terrestrial interests. The barometersmooths, saddens, or makes merry their countenances, turn and turnabout. From end to end of this street, formerly the Grand'Rue deSaumur, the words: "Here's golden weather," are passed from door todoor; or each man calls to his neighbor: "It rains louis," knowingwell what a sunbeam or the opportune rainfall is bringing him.On Saturdays after midday, in the fine season, not one sou's worth ofmerchandise can be bought from these worthy traders. Each has hisvineyard, his enclosure of fields, and all spend two days in thecountry. This being foreseen, and purchases, sales, and profitsprovided for, the merchants have ten or twelve hours to spend inparties of pleasure, in making observations, in criticisms, and incontinual spying. A housewife cannot buy a partridge without theneighbors asking the husband if it were cooked to a turn. A young girlnever puts her head near a window that she is not seen by idlinggroups in the street. Consciences are held in the light; and thehouses, dark, silent, impenetrable as they seem, hide no mysteries.Life is almost wholly in the open air; every household sits at its ownthreshold, breakfasts, dines, and quarrels there. No one can passalong the street without being examined; in fact formerly, when astranger entered a provincial town he was bantered and made game offrom door to door. From this came many good stories, and the nickname/copieux/, which was applied to the inhabitants of Angers, whoexcelled in such urban sarcasms.

°°°°The ancient mansions of the old town of Saumur are at the top of thishilly street, and were formerly occupied by the nobility of theneighborhood. The melancholy dwelling where the events of thefollowing history took place is one of these mansions,--venerablerelics of a century in which men and things bore the characteristicsof simplicity which French manners and customs are losing day by day.Follow the windings of the picturesque thoroughfare, whoseirregularities awaken recollections that plunge the mind mechanicallyinto reverie, and you will see a somewhat dark recess, in the centreof which is hidden the door of the house of Monsieur Grandet. It isimpossible to understand the force of this provincial expression--thehouse of Monsieur Grandet--without giving the biography of MonsieurGrandet himself.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet enjoyed a reputation in Saumur whose causes andeffects can never be fully understood by those who have not, at onetime or another, lived in the provinces. In 1789 Monsieur Grandet--still called by certain persons le Pere Grandet, though the number ofsuch old persons has perceptibly diminished--was a master-cooper, ableto read, write, and cipher. At the period when the French Republicoffered for sale the church property in the arrondissement of Saumur,the cooper, then forty years of age, had just married the daughter ofa rich wood-merchant. Supplied with the ready money of his own fortuneand his wife's /dot/, in all about two thousand louis-d'or, Grandetwent to the newly established "district," where, with the help of twohundred double louis given by his father-in-law to the surlyrepublican who presided over the sales of the national domain, heobtained for a song, legally if not legitimately, one of the finestvineyards in the arrondissement, an old abbey, and several farms. Theinhabitants of Saumur were so little revolutionary that they thoughtPere Grandet a bold man, a republican, and a patriot with a mind opento all the new ideas; though in point of fact it was open only tovineyards. He was appointed a member of the administration of Saumur,and his pacific influence made itself felt politically andcommercially. Politically, he protected the ci-devant nobles, andprevented, to the extent of his power, the sale of the lands andproperty of the /emigres/; commercially, he furnished the Republicanarmies with two or three thousand puncheons of white wine, and tookhis pay in splendid fields belonging to a community of women whoselands had been reserved for the last lot.

°°°°Under the Consulate Grandet became mayor, governed wisely, andharvested still better pickings. Under the Empire he was calledMonsieur Grandet. Napoleon, however, did not like republicans, andsuperseded Monsieur Grandet (who was supposed to have worn thePhrygian cap) by a man of his own surroundings, a future baron of theEmpire. Monsieur Grandet quitted office without regret. He hadconstructed in the interests of the town certain fine roads which ledto his own property; his house and lands, very advantageouslyassessed, paid moderate taxes; and since the registration of hisvarious estates, the vineyards, thanks to his constant care, hadbecome the "head of the country,"--a local term used to denote thosethat produced the finest quality of wine. He might have asked for thecross of the Legion of honor.

°°°°This event occurred in 1806. Monsieur Grandet was then fifty-sevenyears of age, his wife thirty-six, and an only daughter, the fruit oftheir legitimate love, was ten years old. Monsieur Grandet, whomProvidence no doubt desired to compensate for the loss of hismunicipal honors, inherited three fortunes in the course of this year,--that of Madame de la Gaudiniere, born de la Bertelliere, the motherof Madame Grandet; that of old Monsieur de la Bertelliere, hergrandfather; and, lastly, that of Madame Gentillet, her grandmother onthe mother's side: three inheritances, whose amount was not known toany one. The avarice of the deceased persons was so keen that for along time they had hoarded their money for the pleasure of secretlylooking at it. Old Monsieur de la Bertelliere called an investment anextravagance, and thought he got better interest from the sight of hisgold than from the profits of usury. The inhabitants of Saumurconsequently estimated his savings according to "the revenues of thesun's wealth," as they said.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet thus obtained that modern title of nobility which ourmania for equality can never rub out. He became the most imposingpersonage in the arrondissement. He worked a hundred acres ofvineyard, which in fruitful years yielded seven or eight hundredhogsheads of wine. He owned thirteen farms, an old abbey, whosewindows and arches he had walled up for the sake of economy,--ameasure which preserved them,--also a hundred and twenty-seven acresof meadow-land, where three thousand poplars, planted in 1793, grewand flourished; and finally, the house in which he lived. Such was hisvisible estate; as to his other property, only two persons could giveeven a vague guess at its value: one was Monsieur Cruchot, a notaryemployed in the usurious investments of Monsieur Grandet; the otherwas Monsieur des Grassins, the richest banker in Saumur, in whoseprofits Grandet had a certain covenanted and secret share.Although old Cruchot and Monsieur des Grassins were both gifted withthe deep discretion which wealth and trust beget in the provinces,they publicly testified so much respect to Monsieur Grandet thatobservers estimated the amount of his property by the obsequiousattention which they bestowed upon him. In all Saumur there was no onenot persuaded that Monsieur Grandet had a private treasure, somehiding-place full of louis, where he nightly took ineffable delight ingazing upon great masses of gold. Avaricious people gathered proof ofthis when they looked at the eyes of the good man, to which the yellowmetal seemed to have conveyed its tints. The glance of a manaccustomed to draw enormous interest from his capital acquires, likethat of the libertine, the gambler, or the sycophant, certainindefinable habits,--furtive, eager, mysterious movements, which neverescape the notice of his co-religionists. This secret language is in acertain way the freemasonry of the passions. Monsieur Grandet inspiredthe respectful esteem due to one who owed no man anything, who,skilful cooper and experienced wine-grower that he was, guessed withthe precision of an astronomer whether he ought to manufacture athousand puncheons for his vintage, or only five hundred, who neverfailed in any speculation, and always had casks for sale when caskswere worth more than the commodity that filled them, who could storehis whole vintage in his cellars and bide his time to put thepuncheons on the market at two hundred francs, when the littleproprietors had been forced to sell theirs for five louis. His famousvintage of 1811, judiciously stored and slowly disposed of, broughthim in more than two hundred and forty thousand francs.

°°°°Financially speaking, Monsieur Grandet was something between a tigerand a boa-constrictor. He could crouch and lie low, watch his prey along while, spring upon it, open his jaws, swallow a mass of louis,and then rest tranquilly like a snake in process of digestion,impassible, methodical, and cold. No one saw him pass without afeeling of admiration mingled with respect and fear; had not every manin Saumur felt the rending of those polished steel claws? For thisone, Maitre Cruchot had procured the money required for the purchaseof a domain, but at eleven per cent. For that one, Monsieur desGrassins discounted bills of exchange, but at a frightful deduction ofinterest. Few days ever passed that Monsieur Grandet's name was notmentioned either in the markets or in social conversations at theevening gatherings. To some the fortune of the old wine-grower was anobject of patriotic pride. More than one merchant, more than oneinnkeeper, said to strangers with a certain complacency: "Monsieur, wehave two or three millionaire establishments; but as for MonsieurGrandet, he does not himself know how much he is worth."

°°°°In 1816 the best reckoners in Saumur estimated the landed property ofthe worthy man at nearly four millions; but as, on an average, he hadmade yearly, from 1793 to 1817, a hundred thousand francs out of thatproperty, it was fair to presume that he possessed in actual money asum nearly equal to the value of his estate. So that when, after agame of boston or an evening discussion on the matter of vines, thetalk fell upon Monsieur Grandet, knowing people said: "Le PereGrandet? le Pere Grandet must have at least five or six millions.""You are cleverer than I am; I have never been able to find out theamount," answered Monsieur Cruchot or Monsieur des Grassins, wheneither chanced to overhear the remark.

°°°°If some Parisian mentioned Rothschild or Monsieur Lafitte, the peopleof Saumur asked if he were as rich as Monsieur Grandet. When theParisian, with a smile, tossed them a disdainful affirmative, theylooked at each other and shook their heads with an incredulous air. Solarge a fortune covered with a golden mantle all the actions of thisman. If in early days some peculiarities of his life gave occasion forlaughter or ridicule, laughter and ridicule had long since died away.His least important actions had the authority of results repeatedlyshown. His speech, his clothing, his gestures, the blinking of hiseyes, were law to the country-side, where every one, after studyinghim as a naturalist studies the result of instinct in the loweranimals, had come to understand the deep mute wisdom of his slightestactions.

°°°°"It will be a hard winter," said one; "Pere Grandet has put on his furgloves."

°°°°"Pere Grandet is buying quantities of staves; there will be plenty ofwine this year."

°°°°Monsieur Grandet never bought either bread or meat. His farmerssupplied him weekly with a sufficiency of capons, chickens, eggs,butter, and his tithe of wheat. He owned a mill; and the tenant wasbound, over and above his rent, to take a certain quantity of grainand return him the flour and bran. La Grande Nanon, his only servant,though she was no longer young, baked the bread of the householdherself every Saturday. Monsieur Grandet arranged with kitchen-gardeners who were his tenants to supply him with vegetables. As tofruits, he gathered such quantities that he sold the greater part inthe market. His fire-wood was cut from his own hedgerows or taken fromthe half-rotten old sheds which he built at the corners of his fields,and whose planks the farmers carted into town for him, all cut up, andobligingly stacked in his wood-house, receiving in return his thanks.His only known expenditures were for the consecrated bread, theclothing of his wife and daughter, the hire of their chairs in church,the wages of la Grand Nanon, the tinning of the saucepans, lights,taxes, repairs on his buildings, and the costs of his variousindustries. He had six hundred acres of woodland, lately purchased,which he induced a neighbor's keeper to watch, under the promise of anindemnity. After the acquisition of this property he ate game for thefirst time.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet's manners were very simple. He spoke little. Heusually expressed his meaning by short sententious phrases uttered ina soft voice. After the Revolution, the epoch at which he first cameinto notice, the good man stuttered in a wearisome way as soon as hewas required to speak at length or to maintain an argument. Thisstammering, the incoherence of his language, the flux of words inwhich he drowned his thought, his apparent lack of logic, attributedto defects of education, were in reality assumed, and will besufficiently explained by certain events in the following history.Four sentences, precise as algebraic formulas, sufficed him usually tograsp and solve all difficulties of life and commerce: "I don't know;I cannot; I will not; I will see about it." He never said yes, or no,and never committed himself to writing. If people talked to him helistened coldly, holding his chin in his right hand and resting hisright elbow in the back of his left hand, forming in his own mindopinions on all matters, from which he never receded. He reflectedlong before making any business agreement. When his opponent, aftercareful conversation, avowed the secret of his own purposes, confidentthat he had secured his listener's assent, Grandet answered: "I candecide nothing without consulting my wife." His wife, whom he hadreduced to a state of helpless slavery, was a useful screen to him inbusiness. He went nowhere among friends; he neither gave nor accepteddinners; he made no stir or noise, seeming to economize in everything,even movement. He never disturbed or disarranged the things of otherpeople, out of respect for the rights of property. Nevertheless, inspite of his soft voice, in spite of his circumspect bearing, thelanguage and habits of a coarse nature came to the surface, especiallyin his own home, where he controlled himself less than elsewhere.Physically, Grandet was a man five feet high, thick-set, square-built,with calves twelve inches in circumference, knotted knee-joints, andbroad shoulders; his face was round, tanned, and pitted by the small-pox; his chin was straight, his lips had no curves, his teeth werewhite; his eyes had that calm, devouring expression which peopleattribute to the basilisk; his forehead, full of transverse wrinkles,was not without certain significant protuberances; his yellow-grayishhair was said to be silver and gold by certain young people who didnot realize the impropriety of making a jest about Monsieur Grandet.His nose, thick at the end, bore a veined wen, which the common peoplesaid, not without reason, was full of malice. The whole countenanceshowed a dangerous cunning, an integrity without warmth, the egotismof a man long used to concentrate every feeling upon the enjoyments ofavarice and upon the only human being who was anything whatever tohim,--his daughter and sole heiress, Eugenie. Attitude, manners,bearing, everything about him, in short, testified to that belief inhimself which the habit of succeeding in all enterprises never failsto give to a man.

°°°°Thus, though his manners were unctuous and soft outwardly, MonsieurGrandet's nature was of iron. His dress never varied; and those whosaw him to-day saw him such as he had been since 1791. His stout shoeswere tied with leathern thongs; he wore, in all weathers, thickwoollen stockings, short breeches of coarse maroon cloth with silverbuckles, a velvet waistcoat, in alternate stripes of yellow and puce,buttoned squarely, a large maroon coat with wide flaps, a blackcravat, and a quaker's hat. His gloves, thick as those of a gendarme,lasted him twenty months; to preserve them, he always laid themmethodically on the brim of his hat in one particular spot. Saumurknew nothing further about this personage.

°°°°Only six individuals had a right of entrance to Monsieur Grandet'shouse. The most important of the first three was a nephew of MonsieurCruchot. Since his appointment as president of the Civil courts ofSaumur this young man had added the name of Bonfons to that ofCruchot. He now signed himself C. de Bonfons. Any litigant so ill-advised as to call him Monsieur Cruchot would soon be made to feel hisfolly in court. The magistrate protected those who called him Monsieurle president, but he favored with gracious smiles those who addressedhim as Monsieur de Bonfons. Monsieur le president was thirty-threeyears old, and possessed the estate of Bonfons (Boni Fontis), worthseven thousand francs a year; he expected to inherit the property ofhis uncle the notary and that of another uncle, the Abbe Cruchot, adignitary of the chapter of Saint-Martin de Tours, both of whom werethought to be very rich. These three Cruchots, backed by a goodlynumber of cousins, and allied to twenty families in the town, formed aparty, like the Medici in Florence; like the Medici, the Cruchots hadtheir Pazzi.

°°°°Madame des Grassins, mother of a son twenty-three years of age, cameassiduously to play cards with Madame Grandet, hoping to marry herdear Adolphe to Mademoiselle Eugenie. Monsieur des Grassins, thebanker, vigorously promoted the schemes of his wife by means of secretservices constantly rendered to the old miser, and always arrived intime upon the field of battle. The three des Grassins likewise hadtheir adherents, their cousins, their faithful allies. On the Cruchotside the abbe, the Talleyrand of the family, well backed-up by hisbrother the notary, sharply contested every inch of ground with hisfemale adversary, and tried to obtain the rich heiress for his nephewthe president.

°°°°This secret warfare between the Cruchots and des Grassins, the prizethereof being the hand in marriage of Eugenie Grandet, kept thevarious social circles of Saumur in violent agitation. WouldMademoiselle Grandet marry Monsieur le president or Monsieur Adolphedes Grassins? To this problem some replied that Monsieur Grandet wouldnever give his daughter to the one or to the other. The old cooper,eaten up with ambition, was looking, they said, for a peer of France,to whom an income of three hundred thousand francs would make all thepast, present, and future casks of the Grandets acceptable. Othersreplied that Monsieur and Madame des Grassins were nobles, andexceedingly rich; that Adolphe was a personable young fellow; and thatunless the old man had a nephew of the pope at his beck and call, sucha suitable alliance ought to satisfy a man who came from nothing,--aman whom Saumur remembered with an adze in his hand, and who had,moreover, worn the /bonnet rouge/. Certain wise heads called attentionto the fact that Monsieur Cruchot de Bonfons had the right of entry tothe house at all times, whereas his rival was received only onSundays. Others, however, maintained that Madame des Grassins was moreintimate with the women of the house of Grandet than the Cruchotswere, and could put into their minds certain ideas which would lead,sooner or later, to success. To this the former retorted that the AbbeCruchot was the most insinuating man in the world: pit a woman againsta monk, and the struggle was even. "It is diamond cut diamond," said aSaumur wit.

°°°°The oldest inhabitants, wiser than their fellows, declared that theGrandets knew better than to let the property go out of the family,and that Mademoiselle Eugenie Grandet of Saumur would be married tothe son of Monsieur Grandet of Paris, a wealthy wholesale wine-merchant. To this the Cruchotines and the Grassinists replied: "In thefirst place, the two brothers have seen each other only twice inthirty years; and next, Monsieur Grandet of Paris has ambitiousdesigns for his son. He is mayor of an arrondissement, a deputy,colonel of the National Guard, judge in the commercial courts; hedisowns the Grandets of Saumur, and means to ally himself with someducal family,--ducal under favor of Napoleon." In short, was thereanything not said of an heiress who was talked of through acircumference of fifty miles, and even in the public conveyances fromAngers to Blois, inclusively!

°°°°At the beginning of 1811, the Cruchotines won a signal advantage overthe Grassinists. The estate of Froidfond, remarkable for its park, itsmansion, its farms, streams, ponds, forests, and worth about threemillions, was put up for sale by the young Marquis de Froidfond, whowas obliged to liquidate his possessions. Maitre Cruchot, thepresident, and the abbe, aided by their adherents, were able toprevent the sale of the estate in little lots. The notary concluded abargain with the young man for the whole property, payable in gold,persuading him that suits without number would have to be broughtagainst the purchasers of small lots before he could get the money forthem; it was better, therefore, to sell the whole to Monsieur Grandet,who was solvent and able to pay for the estate in ready money. Thefine marquisate of Froidfond was accordingly conveyed down the gulletof Monsieur Grandet, who, to the great astonishment of Saumur, paidfor it, under proper discount, with the usual formalities.This affair echoed from Nantes to Orleans. Monsieur Grandet tookadvantage of a cart returning by way of Froidfond to go and see hischateau. Having cast a master's eye over the whole property, hereturned to Saumur, satisfied that he had invested his money at fiveper cent, and seized by the stupendous thought of extending andincreasing the marquisate of Froidfond by concentrating all hisproperty there. Then, to fill up his coffers, now nearly empty, heresolved to thin out his woods and his forests, and to sell off thepoplars in the meadows.

°°°°II

°°°°It is now easy to understand the full meaning of the term, "the houseof Monsieur Grandet,"--that cold, silent, pallid dwelling, standingabove the town and sheltered by the ruins of the ramparts. The twopillars and the arch, which made the porte-cochere on which the dooropened, were built, like the house itself, of tufa,--a white stonepeculiar to the shores of the Loire, and so soft that it lasts hardlymore than two centuries. Numberless irregular holes, capriciouslybored or eaten out by the inclemency of the weather, gave anappearance of the vermiculated stonework of French architecture to thearch and the side walls of this entrance, which bore some resemblanceto the gateway of a jail. Above the arch was a long bas-relief, inhard stone, representing the four seasons, the faces already crumblingaway and blackened. This bas-relief was surmounted by a projectingplinth, upon which a variety of chance growths had sprung up,--yellowpellitory, bindweed, convolvuli, nettles, plantain, and even a littlecherry-tree, already grown to some height.

°°°°The door of the archway was made of solid oak, brown, shrunken, andsplit in many places; though frail in appearance, it was firmly heldin place by a system of iron bolts arranged in symmetrical patterns. Asmall square grating, with close bars red with rust, filled up themiddle panel and made, as it were, a motive for the knocker, fastenedto it by a ring, which struck upon the grinning head of a huge nail.This knocker, of the oblong shape and kind which our ancestors called/jaquemart/, looked like a huge note of exclamation; an antiquary whoexamined it attentively might have found indications of the figure,essentially burlesque, which it once represented, and which long usagehad now effaced. Through this little grating--intended in olden timesfor the recognition of friends in times of civil war--inquisitivepersons could perceive, at the farther end of the dark and slimyvault, a few broken steps which led to a garden, picturesquely shut inby walls that were thick and damp, and through which oozed a moisturethat nourished tufts of sickly herbage. These walls were the ruins ofthe ramparts, under which ranged the gardens of several neighboringhouses.

°°°°The most important room on the ground-floor of the house was a largehall, entered directly from beneath the vault of the porte-cochere.Few people know the importance of a hall in the little towns of Anjou,Touraine, and Berry. The hall is at one and the same time antechamber,salon, office, boudoir, and dining-room; it is the theatre of domesticlife, the common living-room. There the barber of the neighborhoodcame, twice a year, to cut Monsieur Grandet's hair; there the farmers,the cure, the under-prefect, and the miller's boy came on business.This room, with two windows looking on the street, was entirely ofwood. Gray panels with ancient mouldings covered the walls from top tobottom; the ceiling showed all its beams, which were likewise paintedgray, while the space between them had been washed over in white, nowyellow with age. An old brass clock, inlaid with arabesques, adornedthe mantel of the ill-cut white stone chimney-piece, above which was agreenish mirror, whose edges, bevelled to show the thickness of theglass, reflected a thread of light the whole length of a gothic framein damascened steel-work. The two copper-gilt candelabra whichdecorated the corners of the chimney-piece served a double purpose: bytaking off the side-branches, each of which held a socket, the mainstem--which was fastened to a pedestal of bluish marble tipped withcopper--made a candlestick for one candle, which was sufficient forordinary occasions. The chairs, antique in shape, were covered withtapestry representing the fables of La Fontaine; it was necessary,however, to know that writer well to guess at the subjects, for thefaded colors and the figures, blurred by much darning, were difficultto distinguish.

°°°°At the four corners of the hall were closets, or rather buffets,surmounted by dirty shelves. An old card-table in marquetry, of whichthe upper part was a chess-board, stood in the space between the twowindows. Above this table was an oval barometer with a black borderenlivened with gilt bands, on which the flies had so licentiouslydisported themselves that the gilding had become problematical. On thepanel opposite to the chimney-piece were two portraits in pastel,supposed to represent the grandfather of Madame Grandet, old Monsieurde la Bertelliere, as a lieutenant in the French guard, and thedeceased Madame Gentillet in the guise of a shepherdess. The windowswere draped with curtains of red /gros de Tours/ held back by silkencords with ecclesiastical tassels. This luxurious decoration, littlein keeping with the habits of Monsieur Grandet, had been, togetherwith the steel pier-glass, the tapestries, and the buffets, which wereof rose-wood, included in the purchase of the house.

°°°°By the window nearest to the door stood a straw chair, whose legs wereraised on castors to lift its occupant, Madame Grandet, to a heightfrom which she could see the passers-by. A work-table of stainedcherry-wood filled up the embrasure, and the little armchair ofEugenie Grandet stood beside it. In this spot the lives had flowedpeacefully onward for fifteen years, in a round of constant work fromthe month of April to the month of November. On the first day of thelatter month they took their winter station by the chimney. Not untilthat day did Grandet permit a fire to be lighted; and on the thirty-first of March it was extinguished, without regard either to thechills of the early spring or to those of a wintry autumn. A foot-warmer, filled with embers from the kitchen fire, which la GrandeNanon contrived to save for them, enabled Madame and MademoiselleGrandet to bear the chilly mornings and evenings of April and October.Mother and daughter took charge of the family linen, and spent theirdays so conscientiously upon a labor properly that of working-women,that if Eugenie wished to embroider a collar for her mother she wasforced to take the time from sleep, and deceive her father to obtainthe necessary light. For a long time the miser had given out thetallow candle to his daughter and la Grande Nanon just as he gave outevery morning the bread and other necessaries for the dailyconsumption.

°°°°La Grande Nanon was perhaps the only human being capable of acceptingwillingly the despotism of her master. The whole town envied Monsieurand Madame Grandet the possession of her. La Grande Nanon, so calledon account of her height, which was five feet eight inches, had livedwith Monsieur Grandet for thirty-five years. Though she received onlysixty francs a year in wages, she was supposed to be one of therichest serving-women in Saumur. Those sixty francs, accumulatingthrough thirty-five years, had recently enabled her to invest fourthousand francs in an annuity with Maitre Cruchot. This result of herlong and persistent economy seemed gigantic. Every servant in thetown, seeing that the poor sexagenarian was sure of bread for her oldage, was jealous of her, and never thought of the hard slavery throughwhich it had been won.

°°°°At twenty-two years of age the poor girl had been unable to find asituation, so repulsive was her face to almost every one. Yet thefeeling was certainly unjust: the face would have been much admired onthe shoulders of a grenadier of the guard; but all things, so theysay, should be in keeping. Forced to leave a farm where she kept thecows, because the dwelling-house was burned down, she came to Saumurto find a place, full of the robust courage that shrinks from nolabor. Le Pere Grandet was at that time thinking of marriage and aboutto set up his household. He espied the girl, rejected as she was fromdoor to door. A good judge of corporeal strength in his trade as acooper, he guessed the work that might be got out of a female creatureshaped like a Hercules, as firm on her feet as an oak sixty years oldon its roots, strong in the hips, square in the back, with the handsof a cartman and an honesty as sound as her unblemished virtue.Neither the warts which adorned her martial visage, nor the red-bricktints of her skin, nor the sinewy arms, nor the ragged garments of laGrande Nanon, dismayed the cooper, who was at that time still of anage when the heart shudders. He fed, shod, and clothed the poor girl,gave her wages, and put her to work without treating her too roughly.Seeing herself thus welcomed, la Grande Nanon wept secretly tears ofjoy, and attached herself in all sincerity to her master, who fromthat day ruled her and worked her with feudal authority. Nanon dideverything. She cooked, she made the lye, she washed the linen in theLoire and brought it home on her shoulders; she got up early, she wentto bed late; she prepared the food of the vine-dressers during theharvest, kept watch upon the market-people, protected the property ofher master like a faithful dog, and even, full of blind confidence,obeyed without a murmur his most absurd exactions.

°°°°In the famous year of 1811, when the grapes were gathered withunheard-of difficulty, Grandet resolved to give Nanon his old watch,--the first present he had made her during twenty years of service.Though he turned over to her his old shoes (which fitted her), it isimpossible to consider that quarterly benefit as a gift, for the shoeswere always thoroughly worn-out. Necessity had made the poor girl soniggardly that Grandet had grown to love her as we love a dog, andNanon had let him fasten a spiked collar round her throat, whosespikes no longer pricked her. If Grandet cut the bread with rather toomuch parsimony, she made no complaint; she gaily shared the hygienicbenefits derived from the severe regime of the household, in which noone was ever ill. Nanon was, in fact, one of the family; she laughedwhen Grandet laughed, felt gloomy or chilly, warmed herself, andtoiled as he did. What pleasant compensations there were in suchequality! Never did the master have occasion to find fault with theservant for pilfering the grapes, nor for the plums and nectarineseaten under the trees. "Come, fall-to, Nanon!" he would say in yearswhen the branches bent under the fruit and the farmers were obliged togive it to the pigs.

°°°°To the poor peasant who in her youth had earned nothing but harshtreatment, to the pauper girl picked up by charity, Grandet'sambiguous laugh was like a sunbeam. Moreover, Nanon's simple heart andnarrow head could hold only one feeling and one idea. For thirty-fiveyears she had never ceased to see herself standing before the wood-yard of Monsieur Grandet, ragged and barefooted, and to hear him say:"What do you want, young one?" Her gratitude was ever new. SometimesGrandet, reflecting that the poor creature had never heard aflattering word, that she was ignorant of all the tender sentimentsinspired by women, that she might some day appear before the throne ofGod even more chaste than the Virgin Mary herself,--Grandet, struckwith pity, would say as he looked at her, "Poor Nanon!" Theexclamation was always followed by an undefinable look cast upon himin return by the old servant. The words, uttered from time to time,formed a chain of friendship that nothing ever parted, and to whicheach exclamation added a link. Such compassion arising in the heart ofthe miser, and accepted gratefully by the old spinster, had somethinginconceivably horrible about it. This cruel pity, recalling, as itdid, a thousand pleasures to the heart of the old cooper, was forNanon the sum total of happiness. Who does not likewise say, "PoorNanon!" God will recognize his angels by the inflexions of theirvoices and by their secret sighs.

°°°°There were very many households in Saumur where the servants werebetter treated, but where the masters received far less satisfactionin return. Thus it was often said: "What have the Grandets ever doneto make their Grande Nanon so attached to them? She would go throughfire and water for their sake!" Her kitchen, whose barred windowslooked into the court, was always clean, neat, cold,--a true miser'skitchen, where nothing went to waste. When Nanon had washed herdishes, locked up the remains of the dinner, and put out her fire, sheleft the kitchen, which was separated by a passage from the living-room, and went to spin hemp beside her masters. One tallow candlesufficed the family for the evening. The servant slept at the end ofthe passage in a species of closet lighted only by a fan-light. Herrobust health enabled her to live in this hole with impunity; thereshe could hear the slightest noise through the deep silence whichreigned night and day in that dreary house. Like a watch-dog, sheslept with one ear open, and took her rest with a mind alert.A description of the other parts of the dwelling will be foundconnected with the events of this history, though the foregoing sketchof the hall, where the whole luxury of the household appears, mayenable the reader to surmise the nakedness of the upper floors.In 1819, at the beginning of an evening in the middle of November, laGrande Nanon lighted the fire for the first time. The autumn had beenvery fine. This particular day was a fete-day well known to theCruchotines and the Grassinists. The six antagonists, armed at allpoints, were making ready to meet at the Grandets and surpass eachother in testimonials of friendship. That morning all Saumur had seenMadame and Mademoiselle Grandet, accompanied by Nanon, on their way tohear Mass at the parish church, and every one remembered that the daywas the anniversary of Mademoiselle Eugenie's birth. Calculating thehour at which the family dinner would be over, Maitre Cruchot, theAbbe Cruchot, and Monsieur C. de Bonfons hastened to arrive before thedes Grassins, and be the first to pay their compliments toMademoiselle Eugenie. All three brought enormous bouquets, gathered intheir little green-houses. The stalks of the flowers which thepresident intended to present were ingeniously wound round with awhite satin ribbon adorned with gold fringe. In the morning MonsieurGrandet, following his usual custom on the days that commemorated thebirth and the fete of Eugenie, went to her bedside and solemnlypresented her with his paternal gift,--which for the last thirteenyears had consisted regularly of a curious gold-piece. Madame Grandetgave her daughter a winter dress or a summer dress, as the case mightbe. These two dresses and the gold-pieces, of which she received twoothers on New Year's day and on her father's fete-day, gave Eugenie alittle revenue of a hundred crowns or thereabouts, which Grandet lovedto see her amass. Was it not putting his money from one strong-box toanother, and, as it were, training the parsimony of his heiress? fromwhom he sometimes demanded an account of her treasure (formerlyincreased by the gifts of the Bertellieres), saying: "It is to be yourmarriage dozen."

°°°°The "marriage dozen" is an old custom sacredly preserved and still inforce in many parts of central France. In Berry and in Anjou, when ayoung girl marries, her family, or that of the husband, must give hera purse, in which they place, according to their means, twelve pieces,or twelve dozen pieces, or twelve hundred pieces of gold. The poorestshepherd-girl never marries without her dozen, be it only a dozencoppers. They still tell in Issoudun of a certain "dozen" presented toa rich heiress, which contained a hundred and forty-four /portugaisesd'or/. Pope Clement VII., uncle of Catherine de' Medici, gave her whenhe married her to Henri II. a dozen antique gold medals of pricelessvalue.

°°°°During dinner the father, delighted to see his Eugenie looking well ina new gown, exclaimed: "As it is Eugenie's birthday let us have afire; it will be a good omen."

°°°°"Mademoiselle will be married this year, that's certain," said laGrande Nanon, carrying away the remains of the goose,--the pheasant oftradesmen.

°°°°"I don't see any one suitable for her in Saumur," said Madame Grandet,glancing at her husband with a timid look which, considering heryears, revealed the conjugal slavery under which the poor womanlanguished.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter and exclaimed gaily,--

°°°°"She is twenty-three years old to-day, the child; we must soon beginto think of it."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother silently exchanged a glance of intelligence.Madame Grandet was a dry, thin woman, as yellow as a quince, awkward,slow, one of those women who are born to be down-trodden. She had bigbones, a big nose, a big forehead, big eyes, and presented at firstsight a vague resemblance to those mealy fruits that have neithersavor nor succulence. Her teeth were black and few in number, hermouth was wrinkled, her chin long and pointed. She was an excellentwoman, a true la Bertelliere. L'abbe Cruchot found occasionalopportunity to tell her that she had not done ill; and she believedhim. Angelic sweetness, the resignation of an insect tortured bychildren, a rare piety, a good heart, an unalterable equanimity ofsoul, made her universally pitied and respected. Her husband nevergave her more than six francs at a time for her personal expenses.Ridiculous as it may seem, this woman, who by her own fortune and hervarious inheritances brought Pere Grandet more than three hundredthousand francs, had always felt so profoundly humiliated by herdependence and the slavery in which she lived, against which thegentleness of her spirit prevented her from revolting, that she hadnever asked for one penny or made a single remark on the deeds whichMaitre Cruchot brought for her signature. This foolish secret pride,this nobility of soul perpetually misunderstood and wounded byGrandet, ruled the whole conduct of the wife.

°°°°Madame Grandet was attired habitually in a gown of greenish levantinesilk, endeavoring to make it last nearly a year; with it she wore alarge kerchief of white cotton cloth, a bonnet made of plaited strawssewn together, and almost always a black-silk apron. As she seldomleft the house she wore out very few shoes. She never asked anythingfor herself. Grandet, seized with occasional remorse when heremembered how long a time had elapsed since he gave her the last sixfrancs, always stipulated for the "wife's pin-money" when he sold hisyearly vintage. The four or five louis presented by the Belgian or theDutchman who purchased the wine were the chief visible signs of MadameGrandet's annual revenues. But after she had received the five louis,her husband would often say to her, as though their purse were held incommon: "Can you lend me a few sous?" and the poor woman, glad to beable to do something for a man whom her confessor held up to her asher lord and master, returned him in the course of the winter severalcrowns out of the "pin-money." When Grandet drew from his pocket thefive-franc piece which he allowed monthly for the minor expenses,--thread, needles, and toilet,--of his daughter, he never failed to sayas he buttoned his breeches' pocket: "And you, mother, do you wantanything?"

°°°°"My friend," Madame Grandet would answer, moved by a sense of maternaldignity, "we will see about that later."

°°°°Wasted dignity! Grandet thought himself very generous to his wife.Philosophers who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, ofEugenie, have surely a right to say that irony is at the bottom of theways of Providence.

°°°°After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made toEugenie's marriage, Nanon went to fetch a bottle of black-currantratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly fell as shecame down the stairs.

°°°°"You great stupid!" said her master; "are you going to tumble aboutlike other people, hey?"

°°°°"Monsieur, it was that step on your staircase which has given way.""She is right," said Madame Grandet; "it ought to have been mendedlong ago. Yesterday Eugenie nearly twisted her ankle."

°°°°"Here," said Grandet to Nanon, seeing that she looked quite pale, "asit is Eugenie's birthday, and you came near falling, take a littleglass of ratafia to set you right."

°°°°"Faith! I've earned it," said Nanon; "most people would have brokenthe bottle; but I'd sooner have broken my elbow holding it up high.""Poor Nanon!" said Grandet, filling a glass.

°°°°"Did you hurt yourself?" asked Eugenie, looking kindly at her."No, I didn't fall; I threw myself back on my haunches."

°°°°"Well! as it is Eugenie's birthday," said Grandet, "I'll have the stepmended. You people don't know how to set your foot in the corner wherethe wood is still firm."

°°°°Grandet took the candle, leaving his wife, daughter, and servantwithout any other light than that from the hearth, where the flameswere lively, and went into the bakehouse to fetch planks, nails, andtools.

°°°°"Can I help you?" cried Nanon, hearing him hammer on the stairs."No, no! I'm an old hand at it," answered the former cooper.At the moment when Grandet was mending his worm-eaten staircase andwhistling with all his might, in remembrance of the days of his youth,the three Cruchots knocked at the door.

°°°°"Is it you, Monsieur Cruchot?" asked Nanon, peeping through the littlegrating.

°°°°"Yes," answered the president.

°°°°Nanon opened the door, and the light from the hearth, reflected on theceiling, enabled the three Cruchots to find their way into the room."Ha! you've come a-greeting," said Nanon, smelling the flowers."Excuse me, messieurs," cried Grandet, recognizing their voices; "I'llbe with you in a moment. I'm not proud; I am patching up a step on mystaircase."

°°°°"Go on, go on, Monsieur Grandet; a man's house is his castle," saidthe president sententiously.

°°°°Madame and Mademoiselle Grandet rose. The president, profiting by thedarkness, said to Eugenie:

°°°°"Will you permit me, mademoiselle, to wish you, on this the day ofyour birth, a series of happy years and the continuance of the healthwhich you now enjoy?"

°°°°He offered her a huge bouquet of choice flowers which were rare inSaumur; then, taking the heiress by the elbows, he kissed her on eachside of her neck with a complacency that made her blush. Thepresident, who looked like a rusty iron nail, felt that his courtshipwas progressing.

°°°°"Don't stand on ceremony," said Grandet, entering. "How well you dothings on fete-days, Monsieur le president!"

°°°°"When it concerns mademoiselle," said the abbe, armed with his ownbouquet, "every day is a fete-day for my nephew."

°°°°The abbe kissed Eugenie's hand. As for Maitre Cruchot, he boldlykissed her on both cheeks, remarking: "How we sprout up, to be sure!Every year is twelve months."

°°°°As he replaced the candlestick beside the clock, Grandet, who neverforgot his own jokes, and repeated them to satiety when he thoughtthem funny, said,--

°°°°"As this is Eugenie's birthday let us illuminate."

°°°°He carefully took off the branches of the candelabra, put a socket oneach pedestal, took from Nanon a new tallow candle with paper twistedround the end of it, put it into the hollow, made it firm, lit it, andthen sat down beside his wife, looking alternately at his friends, hisdaughter, and the two candles. The Abbe Cruchot, a plump, puffy littleman, with a red wig plastered down and a face like an old femalegambler, said as he stretched out his feet, well shod in stout shoeswith silver buckles: "The des Grassins have not come?"

°°°°"Not yet," said Grandet.

°°°°"But are they coming?" asked the old notary, twisting his face, whichhad as many holes as a collander, into a queer grimace.

°°°°"I think so," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Are your vintages all finished?" said Monsieur de Bonfons to Grandet."Yes, all of them," said the old man, rising to walk up and down theroom, his chest swelling with pride as he said the words, "all ofthem." Through the door of the passage which led to the kitchen he sawla Grande Nanon sitting beside her fire with a candle and preparing tospin there, so as not to intrude among the guests.

°°°°"Nanon," he said, going into the passage, "put out that fire and thatcandle, and come and sit with us. Pardieu! the hall is big enough forall."

°°°°"But monsieur, you are to have the great people."

°°°°"Are not you as good as they? They are descended from Adam, and so areyou."

°°°°Grandet came back to the president and said,--

°°°°"Have you sold your vintage?"

°°°°"No, not I; I shall keep it. If the wine is good this year, it will bebetter two years hence. The proprietors, you know, have made anagreement to keep up the price; and this year the Belgians won't getthe better of us. Suppose they are sent off empty-handed for once,faith! they'll come back."

°°°°"Yes, but let us mind what we are about," said Grandet in a tone whichmade the president tremble.

°°°°"Is he driving some bargain?" thought Cruchot.

°°°°At this moment the knocker announced the des Grassins family, andtheir arrival interrupted a conversation which had begun betweenMadame Grandet and the abbe.

°°°°Madame des Grassins was one of those lively, plump little women, withpink-and-white skins, who, thanks to the claustral calm of theprovinces and the habits of a virtuous life, keep their youth untilthey are past forty. She was like the last rose of autumn,--pleasantto the eye, though the petals have a certain frostiness, and theirperfume is slight. She dressed well, got her fashions from Paris, setthe tone to Saumur, and gave parties. Her husband, formerly aquartermaster in the Imperial guard, who had been desperately woundedat Austerlitz, and had since retired, still retained, in spite of hisrespect for Grandet, the seeming frankness of an old soldier."Good evening, Grandet," he said, holding out his hand and affecting asort of superiority, with which he always crushed the Cruchots."Mademoiselle," he added, turning to Eugenie, after bowing to MadameGrandet, "you are always beautiful and good, and truly I do not knowwhat to wish you." So saying, he offered her a little box which hisservant had brought and which contained a Cape heather,--a flowerlately imported into Europe and very rare.

°°°°Madame des Grassins kissed Eugenie very affectionately, pressed herhand, and said: "Adolphe wishes to make you my little offering."A tall, blond young man, pale and slight, with tolerable manners andseemingly rather shy, although he had just spent eight or ten thousandfrancs over his allowance in Paris, where he had been sent to studylaw, now came forward and kissed Eugenie on both cheeks, offering hera workbox with utensils in silver-gilt,--mere show-case trumpery, inspite of the monogram E.G. in gothic letters rather well engraved,which belonged properly to something in better taste. As she openedit, Eugenie experienced one of those unexpected and perfect delightswhich make a young girl blush and quiver and tremble with pleasure.She turned her eyes to her father as if to ask permission to acceptit, and Monsieur Grandet replied: "Take it, my daughter," in a tonewhich would have made an actor illustrious.

°°°°The three Cruchots felt crushed as they saw the joyous, animated lookcast upon Adolphe des Grassins by the heiress, to whom such richeswere unheard-of. Monsieur des Grassins offered Grandet a pinch ofsnuff, took one himself, shook off the grains as they fell on theribbon of the Legion of honor which was attached to the button-hole ofhis blue surtout; then he looked at the Cruchots with an air thatseemed to say, "Parry that thrust if you can!" Madame des Grassinscast her eyes on the blue vases which held the Cruchot bouquets,looking at the enemy's gifts with the pretended interest of asatirical woman. At this delicate juncture the Abbe Cruchot left thecompany seated in a circle round the fire and joined Grandet at thelower end of the hall. As the two men reached the embrasure of thefarthest window the priest said in the miser's ear: "Those peoplethrow money out of the windows."

°°°°"What does that matter if it gets into my cellar?" retorted the oldwine-grower.

°°°°"If you want to give gilt scissors to your daughter, you have themeans," said the abbe.

°°°°"I give her something better than scissors," answered Grandet."My nephew is a blockhead," thought the abbe as he looked at thepresident, whose rumpled hair added to the ill grace of his browncountenance. "Couldn't he have found some little trifle which costmoney?"

°°°°"We will join you at cards, Madame Grandet," said Madame des Grassins."We might have two tables, as we are all here."

°°°°"As it is Eugenie's birthday you had better play loto all together,"said Pere Grandet: "the two young ones can join"; and the old cooper,who never played any game, motioned to his daughter and Adolphe."Come, Nanon, set the tables."

°°°°"We will help you, Mademoiselle Nanon," said Madame des Grassinsgaily, quite joyous at the joy she had given Eugenie.

°°°°"I have never in my life been so pleased," the heiress said to her; "Ihave never seen anything so pretty."

°°°°"Adolphe brought it from Paris, and he chose it," Madame des Grassinswhispered in her ear.

°°°°"Go on! go on! damned intriguing thing!" thought the president. "Ifyou ever have a suit in court, you or your husband, it shall go hardwith you."

°°°°The notary, sitting in his corner, looked calmly at the abbe, sayingto himself: "The des Grassins may do what they like; my property andmy brother's and that of my nephew amount in all to eleven hundredthousand francs. The des Grassins, at the most, have not half that;besides, they have a daughter. They may give what presents they like;heiress and presents too will be ours one of these days."At half-past eight in the evening the two card-tables were set out.Madame des Grassins succeeded in putting her son beside Eugenie. Theactors in this scene, so full of interest, commonplace as it seems,were provided with bits of pasteboard striped in many colors andnumbered, and with counters of blue glass, and they appeared to belistening to the jokes of the notary, who never drew a number withoutmaking a remark, while in fact they were all thinking of MonsieurGrandet's millions. The old cooper, with inward self-conceit, wascontemplating the pink feathers and the fresh toilet of Madame desGrassins, the martial head of the banker, the faces of Adolphe, thepresident, the abbe, and the notary, saying to himself:--"They are all after my money. Hey! neither the one nor the other shallhave my daughter; but they are useful--useful as harpoons to fishwith."

°°°°This family gaiety in the old gray room dimly lighted by two tallowcandles; this laughter, accompanied by the whirr of Nanon's spinning-wheel, sincere only upon the lips of Eugenie or her mother; thistriviality mingled with important interests; this young girl, who,like certain birds made victims of the price put upon them, was nowlured and trapped by proofs of friendship of which she was the dupe,--all these things contributed to make the scene a melancholy comedy. Isit not, moreover, a drama of all times and all places, though herebrought down to its simplest expression? The figure of Grandet,playing his own game with the false friendship of the two families andgetting enormous profits from it, dominates the scene and throws lightupon it. The modern god,--the only god in whom faith is preserved,--money, is here, in all its power, manifested in a single countenance.The tender sentiments of life hold here but a secondary place; onlythe three pure, simple hearts of Nanon, of Eugenie, and of her motherwere inspired by them. And how much of ignorance there was in thesimplicity of these poor women! Eugenie and her mother knew nothing ofGrandet's wealth; they could only estimate the things of life by theglimmer of their pale ideas, and they neither valued nor despisedmoney, because they were accustomed to do without it. Their feelings,bruised, though they did not know it, but ever-living, were the secretspring of their existence, and made them curious exceptions in themidst of these other people whose lives were purely material.Frightful condition of the human race! there is no one of its joysthat does not come from some species of ignorance.

°°°°At the moment when Madame Grandet had won a loto of sixteen sous,--thelargest ever pooled in that house,--and while la Grande Nanon waslaughing with delight as she watched madame pocketing her riches, theknocker resounded on the house-door with such a noise that the womenall jumped in their chairs.

°°°°"There is no man in Saumur who would knock like that," said thenotary.

°°°°"How can they bang in that way!" exclaimed Nanon; "do they want tobreak in the door?"

°°°°"Who the devil is it?" cried Grandet.

°°°°III

°°°°Nanon took one of the candles and went to open the door, followed byher master.

°°°°"Grandet! Grandet!" cried his wife, moved by a sudden impulse of fear,and running to the door of the room.

°°°°All the players looked at each other.

°°°°"Suppose we all go?" said Monsieur des Grassins; "that knock strikesme as evil-intentioned."

°°°°Hardly was Monsieur des Grassins allowed to see the figure of a youngman, accompanied by a porter from the coach-office carrying two largetrunks and dragging a carpet-bag after him, than Monsieur Grandetturned roughly on his wife and said,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, go back to your loto; leave me to speak withmonsieur."

°°°°Then he pulled the door quickly to, and the excited players returnedto their seats, but did not continue the game.

°°°°"Is it any one belonging to Saumur, Monsieur des Grassins?" asked hiswife.

°°°°"No, it is a traveller."

°°°°"He must have come from Paris."

°°°°"Just so," said the notary, pulling out his watch, which was twoinches thick and looked like a Dutch man-of-war; "it's nine o'clock;the diligence of the Grand Bureau is never late."

°°°°"Is the gentleman young?" inquired the Abbe Cruchot.

°°°°"Yes," answered Monsieur des Grassins, "and he has brought luggagewhich must weigh nearly three tons."

°°°°"Nanon does not come back," said Eugenie.

°°°°"It must be one of your relations," remarked the president."Let us go on with our game," said Madame Grandet gently. "I know fromMonsieur Grandet's tone of voice that he is annoyed; perhaps he wouldnot like to find us talking of his affairs."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said Adolphe to his neighbor, "it is no doubt yourcousin Grandet,--a very good-looking young man; I met him at the ballof Monsieur de Nucingen." Adolphe did not go on, for his mother trodon his toes; and then, asking him aloud for two sous to put on herstake, she whispered: "Will you hold your tongue, you great goose!"At this moment Grandet returned, without la Grande Nanon, whose steps,together with those of the porter, echoed up the staircase; and he wasfollowed by the traveller who had excited such curiosity and so filledthe lively imaginations of those present that his arrival at thisdwelling, and his sudden fall into the midst of this assembly, canonly be likened to that of a snail into a beehive, or the introductionof a peacock into some village poultry-yard.

°°°°"Sit down near the fire," said Grandet.

°°°°Before seating himself, the young stranger saluted the assembledcompany very gracefully. The men rose to answer by a courteousinclination, and the women made a ceremonious bow.

°°°°"You are cold, no doubt, monsieur," said Madame Grandet; "you have,perhaps, travelled from--"

°°°°"Just like all women!" said the old wine-grower, looking up from aletter he was reading. "Do let monsieur rest himself!"

°°°°"But, father, perhaps monsieur would like to take something," saidEugenie.

°°°°"He has got a tongue," said the old man sternly.

°°°°The stranger was the only person surprised by this scene; all theothers were well-used to the despotic ways of the master. However,after the two questions and the two replies had been exchanged, thenewcomer rose, turned his back towards the fire, lifted one foot so asto warm the sole of its boot, and said to Eugenie,--

°°°°"Thank you, my cousin, but I dined at Tours. And," he added, lookingat Grandet, "I need nothing; I am not even tired."

°°°°"Monsieur has come from the capital?" asked Madame des Grassins.Monsieur Charles,--such was the name of the son of Monsieur Grandet ofParis,--hearing himself addressed, took a little eye-glass, suspendedby a chain from his neck, applied it to his right eye to examine whatwas on the table, and also the persons sitting round it. He ogledMadame des Grassins with much impertinence, and said to her, after hehad observed all he wished,--

°°°°"Yes, madame. You are playing at loto, aunt," he added. "Do not let meinterrupt you, I beg; go on with your game: it is too amusing toleave."

°°°°"I was certain it was the cousin," thought Madame des Grassins,casting repeated glances at him.

°°°°"Forty-seven!" cried the old abbe. "Mark it down, Madame des Grassins.Isn't that your number?"

°°°°Monsieur des Grassins put a counter on his wife's card, who satwatching first the cousin from Paris and then Eugenie, withoutthinking of her loto, a prey to mournful presentiments. From time totime the young the heiress glanced furtively at her cousin, and thebanker's wife easily detected a /crescendo/ of surprise and curiosityin her mind.

°°°°Monsieur Charles Grandet, a handsome young man of twenty-two,presented at this moment a singular contrast to the worthyprovincials, who, considerably disgusted by his aristocratic manners,were all studying him with sarcastic intent. This needs anexplanation. At twenty-two, young people are still so near childhoodthat they often conduct themselves childishly. In all probability, outof every hundred of them fully ninety-nine would have behavedprecisely as Monsieur Charles Grandet was now behaving.

°°°°Some days earlier than this his father had told him to go and spendseveral months with his uncle at Saumur. Perhaps Monsieur Grandet wasthinking of Eugenie. Charles, sent for the first time in his life intothe provinces, took a fancy to make his appearance with thesuperiority of a man of fashion, to reduce the whole arrondissement todespair by his luxury, and to make his visit an epoch, importing intothose country regions all the refinements of Parisian life. In short,to explain it in one word, he mean to pass more time at Saumur inbrushing his nails than he ever thought of doing in Paris, and toassume the extra nicety and elegance of dress which a young man offashion often lays aside for a certain negligence which in itself isnot devoid of grace. Charles therefore brought with him a completehunting-costume, the finest gun, the best hunting-knife in theprettiest sheath to be found in all Paris. He brought his wholecollection of waistcoats. They were of all kinds,--gray, black, white,scarabaeus-colored: some were shot with gold, some spangled, some/chined/; some were double-breasted and crossed like a shawl, otherswere straight in the collar; some had turned-over collars, somebuttoned up to the top with gilt buttons. He brought every variety ofcollar and cravat in fashion at that epoch. He brought two ofBuisson's coats and all his finest linen He brought his pretty goldtoilet-set,--a present from his mother. He brought all his dandyknick-knacks, not forgetting a ravishing little desk presented to himby the most amiable of women,--amiable for him, at least,--a fine ladywhom he called Annette and who at this moment was travelling,matrimonially and wearily, in Scotland, a victim to certain suspicionswhich required a passing sacrifice of happiness; in the desk was muchpretty note-paper on which to write to her once a fortnight.In short, it was as complete a cargo of Parisian frivolities as it waspossible for him to get together,--a collection of all the implementsof husbandry with which the youth of leisure tills his life, from thelittle whip which helps to begin a duel, to the handsomely chasedpistols which end it. His father having told him to travel alone andmodestly, he had taken the coupe of the diligence all to himself,rather pleased at not having to damage a delightful travelling-carriage ordered for a journey on which he was to meet his Annette,the great lady who, etc.,--whom he intended to rejoin at Baden in thefollowing June. Charles expected to meet scores of people at hisuncle's house, to hunt in his uncle's forests,--to live, in short, theusual chateau life; he did not know that his uncle was in Saumur, andhad only inquired about him incidentally when asking the way toFroidfond. Hearing that he was in town, he supposed that he shouldfind him in a suitable mansion.

°°°°In order that he might make a becoming first appearance before hisuncle either at Saumur or at Froidfond, he had put on his most eleganttravelling attire, simple yet exquisite,--"adorable," to use the wordwhich in those days summed up the special perfections of a man or athing. At Tours a hairdresser had re-curled his beautiful chestnutlocks; there he changed his linen and put on a black satin cravat,which, combined with a round shirt-collar, framed his fair and smilingcountenance agreeably. A travelling great-coat, only half buttoned up,nipped in his waist and disclosed a cashmere waistcoat crossed infront, beneath which was another waistcoat of white material. Hiswatch, negligently slipped into a pocket, was fastened by a short goldchain to a buttonhole. His gray trousers, buttoned up at the sides,were set off at the seams with patterns of black silk embroidery. Hegracefully twirled a cane, whose chased gold knob did not mar thefreshness of his gray gloves. And to complete all, his cap was inexcellent taste. None but a Parisian, and a Parisian of the upperspheres, could thus array himself without appearing ridiculous; noneother could give the harmony of self-conceit to all these fopperies,which were carried off, however, with a dashing air,--the air of ayoung man who has fine pistols, a sure aim, and Annette.

°°°°Now if you wish to understand the mutual amazement of the provincialparty and the young Parisian; if you would clearly see the brilliancewhich the traveller's elegance cast among the gray shadows of the roomand upon the faces of this family group,--endeavor to picture to yourminds the Cruchots. All three took snuff, and had long ceased torepress the habit of snivelling or to remove the brown blotches whichstrewed the frills of their dingy shirts and the yellowing creases oftheir crumpled collars. Their flabby cravats were twisted into ropesas soon as they wound them about their throats. The enormous quantityof linen which allowed these people to have their clothing washed onlyonce in six months, and to keep it during that time in the depths oftheir closets, also enabled time to lay its grimy and decaying stainsupon it. There was perfect unison of ill-grace and senility aboutthem; their faces, as faded as their threadbare coats, as creased astheir trousers, were worn-out, shrivelled-up, and puckered. As for theothers, the general negligence of their dress, which was incompleteand wanting in freshness,--like the toilet of all country places,where insensibly people cease to dress for others and come to thinkseriously of the price of a pair of gloves,--was in keeping with thenegligence of the Cruchots. A horror of fashion was the only point onwhich the Grassinists and the Cruchotines agreed.

°°°°When the Parisian took up his eye-glass to examine the strangeaccessories of this dwelling,--the joists of the ceiling, the color ofthe woodwork, and the specks which the flies had left there insufficient number to punctuate the "Moniteur" and the "Encyclopaediaof Sciences,"--the loto-players lifted their noses and looked at himwith as much curiosity as they might have felt about a giraffe.Monsieur des Grassins and his son, to whom the appearance of a man offashion was not wholly unknown, were nevertheless as much astonishedas their neighbors, whether it was that they fell under theindefinable influence of the general feeling, or that they reallyshared it as with satirical glances they seemed to say to theircompatriots,--

°°°°"That is what you see in Paris!"

°°°°They were able to examine Charles at their leisure without fearing todisplease the master of the house. Grandet was absorbed in the longletter which he held in his hand; and to read it he had taken the onlycandle upon the card-table, paying no heed to his guests or theirpleasure. Eugenie, to whom such a type of perfection, whether of dressor of person, was absolutely unknown, thought she beheld in her cousina being descended from seraphic spheres. She inhaled with delight thefragrance wafted from the graceful curls of that brilliant head. Shewould have liked to touch the soft kid of the delicate gloves. Sheenvied Charles his small hands, his complexion, the freshness andrefinement of his features. In short,--if it is possible to sum up theeffect this elegant being produced upon an ignorant young girlperpetually employed in darning stockings or in mending her father'sclothes, and whose life flowed on beneath these unclean rafters,seeing none but occasional passers along the silent street,--thisvision of her cousin roused in her soul an emotion of delicate desirelike that inspired in a young man by the fanciful pictures of womendrawn by Westall for the English "Keepsakes," and that engraved by theFindens with so clever a tool that we fear, as we breathe upon thepaper, that the celestial apparitions may be wafted away. Charles drewfrom his pocket a handkerchief embroidered by the great lady nowtravelling in Scotland. As Eugenie saw this pretty piece of work, donein the vacant hours which were lost to love, she looked at her cousinto see if it were possible that he meant to make use of it. Themanners of the young man, his gestures, the way in which he took uphis eye-glass, his affected superciliousness, his contemptuous glanceat the coffer which had just given so much pleasure to the richheiress, and which he evidently regarded as without value, or even asridiculous,--all these things, which shocked the Cruchots and the desGrassins, pleased Eugenie so deeply that before she slept she dreamedlong dreams of her phoenix cousin.

°°°°The loto-numbers were drawn very slowly, and presently the game camesuddenly to an end. La Grand Nanon entered and said aloud: "Madame, Iwant the sheets for monsieur's bed."

°°°°Madame Grandet followed her out. Madame des Grassins said in a lowvoice: "Let us keep our sous and stop playing." Each took his or hertwo sous from the chipped saucer in which they had been put; then theparty moved in a body toward the fire.

°°°°"Have you finished your game?" said Grandet, without looking up fromhis letter.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" replied Madame des Grassins, taking a seat near Charles.Eugenie, prompted by a thought often born in the heart of a young girlwhen sentiment enters it for the first time, left the room to go andhelp her mother and Nanon. Had an able confessor then questioned hershe would, no doubt, have avowed to him that she thought neither ofher mother nor of Nanon, but was pricked by a poignant desire to lookafter her cousin's room and concern herself with her cousin; to supplywhat might be needed, to remedy any forgetfulness, to see that all wasdone to make it, as far as possible, suitable and elegant; and, infact, she arrived in time to prove to her mother and Nanon thateverything still remained to be done. She put into Nanon's head thenotion of passing a warming-pan between the sheets. She herselfcovered the old table with a cloth and requested Nanon to change itevery morning; she convinced her mother that it was necessary to lighta good fire, and persuaded Nanon to bring up a great pile of wood intothe corridor without saying anything to her father. She ran to get,from one of the corner-shelves of the hall, a tray of old lacquerwhich was part of the inheritance of the late Monsieur de laBertelliere, catching up at the same time a six-sided crystal goblet,a little tarnished gilt spoon, an antique flask engraved with cupids,all of which she put triumphantly on the corner of her cousin'schimney-piece. More ideas surged through her head in one quarter of anhour than she had ever had since she came into the world."Mamma," she said, "my cousin will never bear the smell of a tallowcandle; suppose we buy a wax one?" And she darted, swift as a bird, toget the five-franc piece which she had just received for her monthlyexpenses. "Here, Nanon," she cried, "quick!"

°°°°"What will your father say?" This terrible remonstrance was uttered byMadame Grandet as she beheld her daughter armed with an old Sevressugar-basin which Grandet had brought home from the chateau ofFroidfond. "And where will you get the sugar? Are you crazy?""Mamma, Nanon can buy some sugar as well as the candle."

°°°°"But your father?"

°°°°"Surely his nephew ought not to go without a glass of /eau sucree/?Besides, he will not notice it."

°°°°"Your father sees everything," said Madame Grandet, shaking her head.Nanon hesitated; she knew her master.

°°°°"Come, Nanon, go,--because it is my birthday."

°°°°Nanon gave a loud laugh as she heard the first little jest her youngmistress had ever made, and then obeyed her.

°°°°While Eugenie and her mother were trying to embellish the bedroomassigned by Monsieur Grandet for his nephew, Charles himself was theobject of Madame des Grassins' attentions; to all appearances she wassetting her cap at him.

°°°°"You are very courageous, monsieur," she said to the young dandy, "toleave the pleasures of the capital at this season and take up yourabode in Saumur. But if we do not frighten you away, you will findthere are some amusements even here."

°°°°She threw him the ogling glance of the provinces, where women put somuch prudence and reserve into their eyes that they impart to them theprudish concupiscence peculiar to certain ecclesiastics to whom allpleasure is either a theft or an error. Charles was so completely outof his element in this abode, and so far from the vast chateau and thesumptuous life with which his fancy had endowed his uncle, that as helooked at Madame des Grassins he perceived a dim likeness to Parisianfaces. He gracefully responded to the species of invitation addressedto him, and began very naturally a conversation, in which Madame desGrassins gradually lowered her voice so as to bring it into harmonywith the nature of the confidences she was making. With her, as withCharles, there was the need of conference; so after a few momentsspent in coquettish phrases and a little serious jesting, the cleverprovincial said, thinking herself unheard by the others, who werediscussing the sale of wines which at that season filled the heads ofevery one in Saumur,--

°°°°"Monsieur if you will do us the honor to come and see us, you willgive as much pleasure to my husband as to myself. Our salon is theonly one in Saumur where you will find the higher business circlesmingling with the nobility. We belong to both societies, who meet atour house simply because they find it amusing. My husband--I say itwith pride--is as much valued by the one class as by the other. Wewill try to relieve the monotony of your visit here. If you stay allthe time with Monsieur Grandet, good heavens! what will become of you?Your uncle is a sordid miser who thinks of nothing but his vines; youraunt is a pious soul who can't put two ideas together; and your cousinis a little fool, without education, perfectly common, no fortune, whowill spend her life in darning towels."

°°°°"She is really very nice, this woman," thought Charles Grandet as heduly responded to Madame des Grassins' coquetries.

°°°°"It seems to me, wife, that you are taking possession of monsieur,"said the stout banker, laughing.

°°°°On this remark the notary and the president said a few words that weremore or less significant; but the abbe, looking at them slyly, broughttheir thoughts to a focus by taking a pinch of snuff and saying as hehanded round his snuff-box: "Who can do the honors of Saumur formonsieur so well as madame?"

°°°°"Ah! what do you mean by that, monsieur l'abbe?" demanded Monsieur desGrassins.

°°°°"I mean it in the best possible sense for you, for madame, for thetown of Saumur, and for monsieur," said the wily old man, turning toCharles.

°°°°The Abbe Cruchot had guessed the conversation between Charles andMadame des Grassins without seeming to pay attention to it."Monsieur," said Adolphe to Charles with an air which he tried to makefree and easy, "I don't know whether you remember me, but I had thehonor of dancing as your /vis-a-vis/ at a ball given by the Baron deNucingen, and--"

°°°°"Perfectly; I remember perfectly, monsieur," answered Charles, pleasedto find himself the object of general attention.

°°°°"Monsieur is your son?" he said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°The abbe looked at her maliciously.

°°°°"Yes, monsieur," she answered.

°°°°"Then you were very young when you were in Paris?" said Charles,addressing Adolphe.

°°°°"You must know, monsieur," said the abbe, "that we send them toBabylon as soon as they are weaned."

°°°°Madame des Grassins examined the abbe with a glance of extremepenetration.

°°°°"It is only in the provinces," he continued, "that you will find womenof thirty and more years as fresh as madame, here, with a son about totake his degree. I almost fancy myself back in the days when the youngmen stood on chairs in the ball-room to see you dance, madame," saidthe abbe, turning to his female adversary. "To me, your triumphs arebut of yesterday--"

°°°°"The old rogue!" thought Madame Grassins; "can he have guessed myintentions?"

°°°°"It seems that I shall have a good deal of success in Saumur," thoughtCharles as he unbuttoned his great-coat, put a hand into hiswaistcoat, and cast a glance into the far distance, to imitate theattitude which Chantrey has given to Lord Byron.

°°°°The inattention of Pere Grandet, or, to speak more truly, thepreoccupation of mind into which the reading of the letter had plungedhim, did not escape the vigilance of the notary and the president, whotried to guess the contents of the letter by the almost imperceptiblemotions of the miser's face, which was then under the full light ofthe candle. He maintained the habitual calm of his features withevident difficulty; we may, in fact, picture to ourselves thecountenance such a man endeavored to preserve as he read the fatalletter which here follows:--

°°°°My Brother,--It is almost twenty-three years since we have seen

°°°°each other. My marriage was the occasion of our last interview,

°°°°after which we parted, and both of us were happy. Assuredly I

°°°°could not then foresee that you would one day be the prop of the

°°°°family whose prosperity you then predicted.

°°°°When you hold this letter within your hands I shall be no longer

°°°°living. In the position I now hold I cannot survive the disgrace

°°°°of bankruptcy. I have waited on the edge of the gulf until the

°°°°last moment, hoping to save myself. The end has come, I must sink

°°°°into it. The double bankruptcies of my broker and of Roguin, my

°°°°notary, have carried off my last resources and left me nothing. I

°°°°have the bitterness of owing nearly four millions, with assets not

°°°°more than twenty-five per cent in value to pay them. The wines in

°°°°my warehouses suffer from the fall in prices caused by the

°°°°abundance and quality of your vintage. In three days Paris will

°°°°cry out: "Monsieur Grandet was a knave!" and I, an honest man,

°°°°shall be lying in my winding-sheet of infamy. I deprive my son of

°°°°a good name, which I have stained, and the fortune of his mother,

°°°°which I have lost. He knows nothing of all this,--my unfortunate

°°°°child whom I idolize! We parted tenderly. He was ignorant,

°°°°happily, that the last beatings of my heart were spent in that

°°°°farewell. Will he not some day curse me? My brother, my brother!

°°°°the curses of our children are horrible; they can appeal against

°°°°ours, but theirs are irrevocable. Grandet, you are my elder

°°°°brother, you owe me your protection; act for me so that Charles

°°°°may cast no bitter words upon my grave! My brother, if I were

°°°°writing with my blood, with my tears, no greater anguish could I

°°°°put into this letter,--nor as great, for then I should weep, I

°°°°should bleed, I should die, I should suffer no more, but now I

°°°°suffer and look at death with dry eyes.

°°°°From henceforth you are my son's father; he has no relations, as

°°°°you well know, on his mother's side. Why did I not consider social

°°°°prejudices? Why did I yield to love? Why did I marry the natural

°°°°daughter of a great lord? Charles has no family. Oh, my unhappy

°°°°son! my son! Listen, Grandet! I implore nothing for myself,--

°°°°besides, your property may not be large enough to carry a mortgage

°°°°of three millions,--but for my son! Brother, my suppliant hands

°°°°are clasped as I think of you; behold them! Grandet, I confide my

°°°°son to you in dying, and I look at the means of death with less

°°°°pain as I think that you will be to him a father. He loved me

°°°°well, my Charles; I was good to him, I never thwarted him; he will

°°°°not curse me. Ah, you see! he is gentle, he is like his mother, he

°°°°will cause you no grief. Poor boy! accustomed to all the

°°°°enjoyments of luxury, he knows nothing of the privations to which

°°°°you and I were condemned by the poverty of our youth. And I leave

°°°°him ruined! alone! Yes, all my friends will avoid him, and it is I

°°°°who have brought this humiliation upon him! Would that I had the

°°°°force to send him with one thrust into the heavens to his mother's

°°°°side! Madness! I come back to my disaster--to his. I send him to

°°°°you that you may tell him in some fitting way of my death, of his

°°°°future fate. Be a father to him, but a good father. Do not tear

°°°°him all at once from his idle life, it would kill him. I beg him

°°°°on my knees to renounce all rights that, as his mother's heir, he

°°°°may have on my estate. But the prayer is superfluous; he is

°°°°honorable, and he will feel that he must not appear among my

°°°°creditors. Bring him to see this at the right time; reveal to him

°°°°the hard conditions of the life I have made for him: and if he

°°°°still has tender thoughts of me, tell him in my name that all is

°°°°not lost for him. Yes, work, labor, which saved us both, may give

°°°°him back the fortune of which I have deprived him; and if he

°°°°listens to his father's voice as it reaches him from the grave, he

°°°°will go the Indies. My brother, Charles is an upright and

°°°°courageous young man; give him the wherewithal to make his

°°°°venture; he will die sooner than not repay you the funds which you

°°°°may lend him. Grandet! if you will not do this, you will lay up

°°°°for yourself remorse. Ah, should my child find neither tenderness

°°°°nor succor in you, I would call down the vengeance of God upon

°°°°your cruelty!

°°°°If I had been able to save something from the wreck, I might have

°°°°had the right to leave him at least a portion of his mother's

°°°°property; but my last monthly payments have absorbed everything. I

°°°°did not wish to die uncertain of my child's fate; I hoped to feel

°°°°a sacred promise in a clasp of your hand which might have warmed

°°°°my heart: but time fails me. While Charles is journeying to you I

°°°°shall be preparing my assignment. I shall endeavor to show by the

°°°°order and good faith of my accounts that my disaster comes neither

°°°°from a faulty life nor from dishonesty. It is for my son's sake

°°°°that I strive to do this.

°°°°Farewell, my brother! May the blessing of God be yours for the

°°°°generous guardianship I lay upon you, and which, I doubt not, you

°°°°will accept. A voice will henceforth and forever pray for you in

°°°°that world where we must all go, and where I am now as you read

°°°°these lines.

°°°°Victor-Ange-Guillaume Grandet.

°°°°"So you are talking?" said Pere Grandet as he carefully folded theletter in its original creases and put it into his waistcoat-pocket.He looked at his nephew with a humble, timid air, beneath which he hidhis feelings and his calculations. "Have you warmed yourself?" he saidto him.

°°°°"Thoroughly, my dear uncle."

°°°°"Well, where are the women?" said his uncle, already forgetting thathis nephew was to sleep at the house. At this moment Eugenie andMadame Grandet returned.

°°°°"Is the room all ready?" said Grandet, recovering his composure."Yes, father."

°°°°"Well then, my nephew, if you are tired, Nanon shall show you yourroom. It isn't a dandy's room; but you will excuse a poor wine-growerwho never has a penny to spare. Taxes swallow up everything.""We do not wish to intrude, Grandet," said the banker; "you may wantto talk to your nephew, and therefore we will bid you good-night."At these words the assembly rose, and each made a parting bow inkeeping with his or her own character. The old notary went to the doorto fetch his lantern and came back to light it, offering to accompanythe des Grassins on their way. Madame des Grassins had not foreseenthe incident which brought the evening prematurely to an end, herservant therefore had not arrived.

°°°°"Will you do me the honor to take my arm, madame?" said the abbe."Thank you, monsieur l'abbe, but I have my son," she answered dryly."Ladies cannot compromise themselves with me," said the abbe."Take Monsieur Cruchot's arm," said her husband.

°°°°The abbe walked off with the pretty lady so quickly that they weresoon some distance in advance of the caravan.

°°°°"That is a good-looking young man, madame," he said, pressing her arm."Good-by to the grapes, the vintage is done. It is all over with us.We may as well say adieu to Mademoiselle Grandet. Eugenie will belongto the dandy. Unless this cousin is enamoured of some Parisian woman,your son Adolphe will find another rival in--"

°°°°"Not at all, monsieur l'abbe. This young man cannot fail to see thatEugenie is a little fool,--a girl without the least freshness. Did younotice her to-night? She was as yellow as a quince."

°°°°"Perhaps you made the cousin notice it?"

°°°°"I did not take the trouble--"

°°°°"Place yourself always beside Eugenie, madame, and you need never takethe trouble to say anything to the young man against his cousin; hewill make his own comparisons, which--"

°°°°"Well, he has promised to dine with me the day after to-morrow.""Ah! if you only /would/, madame--" said the abbe.

°°°°"What is it that you wish me to do, monsieur l'abbe? Do you mean tooffer me bad advice? I have not reached the age of thirty-nine,without a stain upon my reputation, thank God! to compromise myselfnow, even for the empire of the Great Mogul. You and I are of an agewhen we both know the meaning of words. For an ecclesiastic, youcertainly have ideas that are very incongruous. Fie! it is worthy ofFaublas!"

°°°°"You have read Faublas?"

°°°°"No, monsieur l'abbe; I meant to say the /Liaisons dangereuses/.""Ah! that book is infinitely more moral," said the abbe, laughing."But you make me out as wicked as a young man of the present day; Ionly meant--"

°°°°"Do you dare to tell me you were not thinking of putting wicked thingsinto my head? Isn't it perfectly clear? If this young man--who I admitis very good-looking--were to make love to me, he would not think ofhis cousin. In Paris, I know, good mothers do devote themselves inthis way to the happiness and welfare of their children; but we livein the provinces, monsieur l'abbe."

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"And," she continued, "I do not want, and Adolphe himself would notwant, a hundred millions brought at such a price."

°°°°"Madame, I said nothing about a hundred millions; that temptationmight be too great for either of us to withstand. Only, I do thinkthat an honest woman may permit herself, in all honor, certainharmless little coquetries, which are, in fact, part of her socialduty and which--"

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"Are we not bound, madame, to make ourselves agreeable to each other?--Permit me to blow my nose.--I assure you, madame," he resumed, "thatthe young gentleman ogled you through his glass in a more flatteringmanner than he put on when he looked at me; but I forgive him fordoing homage to beauty in preference to old age--"

°°°°"It is quite apparent," said the president in his loud voice, "thatMonsieur Grandet of Paris has sent his son to Saumur with extremelymatrimonial intentions."

°°°°"But in that case the cousin wouldn't have fallen among us like acannon-ball," answered the notary.

°°°°"That doesn't prove anything," said Monsieur des Grassins; "the oldmiser is always making mysteries."

°°°°"Des Grassins, my friend, I have invited the young man to dinner. Youmust go and ask Monsieur and Madame de Larsonniere and the du Hautoys,with the beautiful demoiselle du Hautoy, of course. I hope she will beproperly dressed; that jealous mother of hers does make such a frightof her! Gentlemen, I trust that you will all do us the honor to come,"she added, stopping the procession to address the two Cruchots."Here you are at home, madame," said the notary.

°°°°After bowing to the three des Grassins, the three Cruchots returnedhome, applying their provincial genius for analysis to studying, underall its aspects, the great event of the evening, which undoubtedlychanged the respective positions of Grassinists and Cruchotines. Theadmirable common-sense which guided all the actions of these greatmachinators made each side feel the necessity of a momentary allianceagainst a common enemy. Must they not mutually hinder Eugenie fromloving her cousin, and the cousin from thinking of Eugenie? Could theParisian resist the influence of treacherous insinuations, soft-spokencalumnies, slanders full of faint praise and artless denials, whichshould be made to circle incessantly about him and deceive him?IV

°°°°When the four relations were left alone, Monsieur Grandet said to hisnephew,--

°°°°"We must go to bed. It is too late to talk about the matters whichhave brought you here; to-morrow we will take a suitable moment. Webreakfast at eight o'clock; at midday we eat a little fruit or a bitof bread, and drink a glass of white wine; and we dine, like theParisians, at five o'clock. That's the order of the day. If you liketo go and see the town and the environs you are free to do so. Youwill excuse me if my occupations do not permit me to accompany you.You may perhaps hear people say that I am rich,--Monsieur Grandetthis, Monsieur Grandet that. I let them talk; their gossip does nothurt my credit. But I have not a penny; I work in my old age like anapprentice whose worldly goods are a bad plane and two good arms.Perhaps you'll soon know yourself what a franc costs when you have gotto sweat for it. Nanon, where are the candles?"

°°°°"I trust, my nephew, that you will find all you want," said MadameGrandet; "but if you should need anything else, you can call Nanon.""My dear aunt, I shall need nothing; I have, I believe, broughteverything with me. Permit me to bid you good-night, and my youngcousin also."

°°°°Charles took a lighted wax candle from Nanon's hand,--an Anjou candle,very yellow in color, and so shopworn that it looked like tallow anddeceived Monsieur Grandet, who, incapable of suspecting its presenceunder his roof, did not perceive this magnificence.

°°°°"I will show you the way," he said.

°°°°Instead of leaving the hall by the door which opened under thearchway, Grandet ceremoniously went through the passage which dividedthe hall from the kitchen. A swing-door, furnished with a large ovalpane of glass, shut this passage from the staircase, so as to fend offthe cold air which rushed through it. But the north wind whistled nonethe less keenly in winter, and, in spite of the sand-bags at thebottom of the doors of the living-room, the temperature within couldscarcely be kept at a proper height. Nanon went to bolt the outerdoor; then she closed the hall and let loose a wolf-dog, whose barkwas so strangled that he seemed to have laryngitis. This animal, notedfor his ferocity, recognized no one but Nanon; the two untutoredchildren of the fields understood each other.

°°°°When Charles saw the yellow, smoke-stained walls of the well of thestaircase, where each worm-eaten step shook under the heavy foot-fallof his uncle, his expectations began to sober more and more. Hefancied himself in a hen-roost. His aunt and cousin, to whom he turnedan inquiring look, were so used to the staircase that they did notguess the cause of his amazement, and took the glance for anexpression of friendliness, which they answered by a smile that madehim desperate.

°°°°"Why the devil did my father send me to such a place?" he said tohimself.

°°°°When they reached the first landing he saw three doors painted inEtruscan red and without casings,--doors sunk in the dusty walls andprovided with iron bars, which in fact were bolts, each ending withthe pattern of a flame, as did both ends of the long sheath of thelock. The first door at the top of the staircase, which opened into aroom directly above the kitchen, was evidently walled up. In fact, theonly entrance to that room was through Grandet's bedchamber; the roomitself was his office. The single window which lighted it, on the sideof the court, was protected by a lattice of strong iron bars. No one,not even Madame Grandet, had permission to enter it. The old man choseto be alone, like an alchemist in his laboratory. There, no doubt,some hiding-place had been ingeniously constructed; there the title-deeds of property were stored; there hung the scales on which to weighthe louis; there were devised, by night and secretly, the estimates,the profits, the receipts, so that business men, finding Grandetprepared at all points, imagined that he got his cue from fairies ordemons; there, no doubt, while Nanon's loud snoring shook the rafters,while the wolf-dog watched and yawned in the courtyard, while Madameand Mademoiselle Grandet were quietly sleeping, came the old cooper tocuddle, to con over, to caress and clutch and clasp his gold. Thewalls were thick, the screens sure. He alone had the key of thislaboratory, where--so people declared--he studied the maps on whichhis fruit-trees were marked, and calculated his profits to a vine, andalmost to a twig.

°°°°The door of Eugenie's chamber was opposite to the walled-up entranceto this room. At the other end of the landing were the appartements ofthe married pair, which occupied the whole front of the house. MadameGrandet had a room next to that of Eugenie, which was entered througha glass door. The master's chamber was separated from that of his wifeby a partition, and from the mysterious strong-room by a thick wall.Pere Grandet lodged his nephew on the second floor, in the highmansarde attic which was above his own bedroom, so that he might hearhim if the young man took it into his head to go and come. WhenEugenie and her mother reached the middle of the landing they kissedeach other for good-night; then with a few words of adieu to Charles,cold upon the lips, but certainly very warm in the heart of the younggirl, they withdrew into their own chambers.

°°°°"Here you are in your room, my nephew," said Pere Grandet as he openedthe door. "If you need to go out, call Nanon; without her, beware! thedog would eat you up without a word. Sleep well. Good-night. Ha! why,they have made you a fire!" he cried.

°°°°At this moment Nanon appeared with the warming pan.

°°°°"Here's something more!" said Monsieur Grandet. "Do you take my nephewfor a lying-in woman? Carry off your brazier, Nanon!"

°°°°"But, monsieur, the sheets are damp, and this gentleman is as delicateas a woman."

°°°°"Well, go on, as you've taken it into your head," said Grandet,pushing her by the shoulders; "but don't set things on fire." Sosaying, the miser went down-stairs, grumbling indistinct sentences.Charles stood aghast in the midst of his trunks. After casting hiseyes on the attic-walls covered with that yellow paper sprinkled withbouquets so well known in dance-houses, on the fireplace of ribbedstone whose very look was chilling, on the chairs of yellow wood withvarnished cane seats that seemed to have more than the usual fourangles, on the open night-table capacious enough to hold a smallsergeant-at-arms, on the meagre bit of rag-carpet beside the bed, onthe tester whose cloth valance shook as if, devoured by moths, it wasabout to fall, he turned gravely to la Grande Nanon and said,--"Look here! my dear woman, just tell me, am I in the house of MonsieurGrandet, formerly mayor of Saumur, and brother to Monsieur Grandet ofParis?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur; and a very good, a very kind, a very perfectgentleman. Shall I help you to unpack your trunks?"

°°°°"Faith! yes, if you will, my old trooper. Didn't you serve in themarines of the Imperial Guard?"

°°°°"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Nanon. "What's that,--the marines of the guard?Is it salt? Does it go in the water?"

°°°°"Here, get me my dressing-gown out of that valise; there's the key."Nanon was wonder-struck by the sight of a dressing-gown made of greensilk, brocaded with gold flowers of an antique design.

°°°°"Are you going to put that on to go to bed with?" she asked."Yes."

°°°°"Holy Virgin! what a beautiful altar-cloth it would make for theparish church! My dear darling monsieur, give it to the church, andyou'll save your soul; if you don't, you'll lose it. Oh, how nice youlook in it! I must call mademoiselle to see you."

°°°°"Come, Nanon, if Nanon you are, hold your tongue; let me go to bed.I'll arrange my things to-morrow. If my dressing-gown pleases you somuch, you shall save your soul. I'm too good a Christian not to giveit to you when I go away, and you can do what you like with it."Nanon stood rooted to the ground, gazing at Charles and unable to putfaith into his words.

°°°°"Good night, Nanon."

°°°°"What in the world have I come here for?" thought Charles as he wentto sleep. "My father is not a fool; my journey must have some object.Pshaw! put off serious thought till the morrow, as some Greek idiotsaid."

°°°°"Blessed Virgin! how charming he is, my cousin!" Eugenie was saying,interrupting her prayers, which that night at least were neverfinished.

°°°°Madame Grandet had no thoughts at all as she went to bed. She heardthe miser walking up and down his room through the door ofcommunication which was in the middle of the partition. Like all timidwomen, she had studied the character of her lord. Just as the petrelforesees the storm, she knew by imperceptible signs when an inwardtempest shook her husband; and at such times, to use an expression ofher own, she "feigned dead."

°°°°Grandet gazed at the door lined with sheet-iron which he lately put tohis sanctum, and said to himself,--

°°°°"What a crazy idea of my brother to bequeath his son to me! A finelegacy! I have not fifty francs to give him. What are fifty francs toa dandy who looked at my barometer as if he meant to make firewood ofit!"

°°°°In thinking over the consequences of that legacy of anguish Grandetwas perhaps more agitated than his brother had been at the moment ofwriting it.

°°°°"I shall have that golden robe," thought Nanon, who went to sleeptricked out in her altar-cloth, dreaming for the first time in herlife of flowers, embroidery, and damask, just as Eugenie was dreamingof love.

°°°°*****

°°°°In the pure and monotonous life of young girls there comes a delicioushour when the sun sheds its rays into their soul, when the flowersexpress their thoughts, when the throbbings of the heart send upwardto the brain their fertilizing warmth and melt all thoughts into avague desire,--day of innocent melancholy and of dulcet joys! Whenbabes begin to see, they smile; when a young girl first perceives thesentiment of nature, she smiles as she smiled when an infant. If lightis the first love of life, is not love a light to the heart? Themoment to see within the veil of earthly things had come for Eugenie.An early riser, like all provincial girls, she was up betimes and saidher prayers, and then began the business of dressing,--a businesswhich henceforth was to have a meaning. First she brushed and smoothedher chestnut hair and twisted its heavy masses to the top of her headwith the utmost care, preventing the loose tresses from straying, andgiving to her head a symmetry which heightened the timid candor of herface; for the simplicity of these accessories accorded well with theinnocent sincerity of its lines. As she washed her hands again andagain in the cold water which hardened and reddened the skin, shelooked at her handsome round arms and asked herself what her cousindid to make his hands so softly white, his nails so delicately curved.She put on new stockings and her prettiest shoes. She laced her corsetstraight, without skipping a single eyelet. And then, wishing for thefirst time in her life to appear to advantage, she felt the joy ofhaving a new gown, well made, which rendered her attractive.As she finished her toilet the clock of the parish church struck thehour; to her astonishment, it was only seven. The desire of havingplenty of time for dressing carefully had led her to get up too early.Ignorant of the art of retouching every curl and studying everyeffect, Eugenie simply crossed her arms, sat down by the window, andlooked at the court-yard, the narrow garden, and the high terracedwalls that over-topped it: a dismal, hedged-in prospect, yet notwholly devoid of those mysterious beauties which belong to solitary oruncultivated nature. Near the kitchen was a well surrounded by a curb,with a pulley fastened to a bent iron rod clasped by a vine whoseleaves were withered, reddened, and shrivelled by the season. Fromthence the tortuous shoots straggled to the wall, clutched it, and ranthe whole length of the house, ending near the wood-pile, where thelogs were ranged with as much precision as the books in a library. Thepavement of the court-yard showed the black stains produced in time bylichens, herbage, and the absence of all movement or friction. Thethick walls wore a coating of green moss streaked with waving brownlines, and the eight stone steps at the bottom of the court-yard whichled up to the gate of the garden were disjointed and hidden beneathtall plants, like the tomb of a knight buried by his widow in the daysof the Crusades. Above a foundation of moss-grown, crumbling stoneswas a trellis of rotten wood, half fallen from decay; over themclambered and intertwined at will a mass of clustering creepers. Oneach side of the latticed gate stretched the crooked arms of twostunted apple-trees. Three parallel walks, gravelled and separatedfrom each other by square beds, where the earth was held in by box-borders, made the garden, which terminated, beneath a terrace of theold walls, in a group of lindens. At the farther end were raspberry-bushes; at the other, near the house, an immense walnut-tree droopedits branches almost into the window of the miser's sanctum.A clear day and the beautiful autumnal sun common to the banks of theLoire was beginning to melt the hoar-frost which the night had laid onthese picturesque objects, on the walls, and on the plants whichswathed the court-yard. Eugenie found a novel charm in the aspect ofthings lately so insignificant to her. A thousand confused thoughtscame to birth in her mind and grew there, as the sunbeams grew withoutalong the wall. She felt that impulse of delight, vague, inexplicable,which wraps the moral being as a cloud wraps the physical body. Herthoughts were all in keeping with the details of this strangelandscape, and the harmonies of her heart blended with the harmoniesof nature. When the sun reached an angle of the wall where the "Venus-hair" of southern climes drooped its thick leaves, lit with thechanging colors of a pigeon's breast, celestial rays of hope illuminedthe future to her eyes, and thenceforth she loved to gaze upon thatpiece of wall, on its pale flowers, its blue harebells, its wiltingherbage, with which she mingled memories as tender as those ofchildhood. The noise made by each leaf as it fell from its twig in thevoid of that echoing court gave answer to the secret questionings ofthe young girl, who could have stayed there the livelong day withoutperceiving the flight of time. Then came tumultuous heavings of thesoul. She rose often, went to her glass, and looked at herself, as anauthor in good faith looks at his work to criticise it and blame it inhis own mind.

°°°°"I am not beautiful enough for him!" Such was Eugenie's thought,--ahumble thought, fertile in suffering. The poor girl did not do herselfjustice; but modesty, or rather fear, is among the first of love'svirtues. Eugenie belonged to the type of children with sturdyconstitutions, such as we see among the lesser bourgeoisie, whosebeauties always seem a little vulgar; and yet, though she resembledthe Venus of Milo, the lines of her figure were ennobled by the softerChristian sentiment which purifies womanhood and gives it adistinction unknown to the sculptors of antiquity. She had an enormoushead, with the masculine yet delicate forehead of the Jupiter ofPhidias, and gray eyes, to which her chaste life, penetrating fullyinto them, carried a flood of light. The features of her round face,formerly fresh and rosy, were at one time swollen by the small-pox,which destroyed the velvet texture of the skin, though it kindly leftno other traces, and her cheek was still so soft and delicate that hermother's kiss made a momentary red mark upon it. Her nose was somewhattoo thick, but it harmonized well with the vermilion mouth, whoselips, creased in many lines, were full of love and kindness. Thethroat was exquisitely round. The bust, well curved and carefullycovered, attracted the eye and inspired reverie. It lacked, no doubt,the grace which a fitting dress can bestow; but to a connoisseur thenon-flexibility of her figure had its own charm. Eugenie, tall andstrongly made, had none of the prettiness which pleases the masses;but she was beautiful with a beauty which the spirit recognizes, andnone but artists truly love. A painter seeking here below for a typeof Mary's celestial purity, searching womankind for those proud modesteyes which Raphael divined, for those virgin lines, often due tochances of conception, which the modesty of Christian life alone canbestow or keep unchanged,--such a painter, in love with his ideal,would have found in the face of Eugenie the innate nobleness that isignorant of itself; he would have seen beneath the calmness of thatbrow a world of love; he would have felt, in the shape of the eyes, inthe fall of the eyelids, the presence of the nameless something thatwe call divine. Her features, the contour of her head, which noexpression of pleasure had ever altered or wearied, were like thelines of the horizon softly traced in the far distance across thetranquil lakes. That calm and rosy countenance, margined with lightlike a lovely full-blown flower, rested the mind, held the eye, andimparted the charm of the conscience that was there reflected. Eugeniewas standing on the shore of life where young illusions flower, wheredaisies are gathered with delights ere long to be unknown; and thusshe said, looking at her image in the glass, unconscious as yet oflove: "I am too ugly; he will not notice me."

°°°°Then she opened the door of her chamber which led to the staircase,and stretched out her neck to listen for the household noises. "He isnot up," she thought, hearing Nanon's morning cough as the good soulwent and came, sweeping out the halls, lighting her fire, chaining thedog, and speaking to the beasts in the stable. Eugenie at once wentdown and ran to Nanon, who was milking the cow.

°°°°"Nanon, my good Nanon, make a little cream for my cousin's breakfast.""Why, mademoiselle, you should have thought of that yesterday," saidNanon, bursting into a loud peal of laughter. "I can't make cream.Your cousin is a darling, a darling! oh, that he is! You should haveseen him in his dressing-gown, all silk and gold! I saw him, I did! Hewears linen as fine as the surplice of monsieur le cure.""Nanon, please make us a /galette/."

°°°°"And who'll give me wood for the oven, and flour and butter for thecakes?" said Nanon, who in her function of prime-minister to Grandetassumed at times enormous importance in the eyes of Eugenie and hermother. "Mustn't rob the master to feast the cousin. You ask him forbutter and flour and wood: he's your father, perhaps he'll give yousome. See! there he is now, coming to give out the provisions."Eugenie escaped into the garden, quite frightened as she heard thestaircase shaking under her father's step. Already she felt theeffects of that virgin modesty and that special consciousness ofhappiness which lead us to fancy, not perhaps without reason, that ourthoughts are graven on our foreheads and are open to the eyes of all.Perceiving for the first time the cold nakedness of her father'shouse, the poor girl felt a sort of rage that she could not put it inharmony with her cousin's elegance. She felt the need of doingsomething for him,--what, she did not know. Ingenuous and truthful,she followed her angelic nature without mistrusting her impressions orher feelings. The mere sight of her cousin had wakened within her thenatural yearnings of a woman,--yearnings that were the more likely todevelop ardently because, having reached her twenty-third year, shewas in the plenitude of her intelligence and her desires. For thefirst time in her life her heart was full of terror at the sight ofher father; in him she saw the master of the fate, and she fanciedherself guilty of wrong-doing in hiding from his knowledge certainthoughts. She walked with hasty steps, surprised to breathe a purerair, to feel the sun's rays quickening her pulses, to absorb fromtheir heat a moral warmth and a new life. As she turned over in hermind some stratagem by which to get the cake, a quarrel--an event asrare as the sight of swallows in winter--broke out between la GrandeNanon and Grandet. Armed with his keys, the master had come to doleout provisions for the day's consumption.

°°°°"Is there any bread left from yesterday?" he said to Nanon."Not a crumb, monsieur."

°°°°Grandet took a large round loaf, well floured and moulded in one ofthe flat baskets which they use for baking in Anjou, and was about tocut it, when Nanon said to him,--

°°°°"We are five, to-day, monsieur."

°°°°"That's true," said Grandet, "but your loaves weigh six pounds;there'll be some left. Besides, these young fellows from Paris don'teat bread, you'll see."

°°°°"Then they must eat /frippe/?" said Nanon.

°°°°/Frippe/ is a word of the local lexicon of Anjou, and means anyaccompaniment of bread, from butter which is spread upon it, thecommonest kind of /frippe/, to peach preserve, the most distinguishedof all the /frippes/; those who in their childhood have licked the/frippe/ and left the bread, will comprehend the meaning of Nanon'sspeech.

°°°°"No," answered Grandet, "they eat neither bread nor /frippe/; they aresomething like marriageable girls."

°°°°After ordering the meals for the day with his usual parsimony, thegoodman, having locked the closets containing the supplies, was aboutto go towards the fruit-garden, when Nanon stopped him to say,--"Monsieur, give me a little flour and some butter, and I'll make a/galette/ for the young ones."

°°°°"Are you going to pillage the house on account of my nephew?""I wasn't thinking any more of your nephew than I was of your dog,--not more than you think yourself; for, look here, you've only forkedout six bits of sugar. I want eight."

°°°°"What's all this, Nanon? I have never seen you like this before. Whathave you got in your head? Are you the mistress here? You sha'n't havemore than six pieces of sugar."

°°°°"Well, then, how is your nephew to sweeten his coffee?"

°°°°"With two pieces; I'll go without myself."

°°°°"Go without sugar at your age! I'd rather buy you some out of my ownpocket."

°°°°"Mind your own business."

°°°°In spite of the recent fall in prices, sugar was still in Grandet'seyes the most valuable of all the colonial products; to him it wasalways six francs a pound. The necessity of economizing it, acquiredunder the Empire, had grown to be the most inveterate of his habits.All women, even the greatest ninnies, know how to dodge and dodge toget their ends; Nanon abandoned the sugar for the sake of getting the/galette/.

°°°°"Mademoiselle!" she called through the window, "do you want some/galette/?"

°°°°"No, no," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Come, Nanon," said Grandet, hearing his daughter's voice. "See here."He opened the cupboard where the flour was kept, gave her a cupful,and added a few ounces of butter to the piece he had already cut off."I shall want wood for the oven," said the implacable Nanon."Well, take what you want," he answered sadly; "but in that case youmust make us a fruit-tart, and you'll cook the whole dinner in theoven. In that way you won't need two fires."

°°°°"Goodness!" cried Nanon, "you needn't tell me that."

°°°°Grandet cast a look that was well-nigh paternal upon his faithfuldeputy.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she cried, when his back was turned, "we shall havethe /galette/."

°°°°Pere Grandet returned from the garden with the fruit and arranged aplateful on the kitchen-table.

°°°°"Just see, monsieur," said Nanon, "what pretty boots your nephew has.What leather! why it smells good! What does he clean it with, Iwonder? Am I to put your egg-polish on it?"

°°°°"Nanon, I think eggs would injure that kind of leather. Tell him youdon't know how to black morocco; yes, that's morocco. He will get yousomething himself in Saumur to polish those boots with. I have heardthat they put sugar into the blacking to make it shine."

°°°°"They look good to eat," said the cook, putting the boots to her nose."Bless me! if they don't smell like madame's eau-de-cologne. Ah! howfunny!"

°°°°"Funny!" said her master. "Do you call it funny to put more money intoboots than the man who stands in them is worth?"

°°°°"Monsieur," she said, when Grandet returned the second time, afterlocking the fruit-garden, "won't you have the /pot-au-feu/ put on onceor twice a week on account of your nephew?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Am I to go to the butcher's?"

°°°°"Certainly not. We will make the broth of fowls; the farmers willbring them. I shall tell Cornoiller to shoot some crows; they make thebest soup in the world."

°°°°"Isn't it true, monsieur, that crows eat the dead?"

°°°°"You are a fool, Nanon. They eat what they can get, like the rest ofthe world. Don't we all live on the dead? What are legacies?"Monsieur Grandet, having no further orders to give, drew out hiswatch, and seeing that he had half an hour to dispose of beforebreakfast, he took his hat, went and kissed his daughter, and said toher:

°°°°"Do you want to come for a walk in the fields, down by the Loire? Ihave something to do there."

°°°°Eugenie fetched her straw bonnet, lined with pink taffeta; then thefather and daughter went down the winding street to the shore."Where are you going at this early hour?" said Cruchot, the notary,meeting them.

°°°°"To see something," answered Grandet, not duped by the matutinalappearance of his friend.

°°°°When Pere Grandet went to "see something," the notary knew byexperience there was something to be got by going with him; so hewent.

°°°°"Come, Cruchot," said Grandet, "you are one of my friends. I'll showyou what folly it is to plant poplar-trees on good ground.""Do you call the sixty thousand francs that you pocketed for thosethat were in your fields down by the Loire, folly?" said MaitreCruchot, opening his eyes with amazement. "What luck you have had! Tocut down your trees at the very time they ran short of white-wood atNantes, and to sell them at thirty francs!"

°°°°Eugenie listened, without knowing that she approached the most solemnmoment of her whole life, and that the notary was about to bring downupon her head a paternal and supreme sentence. Grandet had now reachedthe magnificent fields which he owned on the banks of the Loire, wherethirty workmen were employed in clearing away, filling up, andlevelling the spots formerly occupied by the poplars.

°°°°"Maitre Cruchot, see how much ground this tree once took up! Jean," hecried to a laborer, "m-m-measure with your r-r-rule, b-both ways.""Four times eight feet," said the man.

°°°°"Thirty-two feet lost," said Grandet to Cruchot. "I had three hundredpoplars in this one line, isn't that so? Well, then, three h-h-hundredtimes thir-thirty-two lost m-m-me five hundred in h-h-hay; add twiceas much for the side rows,--fifteen hundred; the middle rows as muchmore. So we may c-c-call it a th-thousand b-b-bales of h-h-hay--""Very good," said Cruchot, to help out his friend; "a thousand balesare worth about six hundred francs."

°°°°"Say t-t-twelve hundred, be-c-cause there's three or four hundredfrancs on the second crop. Well, then, c-c-calculate that t-twelvethousand francs a year for f-f-forty years with interest c-c-comesto--"

°°°°"Say sixty thousand francs," said the notary.

°°°°"I am willing; c-c-comes t-t-to sixty th-th-thousand. Very good,"continued Grandet, without stuttering: "two thousand poplars fortyyears old will only yield me fifty thousand francs. There's a loss. Ihave found that myself," said Grandet, getting on his high horse."Jean, fill up all the holes except those at the bank of the river;there you are to plant the poplars I have bought. Plant 'em there, andthey'll get nourishment from the government," he said, turning toCruchot, and giving a slight motion to the wen on his nose, whichexpressed more than the most ironical of smiles.

°°°°"True enough; poplars should only be planted on poor soil," saidCruchot, amazed at Grandet's calculations.

°°°°"Y-y-yes, monsieur," answered the old man satirically.

°°°°Eugenie, who was gazing at the sublime scenery of the Loire, andpaying no attention to her father's reckonings, presently turned anear to the remarks of Cruchot when she heard him say,--

°°°°"So you have brought a son-in-law from Paris. All Saumur is talkingabout your nephew. I shall soon have the marriage-contract to draw up,hey! Pere Grandet?"

°°°°"You g-g-got up very early to t-t-tell me that," said Grandet,accompanying the remark with a motion of his wen. "Well, oldc-c-comrade, I'll be frank, and t-t-tell you what you want t-t-toknow. I would rather, do you see, f-f-fling my daughter into the Loirethan g-g-give her to her c-c-cousin. You may t-t-tell that everywhere,--no, never mind; let the world t-t-talk."

°°°°This answer dazzled and blinded the young girl with sudden light. Thedistant hopes upspringing in her heart bloomed suddenly, became real,tangible, like a cluster of flowers, and she saw them cut down andwilting on the earth. Since the previous evening she had attachedherself to Charles by those links of happiness which bind soul tosoul; from henceforth suffering was to rivet them. Is it not the nobledestiny of women to be more moved by the dark solemnities of griefthan by the splendors of fortune? How was it that fatherly feeling haddied out of her father's heart? Of what crime had Charles been guilty?Mysterious questions! Already her dawning love, a mystery so profound,was wrapping itself in mystery. She walked back trembling in all herlimbs; and when she reached the gloomy street, lately so joyous toher, she felt its sadness, she breathed the melancholy which time andevents had printed there. None of love's lessons lacked. A few stepsfrom their own door she went on before her father and waited at thethreshold. But Grandet, who saw a newspaper in the notary's hand,stopped short and asked,--

°°°°"How are the Funds?"

°°°°"You never listen to my advice, Grandet," answered Cruchot. "Buy soon;you will still make twenty per cent in two years, besides getting anexcellent rate of interest,--five thousand a year for eighty thousandfrancs fifty centimes."

°°°°"We'll see about that," answered Grandet, rubbing his chin."Good God!" exclaimed the notary.

°°°°"Well, what?" cried Grandet; and at the same moment Cruchot put thenewspaper under his eyes and said:

°°°°"Read that!"

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, one of the most respected merchants in Paris,

°°°°blew his brains out yesterday, after making his usual appearance

°°°°at the Bourse. He had sent his resignation to the president of the

°°°°Chamber of Deputies, and had also resigned his functions as a

°°°°judge of the commercial courts. The failures of Monsieur Roguin

°°°°and Monsieur Souchet, his broker and his notary, had ruined him.

°°°°The esteem felt for Monsieur Grandet and the credit he enjoyed

°°°°were nevertheless such that he might have obtained the necessary

°°°°assistance from other business houses. It is much to be regretted

°°°°that so honorable a man should have yielded to momentary despair,"

°°°°etc.

°°°°"I knew it," said the old wine-grower to the notary.

°°°°The words sent a chill of horror through Maitre Cruchot, who,notwithstanding his impassibility as a notary, felt the cold runningdown his spine as he thought that Grandet of Paris had possiblyimplored in vain the millions of Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"And his son, so joyous yesterday--"

°°°°"He knows nothing as yet," answered Grandet, with the same composure."Adieu! Monsieur Grandet," said Cruchot, who now understood the stateof the case, and went off to reassure Monsieur de Bonfons.On entering, Grandet found breakfast ready. Madame Grandet, roundwhose neck Eugenie had flung her arms, kissing her with the quickeffusion of feeling often caused by secret grief, was already seatedin her chair on castors, knitting sleeves for the coming winter."You can begin to eat," said Nanon, coming downstairs four steps at atime; "the young one is sleeping like a cherub. Isn't he a darlingwith his eyes shut? I went in and I called him: no answer.""Let him sleep," said Grandet; "he'll wake soon enough to hear ill-tidings."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Eugenie, putting into her coffee the two littlebits of sugar weighing less than half an ounce which the old miseramused himself by cutting up in his leisure hours. Madame Grandet, whodid not dare to put the question, gazed at her husband.

°°°°"His father has blown his brains out."

°°°°"My uncle?" said Eugenie.

°°°°"Poor young man!" exclaimed Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Poor indeed!" said Grandet; "he isn't worth a sou!"

°°°°"Eh! poor boy, and he's sleeping like the king of the world!" saidNanon in a gentle voice.

°°°°Eugenie stopped eating. Her heart was wrung, as the young heart iswrung when pity for the suffering of one she loves overflows, for thefirst time, the whole being of a woman. The poor girl wept."What are you crying about? You didn't know your uncle," said herfather, giving her one of those hungry tigerish looks he doubtlessthrew upon his piles of gold.

°°°°"But, monsieur," said Nanon, "who wouldn't feel pity for the pooryoung man, sleeping there like a wooden shoe, without knowing what'scoming?"

°°°°"I didn't speak to you, Nanon. Hold your tongue!"

°°°°Eugenie learned at that moment that the woman who loves must be ableto hide her feelings. She did not answer.

°°°°"You will say nothing to him about it, Ma'ame Grandet, till I return,"said the old man. "I have to go and straighten the line of my hedgealong the high-road. I shall be back at noon, in time for the secondbreakfast, and then I will talk with my nephew about his affairs. Asfor you, Mademoiselle Eugenie, if it is for that dandy you are crying,that's enough, child. He's going off like a shot to the Indies. Youwill never see him again."

°°°°The father took his gloves from the brim of his hat, put them on withhis usual composure, pushed them in place by shoving the fingers ofboth hands together, and went out.

°°°°"Mamma, I am suffocating!" cried Eugenie when she was alone with hermother; "I have never suffered like this."

°°°°Madame Grandet, seeing that she turned pale, opened the window and lether breathe fresh air.

°°°°"I feel better!" said Eugenie after a moment.

°°°°This nervous excitement in a nature hitherto, to all appearance, calmand cold, reacted on Madame Grandet; she looked at her daughter withthe sympathetic intuition with which mothers are gifted for theobjects of their tenderness, and guessed all. In truth the life of theHungarian sisters, bound together by a freak of nature, could scarcelyhave been more intimate than that of Eugenie and her mother,--alwaystogether in the embrasure of that window, and sleeping together in thesame atmosphere.

°°°°"My poor child!" said Madame Grandet, taking Eugenie's head and layingit upon her bosom.

°°°°At these words the young girl raised her head, questioned her motherby a look, and seemed to search out her inmost thought.

°°°°"Why send him to the Indies?" she said. "If he is unhappy, ought henot to stay with us? Is he not our nearest relation?"

°°°°"Yes, my child, it seems natural; but your father has his reasons: wemust respect them."

°°°°The mother and daughter sat down in silence, the former upon herraised seat, the latter in her little armchair, and both took up theirwork. Swelling with gratitude for the full heart-understanding hermother had given her, Eugenie kissed the dear hand, saying,--"How good you are, my kind mamma!"

°°°°The words sent a glow of light into the motherly face, worn andblighted as it was by many sorrows.

°°°°"You like him?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°Madame Grandet only smiled in reply. Then, after a moment's silence,she said in a low voice: "Do you love him already? That is wrong.""Wrong?" said Eugenie. "Why is it wrong? You are pleased with him,Nanon is pleased with him; why should he not please me? Come, mamma,let us set the table for his breakfast."

°°°°She threw down her work, and her mother did the same, saying, "Foolishchild!" But she sanctioned the child's folly by sharing it. Eugeniecalled Nanon.

°°°°"What do you want now, mademoiselle?"

°°°°"Nanon, can we have cream by midday?"

°°°°"Ah! midday, to be sure you can," answered the old servant."Well, let him have his coffee very strong; I heard Monsieur desGrassins say that they make the coffee very strong in Paris. Put in agreat deal."

°°°°"Where am I to get it?"

°°°°"Buy some."

°°°°"Suppose monsieur meets me?"

°°°°"He has gone to his fields."

°°°°"I'll run, then. But Monsieur Fessard asked me yesterday if the Magihad come to stay with us when I bought the wax candle. All the townwill know our goings-on."

°°°°"If your father finds it out," said Madame Grandet, "he is capable ofbeating us."

°°°°"Well, let him beat us; we will take his blows on our knees."Madame Grandet for all answer raised her eyes to heaven. Nanon put onher hood and went off. Eugenie got out some clean table-linen, andwent to fetch a few bunches of grapes which she had amused herself byhanging on a string across the attic; she walked softly along thecorridor, so as not to waken her cousin, and she could not helplistening at the door to his quiet breathing.

°°°°"Sorrow is watching while he sleeps," she thought.

°°°°She took the freshest vine-leaves and arranged her dish of grapes ascoquettishly as a practised house-keeper might have done, and placedit triumphantly on the table. She laid hands on the pears counted outby her father, and piled them in a pyramid mixed with leaves. She wentand came, and skipped and ran. She would have liked to lay undercontribution everything in her father's house; but the keys were inhis pocket. Nanon came back with two fresh eggs. At sight of themEugenie almost hugged her round the neck.

°°°°"The farmer from Lande had them in his basket. I asked him for them,and he gave them to me, the darling, for nothing, as an attention!"VAfter two hours' thought and care, during which Eugenie jumped uptwenty times from her work to see if the coffee were boiling, or to goand listen to the noise her cousin made in dressing, she succeeded inpreparing a simple little breakfast, very inexpensive, but which,nevertheless, departed alarmingly from the inveterate customs of thehouse. The midday breakfast was always taken standing. Each took aslice of bread, a little fruit or some butter, and a glass of wine. AsEugenie looked at the table drawn up near the fire with an arm-chairplaced before her cousin's plate, at the two dishes of fruit, the egg-cup, the bottle of white wine, the bread, and the sugar heaped up in asaucer, she trembled in all her limbs at the mere thought of the lookher father would give her if he should come in at that moment. Sheglanced often at the clock to see if her cousin could breakfast beforethe master's return.

°°°°"Don't be troubled, Eugenie; if your father comes in, I will take itall upon myself," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Eugenie could not repress a tear.

°°°°"Oh, my good mother!" she cried, "I have never loved you enough."Charles, who had been tramping about his room for some time, singingto himself, now came down. Happily, it was only eleven o'clock. Thetrue Parisian! he had put as much dandyism into his dress as if hewere in the chateau of the noble lady then travelling in Scotland. Hecame into the room with the smiling, courteous manner so becoming toyouth, which made Eugenie's heart beat with mournful joy. He had takenthe destruction of his castles in Anjou as a joke, and came up to hisaunt gaily.

°°°°"Have you slept well, dear aunt? and you, too, my cousin?""Very well, monsieur; did you?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"I? perfectly."

°°°°"You must be hungry, cousin," said Eugenie; "will you take your seat?""I never breakfast before midday; I never get up till then. However, Ifared so badly on the journey that I am glad to eat something at once.Besides--" here he pulled out the prettiest watch Breguet ever made."Dear me! I am early, it is only eleven o'clock!"

°°°°"Early?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Yes; but I wanted to put my things in order. Well, I shall be glad tohave anything to eat,--anything, it doesn't matter what, a chicken, apartridge."

°°°°"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Nanon, overhearing the words.

°°°°"A partridge!" whispered Eugenie to herself; she would gladly havegiven the whole of her little hoard for a partridge.

°°°°"Come and sit down," said his aunt.

°°°°The young dandy let himself drop into an easy-chair, just as a prettywoman falls gracefully upon a sofa. Eugenie and her mother tookordinary chairs and sat beside him, near the fire.

°°°°"Do you always live here?" said Charles, thinking the room uglier bydaylight than it had seemed the night before.

°°°°"Always," answered Eugenie, looking at him, "except during thevintage. Then we go and help Nanon, and live at the Abbaye desNoyers."

°°°°"Don't you ever take walks?"

°°°°"Sometimes on Sunday after vespers, when the weather is fine," saidMadame Grandet, "we walk on the bridge, or we go and watch thehaymakers."

°°°°"Have you a theatre?"

°°°°"Go to the theatre!" exclaimed Madame Grandet, "see a play! Why,monsieur, don't you know it is a mortal sin?"

°°°°"See here, monsieur," said Nanon, bringing in the eggs, "here are yourchickens,--in the shell."

°°°°"Oh! fresh eggs," said Charles, who, like all people accustomed toluxury, had already forgotten about his partridge, "that is delicious:now, if you will give me the butter, my good girl."

°°°°"Butter! then you can't have the /galette/."

°°°°"Nanon, bring the butter," cried Eugenie.

°°°°The young girl watched her cousin as he cut his sippets, with as muchpleasure as a grisette takes in a melodrama where innocence and virtuetriumph. Charles, brought up by a charming mother, improved, andtrained by a woman of fashion, had the elegant, dainty, foppishmovements of a coxcomb. The compassionate sympathy and tenderness of ayoung girl possess a power that is actually magnetic; so that Charles,finding himself the object of the attentions of his aunt and cousin,could not escape the influence of feelings which flowed towards him,as it were, and inundated him. He gave Eugenie a bright, caressinglook full of kindness,--a look which seemed itself a smile. Heperceived, as his eyes lingered upon her, the exquisite harmony offeatures in the pure face, the grace of her innocent attitude, themagic clearness of the eyes, where young love sparkled and desireshone unconsciously.

°°°°"Ah! my dear cousin, if you were in full dress at the Opera, I assureyou my aunt's words would come true,--you would make the men committhe mortal sin of envy, and the women the sin of jealousy."The compliment went to Eugenie's heart and set it beating, though shedid not understand its meaning.

°°°°"Oh! cousin," she said, "you are laughing at a poor little countrygirl."

°°°°"If you knew me, my cousin, you would know that I abhor ridicule; itwithers the heart and jars upon all my feelings." Here he swallowedhis buttered sippet very gracefully. "No, I really have not enoughmind to make fun of others; and doubtless it is a great defect. InParis, when they want to disparage a man, they say: 'He has a goodheart.' The phrase means: 'The poor fellow is as stupid as arhinoceros.' But as I am rich, and known to hit the bull's-eye atthirty paces with any kind of pistol, and even in the open fields,ridicule respects me."

°°°°"My dear nephew, that bespeaks a good heart."

°°°°"You have a very pretty ring," said Eugenie; "is there any harm inasking to see it?"

°°°°Charles held out his hand after loosening the ring, and Eugenieblushed as she touched the pink nails of her cousin with the tips ofher fingers.

°°°°"See, mamma, what beautiful workmanship."

°°°°"My! there's a lot of gold!" said Nanon, bringing in the coffee."What is that?" exclaimed Charles, laughing, as he pointed to anoblong pot of brown earthenware, glazed on the inside, and edged witha fringe of ashes, from the bottom of which the coffee-grounds werebubbling up and falling in the boiling liquid.

°°°°"It is boiled coffee," said Nanon.

°°°°"Ah! my dear aunt, I shall at least leave one beneficent trace of myvisit here. You are indeed behind the age! I must teach you to makegood coffee in a Chaptal coffee-pot."

°°°°He tried to explain the process of a Chaptal coffee-pot.

°°°°"Gracious! if there are so many things as all that to do," said Nanon,"we may as well give up our lives to it. I shall never make coffeethat way; I know that! Pray, who is to get the fodder for the cowwhile I make the coffee?"

°°°°"I will make it," said Eugenie.

°°°°"Child!" said Madame Grandet, looking at her daughter.

°°°°The word recalled to their minds the sorrow that was about to fallupon the unfortunate young man; the three women were silent, andlooked at him with an air of commiseration that caught his attention."Is anything the matter, my cousin?" he said.

°°°°"Hush!" said Madame Grandet to Eugenie, who was about to answer; "youknow, my daughter, that your father charged us not to speak tomonsieur--"

°°°°"Say Charles," said young Grandet.

°°°°"Ah! you are called Charles? What a beautiful name!" cried Eugenie.Presentiments of evil are almost always justified. At this momentNanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie, who had all three been thinkingwith a shudder of the old man's return, heard the knock whose echoesthey knew but too well.

°°°°"There's papa!" said Eugenie.

°°°°She removed the saucer filled with sugar, leaving a few pieces on thetable-cloth; Nanon carried off the egg-cup; Madame Grandet sat up likea frightened hare. It was evidently a panic, which amazed Charles, whowas wholly unable to understand it.

°°°°"Why! what is the matter?" he asked.

°°°°"My father has come," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, what of that?"

°°°°Monsieur Grandet entered the room, threw his keen eye upon the table,upon Charles, and saw the whole thing.

°°°°"Ha! ha! so you have been making a feast for your nephew; very good,very good, very good indeed!" he said, without stuttering. "When thecat's away, the mice will play."

°°°°"Feast!" thought Charles, incapable of suspecting or imagining therules and customs of the household.

°°°°"Give me my glass, Nanon," said the master

°°°°Eugenie brought the glass. Grandet drew a horn-handled knife with abig blade from his breeches' pocket, cut a slice of bread, took asmall bit of butter, spread it carefully on the bread, and ate itstanding. At this moment Charlie was sweetening his coffee. PereGrandet saw the bits of sugar, looked at his wife, who turned pale,and made three steps forward; he leaned down to the poor woman's earand said,--

°°°°"Where did you get all that sugar?"

°°°°"Nanon fetched it from Fessard's; there was none."

°°°°It is impossible to picture the profound interest the three women tookin this mute scene. Nanon had left her kitchen and stood looking intothe room to see what would happen. Charles, having tasted his coffee,found it bitter and glanced about for the sugar, which Grandet hadalready put away.

°°°°"What do you want?" said his uncle.

°°°°"The sugar."

°°°°"Put in more milk," answered the master of the house; "your coffeewill taste sweeter."

°°°°Eugenie took the saucer which Grandet had put away and placed it onthe table, looking calmly at her father as she did so. Most assuredly,the Parisian woman who held a silken ladder with her feeble arms tofacilitate the flight of her lover, showed no greater courage thanEugenie displayed when she replaced the sugar upon the table. Thelover rewarded his mistress when she proudly showed him her beautifulbruised arm, and bathed every swollen vein with tears and kisses tillit was cured with happiness. Charles, on the other hand, never so muchas knew the secret of the cruel agitation that shook and bruised theheart of his cousin, crushed as it was by the look of the old miser."You are not eating your breakfast, wife."

°°°°The poor helot came forward with a piteous look, cut herself a pieceof bread, and took a pear. Eugenie boldly offered her father somegrapes, saying,--

°°°°"Taste my preserves, papa. My cousin, you will eat some, will you not?I went to get these pretty grapes expressly for you."

°°°°"If no one stops them, they will pillage Saumur for you, nephew. Whenyou have finished, we will go into the garden; I have something totell you which can't be sweetened."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother cast a look on Charles whose meaning the youngman could not mistake.

°°°°"What is it you mean, uncle? Since the death of my poor mother"--atthese words his voice softened--"no other sorrow can touch me.""My nephew, who knows by what afflictions God is pleased to try us?"said his aunt.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta," said Grandet, "there's your nonsense beginning. I amsorry to see those white hands of yours, nephew"; and he showed theshoulder-of-mutton fists which Nature had put at the end of his ownarms. "There's a pair of hands made to pick up silver pieces. You'vebeen brought up to put your feet in the kid out of which we make thepurses we keep our money in. A bad look-out! Very bad!"

°°°°"What do you mean, uncle? I'll be hanged if I understand a single wordof what you are saying."

°°°°"Come!" said Grandet.

°°°°The miser closed the blade of his knife with a snap, drank the last ofhis wine, and opened the door.

°°°°"My cousin, take courage!"

°°°°The tone of the young girl struck terror to Charles's heart, and hefollowed his terrible uncle, a prey to disquieting thoughts. Eugenie,her mother, and Nanon went into the kitchen, moved by irresistiblecuriosity to watch the two actors in the scene which was about to takeplace in the garden, where at first the uncle walked silently ahead ofthe nephew. Grandet was not at all troubled at having to tell Charlesof the death of his father; but he did feel a sort of compassion inknowing him to be without a penny, and he sought for some phrase orformula by which to soften the communication of that cruel truth. "Youhave lost your father," seemed to him a mere nothing to say; fathersdie before their children. But "you are absolutely without means,"--all the misfortunes of life were summed up in those words! Grandetwalked round the garden three times, the gravel crunching under hisheavy step.

°°°°In the crucial moments of life our minds fasten upon the localitywhere joys or sorrows overwhelm us. Charles noticed with minuteattention the box-borders of the little garden, the yellow leaves asthey fluttered down, the dilapidated walls, the gnarled fruit-trees,--picturesque details which were destined to remain forever in hismemory, blending eternally, by the mnemonics that belong exclusivelyto the passions, with the recollections of this solemn hour."It is very fine weather, very warm," said Grandet, drawing a longbreath.

°°°°"Yes, uncle; but why--"

°°°°"Well, my lad," answered his uncle, "I have some bad news to give you.Your father is ill--"

°°°°"Then why am I here?" said Charles. "Nanon," he cried, "order post-horses! I can get a carriage somewhere?" he added, turning to hisuncle, who stood motionless.

°°°°"Horses and carriages are useless," answered Grandet, looking atCharles, who remained silent, his eyes growing fixed. "Yes, my poorboy, you guess the truth,--he is dead. But that's nothing; there issomething worse: he blew out his brains."

°°°°"My father!"

°°°°"Yes, but that's not the worst; the newspapers are all talking aboutit. Here, read that."

°°°°Grandet, who had borrowed the fatal article from Cruchot, thrust thepaper under his nephew's eyes. The poor young man, still a child,still at an age when feelings wear no mask, burst into tears."That's good!" thought Grandet; "his eyes frightened me. He'll be allright if he weeps,--That is not the worst, my poor nephew," he saidaloud, not noticing whether Charles heard him, "that is nothing; youwill get over it: but--"

°°°°"Never, never! My father! Oh, my father!"

°°°°"He has ruined you, you haven't a penny."

°°°°"What does that matter? My father! Where is my father?"

°°°°His sobs resounded horribly against those dreary walls andreverberated in the echoes. The three women, filled with pity, weptalso; for tears are often as contagious as laughter. Charles, withoutlistening further to his uncle, ran through the court and up thestaircase to his chamber, where he threw himself across the bed andhid his face in the sheets, to weep in peace for his lost parents."The first burst must have its way," said Grandet, entering theliving-room, where Eugenie and her mother had hastily resumed theirseats and were sewing with trembling hands, after wiping their eyes."But that young man is good for nothing; his head is more taken upwith the dead than with his money."

°°°°Eugenie shuddered as she heard her father's comment on the most sacredof all griefs. From that moment she began to judge him. Charles'ssobs, though muffled, still sounded through the sepulchral house; andhis deep groans, which seemed to come from the earth beneath, onlyceased towards evening, after growing gradually feebler.

°°°°"Poor young man!" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Fatal exclamation! Pere Grandet looked at his wife, at Eugenie, and atthe sugar-bowl. He recollected the extraordinary breakfast preparedfor the unfortunate youth, and he took a position in the middle of theroom.

°°°°"Listen to me," he said, with his usual composure. "I hope that youwill not continue this extravagance, Madame Grandet. I don't give youMY money to stuff that young fellow with sugar."

°°°°"My mother had nothing to do with it," said Eugenie; "it was I who--""Is it because you are of age," said Grandet, interrupting hisdaughter, "that you choose to contradict me? Remember, Eugenie--""Father, the son of your brother ought to receive from us--""Ta, ta, ta, ta!" exclaimed the cooper on four chromatic tones; "theson of my brother this, my nephew that! Charles is nothing at all tous; he hasn't a farthing, his father has failed; and when this dandyhas cried his fill, off he goes from here. I won't have himrevolutionize my household."

°°°°"What is 'failing,' father?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°"To fail," answered her father, "is to commit the most dishonorableaction that can disgrace a man."

°°°°"It must be a great sin," said Madame Grandet, "and our brother may bedamned."

°°°°"There, there, don't begin with your litanies!" said Grandet,shrugging his shoulders. "To fail, Eugenie," he resumed, "is to commita theft which the law, unfortunately, takes under its protection.People have given their property to Guillaume Grandet trusting to hisreputation for honor and integrity; he has made away with it all, andleft them nothing but their eyes to weep with. A highway robber isbetter than a bankrupt: the one attacks you and you can defendyourself, he risks his own life; but the other--in short, Charles isdishonored."

°°°°The words rang in the poor girl's heart and weighed it down with theirheavy meaning. Upright and delicate as a flower born in the depths ofa forest, she knew nothing of the world's maxims, of its deceitfularguments and specious sophisms; she therefore believed the atrociousexplanation which her father gave her designedly, concealing thedistinction which exists between an involuntary failure and anintentional one.

°°°°"Father, could you not have prevented such a misfortune?""My brother did not consult me. Besides, he owes four millions.""What is a 'million,' father?" she asked, with the simplicity of achild which thinks it can find out at once all that it wants to know."A million?" said Grandet, "why, it is a million pieces of twenty souseach, and it takes five twenty sous pieces to make five francs.""Dear me!" cried Eugenie, "how could my uncle possibly have had fourmillions? Is there any one else in France who ever had so manymillions?" Pere Grandet stroked his chin, smiled, and his wen seemedto dilate. "But what will become of my cousin Charles?"

°°°°"He is going off to the West Indies by his father's request, and hewill try to make his fortune there."

°°°°"Has he got the money to go with?"

°°°°"I shall pay for his journey as far as--yes, as far as Nantes."Eugenie sprang into his arms.

°°°°"Oh, father, how good you are!"

°°°°She kissed him with a warmth that almost made Grandet ashamed ofhimself, for his conscience galled him a little.

°°°°"Will it take much time to amass a million?" she asked.

°°°°"Look here!" said the old miser, "you know what a napoleon is? Well,it takes fifty thousand napoleons to make a million."

°°°°"Mamma, we must say a great many /neuvaines/ for him."

°°°°"I was thinking so," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"That's the way, always spending my money!" cried the father. "Do youthink there are francs on every bush?"

°°°°At this moment a muffled cry, more distressing than all the others,echoed through the garrets and struck a chill to the hearts of Eugenieand her mother.

°°°°"Nanon, go upstairs and see that he does not kill himself," saidGrandet. "Now, then," he added, looking at his wife and daughter, whohad turned pale at his words, "no nonsense, you two! I must leave you;I have got to see about the Dutchmen who are going away to-day. Andthen I must find Cruchot, and talk with him about all this."He departed. As soon as he had shut the door Eugenie and her motherbreathed more freely. Until this morning the young girl had never feltconstrained in the presence of her father; but for the last few hoursevery moment wrought a change in her feelings and ideas.

°°°°"Mamma, how many louis are there in a cask of wine?"

°°°°"Your father sells his from a hundred to a hundred and fifty francs,sometimes two hundred,--at least, so I've heard say."

°°°°"Then papa must be rich?"

°°°°"Perhaps he is. But Monsieur Cruchot told me he bought Froidfond twoyears ago; that may have pinched him."

°°°°Eugenie, not being able to understand the question of her father'sfortune, stopped short in her calculations.

°°°°"He didn't even see me, the darling!" said Nanon, coming back from hererrand. "He's stretched out like a calf on his bed and crying like theMadeleine, and that's a blessing! What's the matter with the poor dearyoung man!"

°°°°"Let us go and console him, mamma; if any one knocks, we can comedown."

°°°°Madame Grandet was helpless against the sweet persuasive tones of herdaughter's voice. Eugenie was sublime: she had become a woman. Thetwo, with beating hearts, went up to Charles's room. The door wasopen. The young man heard and saw nothing; plunged in grief, he onlyuttered inarticulate cries.

°°°°"How he loves his father!" said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°In the utterance of those words it was impossible to mistake the hopesof a heart that, unknown to itself, had suddenly become passionate.Madame Grandet cast a mother's look upon her daughter, and thenwhispered in her ear,--

°°°°"Take care, you will love him!"

°°°°"Love him!" answered Eugenie. "Ah! if you did but know what my fathersaid to Monsieur Cruchot."

°°°°Charles turned over, and saw his aunt and cousin.

°°°°"I have lost my father, my poor father! If he had told me his secrettroubles we might have worked together to repair them. My God! my poorfather! I was so sure I should see him again that I think I kissed himquite coldly--"

°°°°Sobs cut short the words.

°°°°"We will pray for him," said Madame Grandet. "Resign yourself to thewill of God."

°°°°"Cousin," said Eugenie, "take courage! Your loss is irreparable;therefore think only of saving your honor."

°°°°With the delicate instinct of a woman who intuitively puts her mindinto all things, even at the moment when she offers consolation,Eugenie sought to cheat her cousin's grief by turning his thoughtsinward upon himself.

°°°°"My honor?" exclaimed the young man, tossing aside his hair with animpatient gesture as he sat up on his bed and crossed his arms. "Ah!that is true. My uncle said my father had failed." He uttered a heart-rending cry, and hid his face in his hands. "Leave me, leave me,cousin! My God! my God! forgive my father, for he must have sufferedsorely!"

°°°°There was something terribly attractive in the sight of this youngsorrow, sincere without reasoning or afterthought. It was a virgingrief which the simple hearts of Eugenie and her mother were fitted tocomprehend, and they obeyed the sign Charles made them to leave him tohimself. They went downstairs in silence and took their accustomedplaces by the window and sewed for nearly an hour without exchanging aword. Eugenie had seen in the furtive glance that she cast about theyoung man's room--that girlish glance which sees all in the twinklingof an eye--the pretty trifles of his dressing-case, his scissors, hisrazors embossed with gold. This gleam of luxury across her cousin'sgrief only made him the more interesting to her, possibly by way ofcontrast. Never before had so serious an event, so dramatic a sight,touched the imaginations of these two passive beings, hitherto sunk inthe stillness and calm of solitude.

°°°°"Mamma," said Eugenie, "we must wear mourning for my uncle.""Your father will decide that," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°They relapsed into silence. Eugenie drew her stitches with a uniformmotion which revealed to an observer the teeming thoughts of hermeditation. The first desire of the girl's heart was to share hercousin's mourning.

°°°°VI

°°°°About four o'clock an abrupt knock at the door struck sharply on theheart of Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What can have happened to your father?" she said to her daughter.Grandet entered joyously. After taking off his gloves, he rubbed hishands hard enough to take off their skin as well, if his epidermis hadnot been tanned and cured like Russia leather,--saving, of course, theperfume of larch-trees and incense. Presently his secret escaped him."Wife," he said, without stuttering, "I've trapped them all! Our wineis sold! The Dutch and the Belgians have gone. I walked about themarket-place in front of their inn, pretending to be doing nothing.That Belgian fellow--you know who I mean--came up to me. The owners ofall the good vineyards have kept back their vintages, intending towait; well, I didn't hinder them. The Belgian was in despair; I sawthat. In a minute the bargain was made. He takes my vintage at twohundred francs the puncheon, half down. He paid me in gold; the notesare drawn. Here are six louis for you. In three months wines will havefallen."

°°°°These words, uttered in a quiet tone of voice, were nevertheless sobitterly sarcastic that the inhabitants of Saumur, grouped at thismoment in the market-place and overwhelmed by the news of the saleGrandet had just effected, would have shuddered had they heard them.Their panic would have brought the price of wines down fifty per centat once.

°°°°"Did you have a thousand puncheons this year, father?"

°°°°"Yes, little one."

°°°°That term applied to his daughter was the superlative expression ofthe old miser's joy.

°°°°"Then that makes two hundred thousand pieces of twenty sous each?""Yes, Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"Then, father, you can easily help Charles."

°°°°The amazement, the anger, the stupefaction of Belshazzar when he sawthe /Mene-Tekel-Upharsin/ before his eyes is not to be compared withthe cold rage of Grandet, who, having forgotten his nephew, now foundhim enshrined in the heart and calculations of his daughter."What's this? Ever since that dandy put foot in MY house everythinggoes wrong! You behave as if you had the right to buy sugar-plums andmake feasts and weddings. I won't have that sort of thing. I hope Iknow my duty at my time of life! I certainly sha'n't take lessons frommy daughter, or from anybody else. I shall do for my nephew what it isproper to do, and you have no need to poke your nose into it. As foryou, Eugenie," he added, facing her, "don't speak of this again, orI'll send you to the Abbaye des Noyers with Nanon, see if I don't; andno later than to-morrow either, if you disobey me! Where is thatfellow, has he come down yet?"

°°°°"No, my friend," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What is he doing then?"

°°°°"He is weeping for his father," said Eugenie.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter without finding a word to say; afterall, he was a father. He made a couple of turns up and down the room,and then went hurriedly to his secret den to think over an investmenthe was meditating in the public Funds. The thinning out of his twothousand acres of forest land had yielded him six hundred thousandfrancs: putting this sum to that derived from the sale of his poplarsand to his other gains for the last year and for the current year, hehad amassed a total of nine hundred thousand francs, without countingthe two hundred thousand he had got by the sale just concluded. Thetwenty per cent which Cruchot assured him would gain in a short timefrom the Funds, then quoted at seventy, tempted him. He figured outhis calculation on the margin of the newspaper which gave the accountof his brother's death, all the while hearing the moans of his nephew,but without listening to them. Nanon came and knocked on the wall tosummon him to dinner. On the last step of the staircase he was sayingto himself as he came down,--

°°°°"I'll do it; I shall get eight per cent interest. In two years I shallhave fifteen hundred thousand francs, which I will then draw out ingood gold,--Well, where's my nephew?"

°°°°"He says he doesn't want anything to eat," answered Nanon; "that's notgood for him."

°°°°"So much saved," retorted her master.

°°°°"That's so," she said.

°°°°"Bah! he won't cry long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the woods."The dinner was eaten in silence.

°°°°"My good friend," said Madame Grandet, when the cloth was removed, "wemust put on mourning."

°°°°"Upon my word, Madame Grandet! what will you invent next to spendmoney on? Mourning is in the heart, and not in the clothes.""But mourning for a brother is indispensable; and the Church commandsus to--"

°°°°"Buy your mourning out of your six louis. Give me a hat-band; that'senough for me."

°°°°Eugenie raised her eyes to heaven without uttering a word. Hergenerous instincts, slumbering and long repressed but now suddenly andfor the first time awakened, were galled at every turn. The eveningpassed to all appearance like a thousand other evenings of theirmonotonous life, yet it was certainly the most horrible. Eugenie sewedwithout raising her head, and did not use the workbox which Charleshad despised the night before. Madame Grandet knitted her sleeves.Grandet twirled his thumbs for four hours, absorbed in calculationswhose results were on the morrow to astonish Saumur. No one came tovisit the family that day. The whole town was ringing with the news ofthe business trick just played by Grandet, the failure of his brother,and the arrival of his nephew. Obeying the desire to gossip over theirmutual interests, all the upper and middle-class wine-growers inSaumur met at Monsieur des Grassins, where terrible imprecations werebeing fulminated against the ex-mayor. Nanon was spinning, and thewhirr of her wheel was the only sound heard beneath the gray raftersof that silent hall.

°°°°"We don't waste our tongues," she said, showing her teeth, as largeand white as peeled almonds.

°°°°"Nothing should be wasted," answered Grandet, rousing himself from hisreverie. He saw a perspective of eight millions in three years, and hewas sailing along that sheet of gold. "Let us go to bed. I will bid mynephew good-night for the rest of you, and see if he will takeanything."

°°°°Madame Grandet remained on the landing of the first storey to hear theconversation that was about to take place between the goodman and hisnephew. Eugenie, bolder than her mother, went up two stairs."Well, nephew, you are in trouble. Yes, weep, that's natural. A fatheris a father; but we must bear our troubles patiently. I am a gooduncle to you, remember that. Come, take courage! Will you have alittle glass of wine?" (Wine costs nothing in Saumur, and they offerit as tea is offered in China.) "Why!" added Grandet, "you have got nolight! That's bad, very bad; you ought to see what you are about," andhe walked to the chimney-piece. "What's this?" he cried. "A waxcandle! How the devil did they filch a wax candle? The spendthriftswould tear down the ceilings of my house to boil the fellow's eggs."Hearing these words, mother and daughter slipped back into their roomsand burrowed in their beds, with the celerity of frightened micegetting back to their holes.

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you found a mine?" said the man, coming into thechamber of his wife.

°°°°"My friend, wait; I am saying my prayers," said the poor mother in atrembling voice.

°°°°"The devil take your good God!" growled Grandet in reply.Misers have no belief in a future life; the present is their all inall. This thought casts a terrible light upon our present epoch, inwhich, far more than at any former period, money sways the laws andpolitics and morals.  Institutions, books, men, and dogmas, allconspire to undermine belief in a future life,--a belief upon whichthe social edifice has rested for eighteen hundred years. The grave,as a means of transition, is little feared in our day. The future,which once opened to us beyond the requiems, has now been importedinto the present. To obtain /per fas et nefas/ a terrestrial paradiseof luxury and earthly enjoyment, to harden the heart and macerate thebody for the sake of fleeting possessions, as the martyrs oncesuffered all things to reach eternal joys, this is now the universalthought--a thought written everywhere, even in the very laws which askof the legislator, "What do you pay?" instead of asking him, "What doyou think?" When this doctrine has passed down from the bourgeoisie tothe populace, where will this country be?

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you done?" asked the old man.

°°°°"My friend, I am praying for you."

°°°°"Very good! Good-night; to-morrow morning we will have a talk."The poor woman went to sleep like a schoolboy who, not having learnedhis lessons, knows he will see his master's angry face on the morrow.At the moment when, filled with fear, she was drawing the sheet aboveher head that she might stifle hearing, Eugenie, in her night-gown andwith naked feet, ran to her side and kissed her brow.

°°°°"Oh! my good mother," she said, "to-morrow I will tell him it was I.""No; he would send you to Noyers. Leave me to manage it; he cannot eatme."

°°°°"Do you hear, mamma?"

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"/He/ is weeping still."

°°°°"Go to bed, my daughter; you will take cold in your feet: the floor isdamp."

°°°°*****

°°°°Thus passed the solemn day which was destined to weight upon the wholelife of the rich and poor heiress, whose sleep was never again to beso calm, nor yet so pure, as it had been up to this moment. It oftenhappens that certain actions of human life seem, literally speaking,improbable, though actual. Is not this because we constantly omit toturn the stream of psychological light upon our impulsivedeterminations, and fail to explain the subtile reasons, mysteriouslyconceived in our minds, which impelled them? Perhaps Eugenie's deeppassion should be analyzed in its most delicate fibres; for it became,scoffers might say, a malady which influenced her whole existence.Many people prefer to deny results rather than estimate the force ofties and links and bonds, which secretly join one fact to another inthe moral order. Here, therefore, Eugenie's past life will offer toobservers of human nature an explanation of her naive want ofreflection and the suddenness of the emotions which overflowed hersoul. The more tranquil her life had been, the more vivid was herwomanly pity, the more simple-minded were the sentiments now developedin her soul.

°°°°Made restless by the events of the day, she woke at intervals tolisten to her cousin, thinking she heard the sighs which still echoedin her heart. Sometimes she saw him dying of his trouble, sometimesshe dreamed that he fainted from hunger. Towards morning she wascertain that she heard a startling cry. She dressed at once and ran,in the dawning light, with a swift foot to her cousin's chamber, thedoor of which he had left open. The candle had burned down to thesocket. Charles, overcome by nature, was sleeping, dressed and sittingin an armchair beside the bed, on which his head rested; he dreamed asmen dream on an empty stomach. Eugenie might weep at her ease; shemight admire the young and handsome face blotted with grief, the eyesswollen with weeping, that seemed, sleeping as they were, to wellforth tears. Charles felt sympathetically the young girl's presence;he opened his eyes and saw her pitying him.

°°°°"Pardon me, my cousin," he said, evidently not knowing the hour northe place in which he found himself.

°°°°"There are hearts who hear you, cousin, and /we/ thought you mightneed something. You should go to bed; you tire yourself by sittingthus."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, then, adieu!"

°°°°She escaped, ashamed and happy at having gone there. Innocence alonecan dare to be so bold. Once enlightened, virtue makes hercalculations as well as vice. Eugenie, who had not trembled beside hercousin, could scarcely stand upon her legs when she regained herchamber. Her ignorant life had suddenly come to an end; she reasoned,she rebuked herself with many reproaches.

°°°°"What will he think of me? He will think that I love him!"That was what she most wished him to think. An honest love has its ownprescience, and knows that love begets love. What an event for thispoor solitary girl thus to have entered the chamber of a young man!Are there not thoughts and actions in the life of love which tocertain souls bear the full meaning of the holiest espousals? An hourlater she went to her mother and dressed her as usual. Then they bothcame down and sat in their places before the window waiting forGrandet, with that cruel anxiety which, according to the individualcharacter, freezes the heart or warms it, shrivels or dilates it, whena scene is feared, a punishment expected,--a feeling so natural thateven domestic animals possess it, and whine at the slightest pain ofpunishment, though they make no outcry when they inadvertently hurtthemselves. The goodman came down; but he spoke to his wife with anabsent manner, kissed Eugenie, and sat down to table without appearingto remember his threats of the night before.

°°°°"What has become of my nephew? The lad gives no trouble.""Monsieur, he is asleep," answered Nanon.

°°°°"So much the better; he won't want a wax candle," said Grandet in ajeering tone.

°°°°This unusual clemency, this bitter gaiety, struck Madame Grandet withamazement, and she looked at her husband attentively. The goodman--here it may be well to explain that in Touraine, Anjou, Pitou, andBretagne the word "goodman," already used to designate Grandet, isbestowed as often upon harsh and cruel men as upon those of kindlytemperament, when either have reached a certain age; the title meansnothing on the score of individual gentleness--the goodman took hishat and gloves, saying as he went out,--

°°°°"I am going to loiter about the market-place and find Cruchot.""Eugenie, your father certainly has something on his mind."Grandet, who was a poor sleeper, employed half his nights in thepreliminary calculations which gave such astonishing accuracy to hisviews and observations and schemes, and secured to them the unfailingsuccess at sight of which his townsmen stood amazed. All human poweris a compound of time and patience. Powerful beings will and wait. Thelife of a miser is the constant exercise of human power put to theservice of self. It rests on two sentiments only,--self-love and self-interest; but self-interest being to a certain extent compact andintelligent self-love, the visible sign of real superiority, itfollows that self-love and self-interest are two parts of the samewhole,--egotism. From this arises, perhaps, the excessive curiosityshown in the habits of a miser's life whenever they are put before theworld. Every nature holds by a thread to those beings who challengeall human sentiments by concentrating all in one passion. Where is theman without desire? and what social desire can be satisfied withoutmoney?

°°°°Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

°°°°In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

°°°°"My cousin!"

°°°°"Yes, cousin."

°°°°"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

°°°°"Where you like."

°°°°"How do you feel?"

°°°°"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

°°°°This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

°°°°She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

°°°°That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

°°°°"What troubles you?" she said.

°°°°"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

°°°°Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

°°°°When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

°°°°"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

°°°°"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

°°°°Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

°°°°"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

°°°°"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

°°°°The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

°°°°"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

°°°°Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

°°°°"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

°°°°"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

°°°°*****

°°°°About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

°°°°VII

°°°°At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

°°°°The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

°°°°"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

°°°°"Certainly, nephew."

°°°°As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

°°°°He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

°°°°"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

°°°°"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

°°°°"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

°°°°"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

°°°°"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

°°°°"--is threatened with insolvency--"

°°°°"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

°°°°"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

°°°°"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

°°°°"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

°°°°"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

°°°°"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

°°°°"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

°°°°"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

°°°°"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

°°°°"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

°°°°Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

°°°°"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

°°°°"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

°°°°"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

°°°°"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Exactly so," said the president.

°°°°"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

°°°°"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

°°°°"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

°°°°"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

°°°°"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

°°°°"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

°°°°"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

°°°°"Bentham, an Englishman.'

°°°°"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

°°°°"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

°°°°"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

°°°°"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

°°°°"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

°°°°"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

°°°°"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

°°°°"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

°°°°"That's very true."

°°°°"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

°°°°"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

°°°°"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

°°°°"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

°°°°A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

°°°°"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

°°°°He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

°°°°"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

°°°°"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

°°°°These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

°°°°"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

°°°°"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

°°°°The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

°°°°"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

°°°°She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

°°°°"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

°°°°"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

°°°°"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

°°°°"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

°°°°"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

°°°°"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

°°°°"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

°°°°"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

°°°°"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

°°°°The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

°°°°"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

°°°°"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

°°°°"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

°°°°When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

°°°°"Are not they fuming, hein?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

°°°°"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

°°°°In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

°°°°When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

°°°°"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

°°°°So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

°°°°"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

°°°°Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

°°°°"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

°°°°"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

°°°°The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

°°°°"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

°°°°"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

°°°°"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

°°°°"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

°°°°"I didn't know where."

°°°°"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

°°°°"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

°°°°"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

°°°°"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

°°°°The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

°°°°VIII

°°°°"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

°°°°"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

°°°°"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

°°°°"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

°°°°These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

°°°°She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

°°°°"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

°°°°My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

°°°°great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

°°°°foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

°°°°fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

°°°°when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

°°°°yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

°°°°plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

°°°°If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

°°°°that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

°°°°fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

°°°°my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

°°°°me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

°°°°so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

°°°°the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

°°°°bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

°°°°killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

°°°°there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

°°°°ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

°°°°I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

°°°°last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

°°°°enterprise.

°°°°"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

°°°°She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

°°°°I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

°°°°hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

°°°°not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

°°°°even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

°°°°have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

°°°°to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

°°°°world like other men who have started young without a sou and

°°°°brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

°°°°faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

°°°°another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

°°°°so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

°°°°my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

°°°°life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

°°°°Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

°°°°young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

°°°°caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

°°°°family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

°°°°were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

°°°°Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

°°°°grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

°°°°with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

°°°°your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

°°°°expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

°°°°accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

°°°°Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

°°°°When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

°°°°ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

°°°°hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

°°°°your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

°°°°spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

°°°°cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

°°°°ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

°°°°depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

°°°°of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

°°°°poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

°°°°see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

°°°°life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

°°°°can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

°°°°necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

°°°°have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

°°°°face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

°°°°seems to me--

°°°°"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

°°°°Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

°°°°Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

°°°°"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

°°°°Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

°°°°Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

°°°°My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

°°°°friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

°°°°of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

°°°°settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

°°°°can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

°°°°have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

°°°°have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

°°°°and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

°°°°can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

°°°°horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

°°°°keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

°°°°the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

°°°°will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

°°°°these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

°°°°nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

°°°°give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

°°°°his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

°°°°travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

°°°°them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

°°°°do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

°°°°seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

°°°°British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

°°°°pay him--

°°°°"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

°°°°Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

°°°°"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

°°°°"I have read those letters."

°°°°Charles colored.

°°°°"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

°°°°"And what?" asked Charles.

°°°°"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

°°°°"My dear cousin--"

°°°°"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

°°°°Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

°°°°"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

°°°°Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

°°°°As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

°°°°"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

°°°°Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

°°°°"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

°°°°"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

°°°°"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

°°°°"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

°°°°Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

°°°°"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

°°°°"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

°°°°"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

°°°°"But he owns Froidfond."

°°°°"What is Froidfond worth?"

°°°°"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

°°°°"Nothing but a poor farm!"

°°°°"He has vineyards and fields."

°°°°"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

°°°°"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

°°°°Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

°°°°Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

°°°°It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

°°°°"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

°°°°"Nothing," answered the old man.

°°°°Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

°°°°"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

°°°°"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

°°°°"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

°°°°"Say /was/ worth--"

°°°°"Where the devil have they got any?"

°°°°"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

°°°°"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

°°°°"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

°°°°"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

°°°°"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

°°°°Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

°°°°"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

°°°°The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

°°°°"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

°°°°Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

°°°°"Dans les gardes francaises

°°°°J'avais un bon papa."

°°°°Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

°°°°"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

°°°°He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

°°°°"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

°°°°"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

°°°°"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

°°°°"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

°°°°IX

°°°°The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

°°°°For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

°°°°After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

°°°°Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

°°°°"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

°°°°"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

°°°°"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

°°°°"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

°°°°"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

°°°°"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

°°°°"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

°°°°"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

°°°°"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

°°°°"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

°°°°The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

°°°°"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

°°°°Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

°°°°"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

°°°°He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

°°°°"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

°°°°"I must," he said, bowing his head.

°°°°For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

°°°°"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

°°°°"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

°°°°When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

°°°°"Do you love me?" she said.

°°°°"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

°°°°"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

°°°°She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

°°°°"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

°°°°"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

°°°°The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

°°°°"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

°°°°"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

°°°°"Then my heart will be always there."

°°°°"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

°°°°No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

°°°°"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

°°°°At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

°°°°"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

°°°°"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

°°°°"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

°°°°Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

°°°°Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

°°°°"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

°°°°Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

°°°°In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

°°°°Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

°°°°In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

°°°°"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

°°°°Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

°°°°"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

°°°°"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

°°°°The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

°°°°But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

°°°°As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

°°°°"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

°°°°"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

°°°°"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

°°°°In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

°°°°*****

°°°°In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

°°°°"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

°°°°Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

°°°°"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

°°°°X

°°°°Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

°°°°"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

°°°°The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

°°°°"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

°°°°"Where could we have got the money?"

°°°°"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

°°°°"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

°°°°Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

°°°°"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

°°°°There was a moment's silence.

°°°°"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

°°°°"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

°°°°"I'm always gay,--

°°°°"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

°°°°Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

°°°°he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

°°°°Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

°°°°"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

°°°°The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

°°°°When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

°°°°"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

°°°°"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

°°°°"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

°°°°"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

°°°°"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

°°°°"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur."

°°°°"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

°°°°"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

°°°°Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

°°°°"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

°°°°"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

°°°°"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

°°°°"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

°°°°The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

°°°°"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

°°°°At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

°°°°"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

°°°°"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

°°°°The two women were dumb.

°°°°"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

°°°°Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

°°°°"I have not got /my/ gold."

°°°°"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

°°°°"No, I have not got it."

°°°°"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

°°°°"No."

°°°°"By the shears of my father!"

°°°°Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

°°°°"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

°°°°Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

°°°°"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

°°°°Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

°°°°"Yes, father."

°°°°She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

°°°°"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

°°°°"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

°°°°Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

°°°°"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

°°°°"What use?"

°°°°"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

°°°°"And this is mine."

°°°°"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

°°°°"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

°°°°"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

°°°°She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

°°°°"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

°°°°Eugenie was silent and impassive.

°°°°"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

°°°°"You are a child."

°°°°"Of age."

°°°°Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

°°°°He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

°°°°Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

°°°°"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

°°°°Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

°°°°"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

°°°°"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

°°°°"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

°°°°"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

°°°°Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

°°°°"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

°°°°"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

°°°°"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

°°°°"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

°°°°"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

°°°°"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

°°°°He looked fixedly at his wife.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

°°°°"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

°°°°"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

°°°°"I will ask God to punish only me."

°°°°"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

°°°°"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

°°°°"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

°°°°"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

°°°°*****

°°°°Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

°°°°"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

°°°°"It is grease I'm trying out."

°°°°"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

°°°°The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

°°°°"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

°°°°At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

°°°°"How is Madame Grandet?"

°°°°"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

°°°°"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

°°°°They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

°°°°"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

°°°°When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

°°°°"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

°°°°"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

°°°°XI

°°°°For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

°°°°"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

°°°°"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

°°°°Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

°°°°One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

°°°°"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

°°°°"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

°°°°"All" meant "him."

°°°°"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

°°°°"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

°°°°Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

°°°°"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

°°°°Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

°°°°When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

°°°°"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

°°°°At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

°°°°"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

°°°°"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

°°°°"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

°°°°On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

°°°°"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

°°°°"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

°°°°"What do you mean?"

°°°°"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

°°°°"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

°°°°These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

°°°°"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

°°°°"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

°°°°"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

°°°°"She has given away her gold!"

°°°°"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

°°°°"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

°°°°"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

°°°°"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

°°°°"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

°°°°"How much?"

°°°°"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

°°°°"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

°°°°After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

°°°°"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

°°°°"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

°°°°"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

°°°°"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

°°°°"She has not a month to live."

°°°°Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

°°°°"What can be done?"

°°°°"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

°°°°"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

°°°°"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

°°°°"The scoundrels!"

°°°°"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

°°°°"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

°°°°He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

°°°°"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

°°°°"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

°°°°But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

°°°°"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

°°°°He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

°°°°"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

°°°°"O God, have pity upon us!"

°°°°The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

°°°°"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

°°°°Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

°°°°"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

°°°°"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

°°°°"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

°°°°"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

°°°°"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

°°°°Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

°°°°"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

°°°°"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

°°°°The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

°°°°"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

°°°°"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

°°°°"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

°°°°Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

°°°°"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

°°°°Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

°°°°"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

°°°°"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

°°°°"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

°°°°"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

°°°°XII

°°°°On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

°°°°"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

°°°°"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

°°°°"Oh! father--"

°°°°"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

°°°°"What is it you wish me to do?"

°°°°"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

°°°°"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

°°°°"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

°°°°"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

°°°°"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

°°°°Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

°°°°"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

°°°°"I will do all you wish, father."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

°°°°"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

°°°°He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

°°°°"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

°°°°The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

°°°°"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

°°°°"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

°°°°"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

°°°°Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

°°°°*****

°°°°Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

°°°°At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

°°°°"Yes, my father," she would answer.

°°°°"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

°°°°Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

°°°°"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

°°°°When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

°°°°"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

°°°°"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

°°°°*****

°°°°Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

°°°°"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

°°°°The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

°°°°"Nanon, we are alone--"

°°°°"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

°°°°"The ocean is between us," she said.

°°°°While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

°°°°"Fast colors!" said the draper.

°°°°"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

°°°°"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

°°°°When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

°°°°At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

°°°°It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

°°°°"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

°°°°"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

°°°°"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

°°°°"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

°°°°Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

°°°°Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

°°°°"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

°°°°"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

°°°°XIII

°°°°While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

°°°°With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

°°°°Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

°°°°Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

°°°°"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

°°°°Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

°°°°Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

°°°°"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

°°°°*****

°°°°At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

°°°°"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

°°°°The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

°°°°"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

°°°°Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

°°°°"Read it, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

°°°°Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

°°°°My dear Cousin,--

°°°°"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

°°°°You--

°°°°"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

°°°°"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

°°°°"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

°°°°She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

°°°°My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

°°°°success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

°°°°rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

°°°°together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

°°°°des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

°°°°we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

°°°°Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

°°°°the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

°°°°be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

°°°°life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

°°°°To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

°°°°dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

°°°°realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

°°°°from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

°°°°forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

°°°°long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

°°°°Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

°°°°--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

°°°°forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

°°°°night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

°°°°to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

°°°°heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

°°°°Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

°°°°sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

°°°°deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

°°°°all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

°°°°present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

°°°°all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

°°°°Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

°°°°your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

°°°°will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

°°°°education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

°°°°with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

°°°°myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

°°°°to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

°°°°think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

°°°°be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

°°°°right to understand it and to judge it.

°°°°I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

°°°°francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

°°°°Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

°°°°me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

°°°°Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

°°°°dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

°°°°marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

°°°°advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

°°°°are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

°°°°my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

°°°°have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

°°°°year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

°°°°proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

°°°°You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

°°°°heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

°°°°years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

°°°°but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

°°°°remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

°°°°which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

°°°°and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

°°°°you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

°°°°convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

°°°°putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

°°°°of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

°°°°ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

°°°°simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

°°°°Your devoted cousin,

°°°°Charles.

°°°°"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

°°°°P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

°°°°thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

°°°°capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

°°°°am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

°°°°which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

°°°°gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

°°°°hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

°°°°"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

°°°°Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

°°°°"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

°°°°Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

°°°°This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

°°°°"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

°°°°"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

°°°°"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

°°°°"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

°°°°"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

°°°°At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

°°°°"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

°°°°"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

°°°°"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

°°°°"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

°°°°Eugenie read the following letter:--

°°°°My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

°°°°has been in Paris about a month--

°°°°"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

°°°°I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

°°°°Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

°°°°the banns are published--

°°°°"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

°°°°The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

°°°°will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

°°°°tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

°°°°business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

°°°°keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

°°°°fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

°°°°devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

°°°°/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

°°°°the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

°°°°francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

°°°°there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

°°°°creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

°°°°I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

°°°°Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

°°°°Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

°°°°for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

°°°°have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

°°°°happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

°°°°matter before you have spoken to her about it--

°°°°There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

°°°°"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

°°°°"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

°°°°"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

°°°°"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

°°°°"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

°°°°The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

°°°°"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

°°°°There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

°°°°"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

°°°°"A love game," said the notary.

°°°°Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

°°°°"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

°°°°"I am ready for all things," said the president.

°°°°"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

°°°°The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

°°°°"I will be your slave!" he said.

°°°°"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

°°°°The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

°°°°When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

°°°°The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

°°°°The president gave Charles the following letter:--

°°°°My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

°°°°place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

°°°°also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

°°°°sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

°°°°I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

°°°°Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

°°°°mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

°°°°I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

°°°°not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

°°°°according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

°°°°our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

°°°°your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

°°°°in your cousin

°°°°Eugenie.

°°°°The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

°°°°"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

°°°°"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

°°°°Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

°°°°"Seventeen mil--"

°°°°"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

°°°°"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

°°°°"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

°°°°"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

°°°°"In money?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

°°°°"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

°°°°"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

°°°°The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

°°°°"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

°°°°The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

°°°°"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

°°°°"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

°°°°Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

°°°°God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

°°°°The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

°°°°Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

°°°°End





°°°°Colonel Chabert

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage and Clara Bell

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Madame la Comtesse Ida de Bocarme nee du Chasteler.

°°°°COLONEL CHABERT

°°°°"HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!"

°°°°This exclamation was made by a lawyer's clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper--a messenger in fact--who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread with a hearty appetite. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

°°°°"Come, Simonnin, don't play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!" said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

°°°°The lawyer's messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and /billets-doux/ keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

°°°°"If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?" asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

°°°°And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

°°°°"What trick can we play that cove?" said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

°°°°Then he went on improvising:

°°°°"/But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth/--(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned-- you, as you engross it!)--/when he resumed the reins of Government, understood/--(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)--/the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!/--(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)--/and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents/--('numerous' is flattering, and ought to please the Bench)--/all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in/--Stop," said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, "that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.--Well," he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, "well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!"

°°°°And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating--"/given in/--Are you ready?"

°°°°"Yes," cried the three writers.

°°°°It all went all together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

°°°°"/Given in/--Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our /i/'s and cross our /t/'s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages."

°°°°"By Jingo!" repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

°°°°"What! have you written /by Jingo/?" cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

°°°°"Why, yes," said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor's copy, "he has written, '/We must dot our i's/' and spelt it /by Gingo/!"

°°°°All the clerks shouted with laughter.

°°°°"Why! Monsieur Hure, you take 'By Jingo' for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!" exclaimed Simonnin.

°°°°"Scratch it cleanly out," said the head clerk. "If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the 'Shoulder arms!' of the law."

°°°°"/Given in--in/?" asked Godeschal.--"Tell me when, Boucard."

°°°°"June 1814," replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

°°°°A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, "Come in!"

°°°°Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers--/broutilles/ (odds and ends) in French law jargon--and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

°°°°The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk's cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk's table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

°°°°The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,--all the glory of a lawyer's office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine --neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of /remainders/, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to /Chlet/)--a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

°°°°So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients--something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities--an attorney's office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

°°°°But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man's soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

°°°°"Where is my penknife?"

°°°°"I am eating my breakfast."

°°°°"You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen!"

°°°°These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

°°°°"Monsieur, is your master at home?"

°°°°The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, "I am deaf."

°°°°"What do you want, sir?" asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

°°°°"This is the fifth time I have called," replied the victim. "I wish to speak to M. Derville."

°°°°"On business?"

°°°°"Yes, but I can explain it to no one but--"

°°°°"M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to----"

°°°°The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers' clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the old man, "as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up."

°°°°Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

°°°°"It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning." The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in "parties," went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

°°°°"I will come again to-night," said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

°°°°The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

°°°°"What do you think of that for a cracked pot?" said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

°°°°"He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again," said a clerk.

°°°°"He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay," said the head clerk.

°°°°"No, he is a retired concierge," said Godeschal.

°°°°"I bet you he is a nobleman," cried Boucard.

°°°°"I bet you he has been a porter," retorted Godeschal. "Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body's. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch."

°°°°"He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch," cried Desroches. "It has been known!"

°°°°"No," Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, "I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic."

°°°°"I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Done with you," answered Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur! Monsieur!" shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

°°°°"What are you at now, Simonnin?" asked Boucard.

°°°°"I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know."

°°°°All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

°°°°"What can we say to him?" cried Godeschal.

°°°°"Leave it to me," replied Boucard.

°°°°The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Boucard, "will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know----"

°°°°"Chabert."

°°°°"The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?" asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

°°°°"The same, monsieur," replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

°°°°"Whew!"

°°°°"Done brown!"

°°°°"Poof!"

°°°°"Oh!"

°°°°"Ah!"

°°°°"Boum!"

°°°°"The old rogue!"

°°°°"Ting-a-ring-ting!"

°°°°"Sold again!"

°°°°"Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying," said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

°°°°There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopeia of the language would fail to represent.

°°°°"Which theatre shall we go to?"

°°°°"To the opera," cried the head clerk.

°°°°"In the first place," said Godeschal, "I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui."

°°°°"Madame Saqui is not the play."

°°°°"What is a play?" replied Godeschal. "First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen--"

°°°°"But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!" cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

°°°°"To be seen for money," Godeschal added.

°°°°"But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective," said Desroches.

°°°°"But do listen to me!"

°°°°"You are talking nonsense, my dear boy," said Boucard.

°°°°"Is Curtius' a play?" said Godeschal.

°°°°"No," said the head clerk, "it is a collection of figures--but it is a spectacle."

°°°°"I bet you a hundred francs to a sou," Godeschal resumed, "that Curtius' Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy."

°°°°"And so on, and so forth!" said Simonnin.

°°°°"You mind I don't box your ears!" said Godeschal.

°°°°The clerk shrugged their shoulders.

°°°°"Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us," he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. "On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients."

°°°°"Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow," said Boucard. "To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!"

°°°°"If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?" said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal's.

°°°°"Since nothing is settled," said Boucard, "let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in 'Nero.' Simonnin may go to the pit."

°°°°And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

°°°°"/Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen/ (in words)," said Godeschal. "Ready?"

°°°°"Yes," replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

°°°°"/And we hope that my lords on the Bench/," the extemporizing clerk went on. "Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself."

°°°°"Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines," said Boucard.

°°°°"/We hope/," Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, "/that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth/----"

°°°°"Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn't you like a glass of water?" said the little messenger.

°°°°"That imp of a boy!" said Boucard. "Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides."

°°°°"/Here set forth/," Godeschal went on. "Add /in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse/ (at full length) /de Grandlieu/."

°°°°"What!" cried the chief, "are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor--a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of 'inasmuch,' and go to the Courts myself."

°°°°This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, "Those were good times."

°°°°At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maitre Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

°°°°Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at finding the head clerk busily arranging in a convenient order on his master's dining-room table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take a seat, which the client did.

°°°°"On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you named such an hour for an interview," said the old man, with the forced mirth of a ruined man, who does his best to smile.

°°°°"The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too," replied the man, going on with his work. "M. Derville chooses this hour for studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect is freer at this hour--the only time when he can have the silence and quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case, read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business, then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money."

°°°°As he listened to this explanation, the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an expression so bereft of intelligence, that the clerk, after looking at him, thought no more about him.

°°°°A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers. The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius' collection to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This quiescence would not have been a subject for astonishment if it had not completed the supernatural aspect of the man's whole person. The old soldier was dry and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, if I may use such a vulgar expression, was as the face of the dead. Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

°°°°Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head was due to some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by Rembrandt, without a frame. The brim of the hat which covered the old man's brow cast a black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This grotesque effect, though natural, threw into relief by contrast the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a certain look of melancholy madness, and the deteriorating symptoms characteristic of senility, giving the face an indescribably ill- starred look which no human words could render.

°°°°But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had worn into this face, as drops of water from the sky falling on fine marble at last destroy its beauty. A physician, an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama at the sight of its sublime horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques which artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of the lithographic stone while chatting with a friend.

°°°°On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful reverie in silence and at night. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow to the young man; the leather lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was, "His intelligence must have escaped through that cut."

°°°°"If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!" thought Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Derville, "to whom have I the honor of speaking?"

°°°°"To Colonel Chabert."

°°°°"Which?"

°°°°"He who was killed at Eylau," replied the old man.

°°°°On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each other, as much as to say, "He is mad."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Colonel went on, "I wish to confide to you the secret of my position."

°°°°A thing worthy of note is the natural intrepidity of lawyers. Whether from the habit of receiving a great many persons, or from the deep sense of the protection conferred on them by the law, or from confidence in their missions, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing, like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

°°°°"During the day, sir," said the attorney, "I am not so miserly of my time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise. Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I may consider necessary. Speak."

°°°°Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he turned over the bundles of papers.

°°°°"You know, perhaps," said the dead man, "that I commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat's famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is a historical fact, recorded in /Victoires et Conquetes/, where it is related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor, after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the enemy's cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers, perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse. Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men, fifteen hundred of them--there might have been more! My death was announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution --for he was fond of me, was the master--wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and bring me into Hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, for he was very busy, 'Go and see whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.' These rascally saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse, and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was probably made out in accordance with the rules of military jurisprudence."

°°°°As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and relate a story so probable though so strange, the young lawyer ceased fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

°°°°"Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud," he said, interrupting the speaker, "Colonel Chabert's widow?"

°°°°"My wife--yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the custom in time of the war, and thrown into the common grave by the men ordered to bury the dead?

°°°°"Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded. Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a ball.

°°°°"When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. the little air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room. I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die. This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard--or I thought I heard, I will assert nothing--groans from the world of dead among whom I was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very indistinct, in spite of my impressions of far more acute suffering I was fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

°°°°"But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such as I have never known elsewhere--literally, the silence of the grave. At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would seem that, thanks to the carelessness and the haste with which we had been pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules! A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unhoped-for help, I must have perished. But with a fury you may imagine, I began to work my way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which had no doubt been thrown over us--I say us, as if there had been others living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms. This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw daylight, but through snow!

°°°°"At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse, who knows, had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow. However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole, where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the moment for saying, 'Respect courage in misfortune!' In short, monsieur, after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy, of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them they got me to their poor hovel.

°°°°"It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy--allow me to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which, from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

°°°°"You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave as naked as I came from my mother's; so that six months afterwards, when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert, and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man, named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

°°°°"Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence, nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond, begging my bread, treated as a madman when I have told my story, without ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert. For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample reason for shutting a man up.

°°°°"At the end of two years' detention, which I was compelled to submit to, after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, 'Here is a poor man who thinks he is Colonel Chabert' to people who would reply, 'Poor fellow!' I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh, monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I----"

°°°°Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study, which Derville respected.

°°°°"One fine day," his visitor resumed, "one spring day, they gave me the key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me. If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name, no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field- Marshal in Austria or Russia. Who knows?"

°°°°"Monsieur," said the attorney, "you have upset all my ideas. I feel as if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you."

°°°°"You are the only person," said the Colonel, with a melancholy look, "who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary documents to begin my lawsuit--"

°°°°"What lawsuit?" said the attorney, who had forgotten his client's painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

°°°°"Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a son. When I tell lawyers these things--men of sense; when I propose-- I, a beggar--to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I--a dead man--bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold politeness, which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler or a madman--it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts, under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!"

°°°°"Pray resume your narrative," said Derville.

°°°°" 'Pray resume it!' " cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer's hand. "That is the first polite word I have heard since----"

°°°°The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing and unutterable eloquence that lies in the eyes, in a gesture, even in silence, entirely convinced Derville, and touched him deeply.

°°°°"Listen, monsieur," said he; "I have this evening won three hundred francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his fortune to make. Proceed."

°°°°The Colonel, as he called himself, sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps it was in obedience to the inexplicable feeling, the latent germ in every man's heart, to which we owe the experiments of alchemists, the passion for glory, the discoveries of astronomy and of physics, everything which prompts man to expand his being by multiplying himself through deeds or ideas. In his mind the /Ego/ was now but a secondary object, just as the vanity of success or the pleasures of winning become dearer to the gambler than the object he has at stake. The young lawyer's words were as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer's office the ten gold pieces which had so long been refused him by so many people, and in so many ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured. There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us, it is like a thunderbolt; they burn us. The poor man's gratitude was too great to find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found his voice.

°°°°"Where was I?" said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier, and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in France.

°°°°"At Stuttgart. You were out of prison," said Derville.

°°°°"You know my wife?" asked the Colonel.

°°°°"Yes," said Derville, with a bow.

°°°°"What is she like?"

°°°°"Still quite charming."

°°°°The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation that is characteristic of men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, with a sort of cheerfulness--for he breathed again, the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave; he had just melted a covering of snow less easily thawed than that which had once before frozen his head; and he drew a deep breath, as if he had just escaped from a dungeon--"Monsieur, if I had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a /sans-culotte/. I was more like an Esquimaux than a Frenchman--I, who had formerly been considered one of the smartest of fops in 1799!--I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

°°°°"Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier's name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; but though I recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin's mouth opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known. It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was, then, unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former friends!

°°°°"I had once saved Boutin's life, but it was only the repayment of a debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but, like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I recalled them to his mind his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me, were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered triumphantly.

°°°°"He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon's first abdication. That news was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

°°°°"We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland, Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies. Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert. That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage, whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose only protector is the Almighty.--Nay, I am wrong! I had a father--the Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see /his Chabert/, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my wife's silence!

°°°°"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar. Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me. I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

°°°°"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu. There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me! Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

°°°°"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur, knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury, "when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

°°°°"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness; well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not know what will become of me!"

°°°°With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

°°°°"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg, it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

°°°°"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I fail, I can die--but not alone."

°°°°The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy, lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

°°°°"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

°°°°"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

°°°°"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to recover; you are rich."

°°°°This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

°°°°"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

°°°°The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville, and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

°°°°"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

°°°°The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs, and held a light for him.

°°°°"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the day."

°°°°When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

°°°°"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.

°°°°About three months after this interview, at night, in Derville's room, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville's account to his eccentric client, came to consult the attorney on a serious matter, and began by begging him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

°°°°"Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?" said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought up the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

°°°°"I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair," replied Derville. "My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty- five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism."

°°°°As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers his head clerk had laid out for him. His eye was struck by the appearance of the stamps--long, square, and triangular, in red and blue ink, which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

°°°°"Ah ha!" said he with a laugh, "here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!"

°°°°He took up the letter and opened it; but he could not read it; it was written in German.

°°°°"Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately," said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

°°°°The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, all perfectly regular and duly witnessed, and legally stamped to serve as evidence in law. He also informed him that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

°°°°"This looks like business," cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. "But look here, my boy," he went on, addressing the notary, "I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?"

°°°°"We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin," interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

°°°°"Well, was it not that ill-used man who has just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients' money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert's estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud."

°°°°"Yes," said Crottat. "It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollections, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at the time of his decease, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury."

°°°°"So that Comte Chabert's personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?"

°°°°"Consequently so it was, old fellow!" said Crottat. "You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other."

°°°°Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint- Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were rather too deep for cab wheels. Looking about him on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, "Vergniaud, dairyman." To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, all painted in white. The gate was open, and no doubt remained open all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels built in the neighborhood of Paris, which are like nothing else, not even the most wretched dwellings in the country, of which they have all the poverty without their poetry.

°°°°Indeed, in the midst of the fields, even a hovel may have a certain grace derived from the pure air, the verdure, the open country--a hill, a serpentine road, vineyards, quickset hedges, moss-grown thatch and rural implements; but poverty in Paris gains dignity only by horror. Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found a legitimate use; they had been collected from the various demolitions which are going on every day in Paris. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, "Fancy Goods." The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed to be the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil, and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall of this frail construction, which seemed rather more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred their numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes, the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough deal boards nailed so as to overlap, and shabbily thatched with rushes.

°°°°Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of the necessity for being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags that were used to clean them, fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat was munching the shoots of a starved and dusty vine that clung to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, was licking them over. The fowls, scared by Derville's approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

°°°°"And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!" said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the general effect of the squalid scene.

°°°°The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, in the hope that they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole thing tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither of them replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity, if I may combine those two words. Derville repeated his questions, but without success. Provoked by the saucy cunning of these three imps, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry which young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

°°°°The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold of his doorway with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely- colored pipe--a technical phrase to a smoker--a humble, short clay pipe of the kind called "/brule-queule/." He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join his benefactor the sooner, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

°°°°"Silence in the ranks!"

°°°°The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

°°°°"Why did you not write to me?" he said to Derville. "Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there," he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer's hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

°°°°Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; and, in fact, Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel's bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread two or three of those old fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating salt-petre, green with mould, and full of cracks, were so excessively damp that on the side where the Colonel's bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the /Bulletins de la Grande Armee/, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel's reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit to Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived in them traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

°°°°"Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?" he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

°°°°"But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!"

°°°°The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the deplorable experience which they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

°°°°"Here," said he to himself, "is a man who has of course spent my money in satisfying a trooper's three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!"

°°°°"To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----" And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--"I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace."

°°°°Derville reflected that there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums of money he had advanced, so he merely said:

°°°°"But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, but where you would have been better lodged?"

°°°°"Why," replied the Colonel, "the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me /gratis/ for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old /Egyptian/--"

°°°°"An Egyptian!"

°°°°"We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read."

°°°°"He might have lodged you better for your money," said Derville.

°°°°"Bah!" said the Colonel, "his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune . . . However, it does very well."

°°°°"Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!"

°°°°"Curse the money! To think I haven't got any!" he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

°°°°Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

°°°°"Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business," said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

°°°°"To me," said the soldier, "it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau."

°°°°"Things are not done so in the legal world," said Derville. "Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing that justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

°°°°"In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets."

°°°°"And my fortune?"

°°°°"Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?"

°°°°"Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?"

°°°°"My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs."

°°°°"And you call that justice!" said the Colonel, in dismay.

°°°°"Why, certainly--"

°°°°"A pretty kind of justice!"

°°°°"So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, that what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor."

°°°°"But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----"

°°°°"I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to."

°°°°"That would be to sell my wife!"

°°°°"With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in the position in which you are, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice."

°°°°"Let us go together."

°°°°"What, just as you are?" said the lawyer. "No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot."

°°°°"Can I possibly gain it?"

°°°°"On every count," replied Derville. "But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor."

°°°°"To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that," said he simply.

°°°°"Well, until then," Derville went on, "will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it."

°°°°Large tears gathered in the poor veteran's faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

°°°°"I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!" he cried. "I will call out: 'I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!'--The statue--he--he will know me."

°°°°"And you will find yourself in Charenton."

°°°°At this terrible name the soldier's transports collapsed.

°°°°"And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?"

°°°°"The war office!" said Derville. "Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire."

°°°°The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

°°°°His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements, which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

°°°°Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

°°°°"Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests."

°°°°"Do what you will," said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death."

°°°°"Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?"

°°°°"That is not my view of it," said the lawyer. "We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud's intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension."

°°°°"Well, proceed then," said Chabert. "I put myself entirely in your hands."

°°°°"I will send you a power of attorney to sign," said Derville. "Good- bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me."

°°°°Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer's hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him excepting with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

°°°°During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer's; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir," said he, taking Derville by the arm, "if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General's."

°°°°"And what then?" replied Derville. "What concern have you with him?-- But who are you?" said the cautious lawyer.

°°°°"I am Louis Vergniaud," he replied at once. "I have a few words to say to you."

°°°°"So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?"

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think? --Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it's neighbors' fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings."

°°°°"He?"

°°°°"Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, 'Really, General----' 'Bah!' says he, 'I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.'--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados-- Do you know him, sir?"

°°°°"But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you."

°°°°"He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it's just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----"

°°°°Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

°°°°"On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!" thought he.

°°°°"All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure."

°°°°"And will that be soon?"

°°°°"Why, yes."

°°°°"Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!" and the cowkeeper's tanned face seemed to expand.

°°°°"Now," said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, "let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but . . ."

°°°°And he set to work to study the Countess' position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves up when concocting their own plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

°°°°But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer's cleverness.

°°°°Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old /Parlement/ of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon's blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor's advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised the restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

°°°°The Emperor fell.

°°°°At the time of Comte Chabert's death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband's fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving of this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband's will; but Napoleon's hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count's marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

°°°°Then came the Restoration. The Count's political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the "Gulf of Revolution should be closed"--for this phrase of the King's, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer's preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

°°°°Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master's influence, and he made the Count's fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness of which most women have a share more or less, understood the man's motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well, that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

°°°°The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess' abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress' capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on the housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess' greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

°°°°At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert's widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

°°°°A speech he made, /a propos/ of Talleyrand's marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess' heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband's return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

°°°°"There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud's position," said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. "How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the /pairie/ by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the /Parlement/ is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King's great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess," thought he as he went up the steps.

°°°°Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

°°°°She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, while playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert's wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

°°°°"The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them."

°°°°A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

°°°°"Good-morning, Monsieur Derville," said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

°°°°"Madame," said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. "I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter."

°°°°"I am so /grieved/, M. le Comte is away--"

°°°°"I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count."

°°°°"Then I will send for Delbecq," said she.

°°°°"He would be of no use to you, clever as he is," replied Derville. "Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!"

°°°°"Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?" said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

°°°°"Madame," he said with cold and piercing solemnity, "you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point."

°°°°"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

°°°°"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

°°°°"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come."

°°°°"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

°°°°"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--"

°°°°"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

°°°°"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----"

°°°°The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's attorney, be so good as to--"

°°°°"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening."

°°°°"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

°°°°"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

°°°°"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

°°°°"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you."

°°°°"And who is he?"

°°°°"Comte Ferraud."

°°°°"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--"

°°°°"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--"

°°°°"He would defend me, monsieur."

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

°°°°"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

°°°°The Countess turned pale.

°°°°"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

°°°°"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?"

°°°°"Compromise!" said Derville.

°°°°"Does he still love me?" she said.

°°°°"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

°°°°The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

°°°°"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.

°°°°A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and seemed to have acquired youth and /impasto/, to borrow a picturesque word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture and a book.

°°°°When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville's office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off, when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a dress which, though simple, was cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was. She wore a pretty drawn bonnet lined with pink, which framed her face to perfection, softening its outlines and making it look younger.

°°°°If the clients were rejuvenescent, the office was unaltered, and presented the same picture as that described at the beginning of this story. Simonnin was eating his breakfast, his shoulder leaning against the window, which was then open, and he was staring up at the blue sky in the opening of the courtyard enclosed by four gloomy houses.

°°°°"Ah, ha!" cried the little clerk, "who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?"

°°°°"The chief is a great magician," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Then there is no trick to play on him this time?" asked Desroches.

°°°°"His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud," said Boucard.

°°°°"What next?" said Godeschal. "Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?"

°°°°"Here she is," answered Simonnin.

°°°°"So you are not deaf, you young rogue!" said Chabert, taking the gutter-jumper by the ear and twisting it, to the delight of the other clerks, who began to laugh, looking at the Colonel with the curious attention due to so singular a personage.

°°°°Comte Chabert was in Derville's private room at the moment when his wife came in by the door of the office.

°°°°"I say, Boucard, there is going to be a queer scene in the chief's room! There is a woman who can spend her days alternately, the odd with Comte Ferraud, and the even with Comte Chabert."

°°°°"And in leap year," said Godeschal, "they must settle the /count/ between them."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen, you can be heard!" said Boucard severely. "I never was in an office where there was so much jesting as there is here over the clients."

°°°°Derville had made the Colonel retire to the bedroom when the Countess was admitted.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert, I have placed you apart. If, however, you should wish it--"

°°°°"It is an attention for which I am obliged to you."

°°°°"I have drawn up the memorandum of an agreement of which you and M. Chabert can discuss the conditions, here, and now. I will go alternately to him and to you, and explain your views respectively."

°°°°"Let me see, monsieur," said the Countess impatiently.

°°°°Derville read aloud:

°°°°" 'Between the undersigned:

°°°°" 'M. Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, Marechal de Camp, and Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, living in Paris, Rue du Petit-Banquier, on the one part;

°°°°" 'And Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the aforesaid M. le Comte Chabert, /nee/--' "

°°°°"Pass over the preliminaries," said she. "Come to the conditions."

°°°°"Madame," said the lawyer, "the preamble briefly sets forth the position in which you stand to each other. Then, by the first clause, you acknowledge, in the presence of three witnesses, of whom two shall be notaries, and one the dairyman with whom your husband has been lodging, to all of whom your secret is known, and who will be absolutely silent--you acknowledge, I say, that the individual designated in the documents subjoined to the deed, and whose identity is to be further proved by an act of recognition prepared by your notary, Alexandre Crottat, is your first husband, Comte Chabert. By the second clause Comte Chabert, to secure your happiness, will undertake to assert his rights only under certain circumstances set forth in the deed.--And these," said Derville, in a parenthesis, "are none other than a failure to carry out the conditions of this secret agreement.--M. Chabert, on his part, agrees to accept judgment on a friendly suit, by which his certificate of death shall be annulled, and his marriage dissolved."

°°°°"That will not suit me in the least," said the Countess with surprise. "I will be a party to no suit; you know why."

°°°°"By the third clause," Derville went on, with imperturbable coolness, "you pledge yourself to secure to Hyacinthe Comte Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock held in his name, to revert to you at his death--"

°°°°"But it is much too dear!" exclaimed the Countess.

°°°°"Can you compromise the matter cheaper?"

°°°°"Possibly."

°°°°"But what do you want, madame?"

°°°°"I want--I will not have a lawsuit. I want--"

°°°°"You want him to remain dead?" said Derville, interrupting her hastily.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, "if twenty-four thousand francs a year are necessary, we will go to law--"

°°°°"Yes, we will go to law," said the Colonel in a deep voice, as he opened the door and stood before his wife, with one hand in his waistcoat and the other hanging by his side--an attitude to which the recollection of his adventure gave horrible significance.

°°°°"It is he," said the Countess to herself.

°°°°"Too dear!" the old soldier exclaimed. "I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you--you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved--"

°°°°"But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!" cried the Countess, in feigned amazement.

°°°°"Indeed!" said the old man, in a tone of intense irony. "Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais Royal----"

°°°°The Countess turned pale. Seeing her grow white under her rouge, the old soldier paused, touched by the acute suffering he was inflicting on the woman he had once so ardently loved; but she shot such a venomous glance at him that he abruptly went on:

°°°°"You were with La--"

°°°°"Allow me, Monsieur Derville," said the Countess to the lawyer. "You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things."

°°°°She rose and went out. Derville rushed after her; but the Countess had taken wings, and seemed to have flown from the place.

°°°°On returning to his private room, he found the Colonel in a towering rage, striding up and down.

°°°°"In those times a man took his wife where he chose," said he. "But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted to appearances. She has no heart."

°°°°"Well, Colonel, was I not right to beg you not to come?--I am now positive of your identity; when you came in, the Countess gave a little start, of which the meaning was unequivocal. But you have lost your chances. Your wife knows that you are unrecognizable."

°°°°"I will kill her!"

°°°°"Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch. Besides you might miss! That would be unpardonable. A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife.--Let me set things straight; you are only a big child. Go now. Take care of yourself; she is capable of setting some trap for you and shutting you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you against a surprise."

°°°°The unhappy Colonel obeyed his young benefactor, and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly went down the dark staircase, lost in gloomy thoughts, and crushed perhaps by the blow just dealt him--the most cruel he could feel, the thrust that could most deeply pierce his heart--when he heard the rustle of a woman's dress on the lowest landing, and his wife stood before him.

°°°°"Come, monsieur," said she, taking his arm with a gesture like those familiar to him of old. Her action and the accent of her voice, which had recovered its graciousness, were enough to allay the Colonel's wrath, and he allowed himself to be led to the carriage.

°°°°"Well, get in!" said she, when the footman had let down the step.

°°°°And as if by magic, he found himself sitting by his wife in the brougham.

°°°°"Where to?" asked the servant.

°°°°"To Groslay," said she.

°°°°The horses started at once, and carried them all across Paris.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, in a tone of voice which betrayed one of those emotions which are rare in our lives, and which agitate every part of our being. At such moments the heart, fibres, nerves, countenance, soul, and body, everything, every pore even, feels a thrill. Life no longer seems to be within us; it flows out, springs forth, is communicated as if by contagion, transmitted by a look, a tone of voice, a gesture, impressing our will on others. The old soldier started on hearing this single word, this first, terrible "monsieur!" But still it was at once a reproach and a pardon, a hope and a despair, a question and an answer. This word included them all; none but an actress could have thrown so much eloquence, so many feelings into a single word. Truth is less complete in its utterance; it does not put everything on the outside; it allows us to see what is within. The Colonel was filled with remorse for his suspicions, his demands, and his anger; he looked down not to betray his agitation.

°°°°"Monsieur," repeated she, after an imperceptible pause, "I knew you at once."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old soldier, "those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes."

°°°°Two large tears rolled hot on to his wife's hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

°°°°"Monsieur," she went on, "could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false as mine now is? If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in the privacy of my family. Ought not such a secret to remain buried in our hearts? You will forgive me, I hope, for my apparent indifference to the woes of a Chabert in whose existence I could not possibly believe. I received your letters," she hastily added, seeing in his face the objection it expressed, "but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing was unrecognizable; and after obtaining Napoleon's signature to my second marriage contract, I could not help believing that some clever swindler wanted to make a fool of me. Therefore, to avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud's peace of mind, and disturbing family ties, I was obliged to take precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right, I ask you?"

°°°°"Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot, the owl, the dolt, not to have calculated better what the consequences of such a position might be.--But where are we going?" he asked, seeing that they had reached the barrier of La Chapelle.

°°°°"To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There, monsieur, we will consider the steps to be taken. I know my duties. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? We need not inform the public of a situation, which for me has its ridiculous side, and let us preserve our dignity. You still love me," she said, with a sad, sweet gaze at the Colonel, "but have not I been authorized to form other ties? In so strange a position, a secret voice bids me trust to your kindness, which is so well known to me. Can I be wrong in taking you as the sole arbiter of my fate? Be at once judge and party to the suit. I trust in your noble character; you will be generous enough to forgive me for the consequences of faults committed in innocence. I may then confess to you: I love M. Ferraud. I believed that I had a right to love him. I do not blush to make this confession to you; even if it offends you, it does not disgrace us. I cannot conceal the facts. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother."

°°°°The Colonel with a wave of his hand bid his wife be silent, and for a mile and a half they sat without speaking a single word. Chabert could fancy he saw the two little ones before him.

°°°°"Rosine."

°°°°"Monsieur?"

°°°°"The dead are very wrong to come to life again."

°°°°"Oh, monsieur, no, no! Do not think me ungrateful. Only, you find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old man in a softened tone, "I no longer feel any resentment against you. We will forget anything," he added, with one of those smiles which always reflect a noble soul; "I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me."

°°°°The Countess gave him a flashing look full of such deep gratitude that poor Chabert would have been glad to sink again into his grave at Eylau. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion, of which the whole reward consists in the assurance that they have made the person they love happy.

°°°°"My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested," said the Countess.

°°°°The conversation turned to other subjects, for it was impossible to dwell very long on this one. Though the couple came back again and again to their singular position, either by some allusion or of serious purpose, they had a delightful drive, recalling the events of their former life together and the times of the Empire. The Countess knew how to lend peculiar charm to her reminiscences, and gave the conversation the tinge of melancholy that was needed to keep it serious. She revived his love without awakening his desires, and allowed her first husband to discern the mental wealth she had acquired while trying to accustom him to moderate his pleasure to that which a father may feel in the society of a favorite daughter.

°°°°The Colonel had known the Countess of the Empire; he found her a Countess of the Restoration.

°°°°At last, by a cross-road, they arrived at the entrance to a large park lying in the little valley which divides the heights of Margency from the pretty village of Groslay. The Countess had there a delightful house, where the Colonel on arriving found everything in readiness for his stay there, as well as for his wife's. Misfortune is a kind of talisman whose virtue consists in its power to confirm our original nature; in some men it increases their distrust and malignancy, just as it improves the goodness of those who have a kind heart.

°°°°Sorrow had made the Colonel even more helpful and good than he had always been, and he could understand some secrets of womanly distress which are unrevealed to most men. Nevertheless, in spite of his loyal trustfulness, he could not help saying to his wife:

°°°°"Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?"

°°°°"Yes," replied she, "if I found Colonel Chabert in Derville's client."

°°°°The appearance of truth she contrived to give to this answer dissipated the slight suspicions which the Colonel was ashamed to have felt. For three days the Countess was quite charming to her first husband. By tender attentions and unfailing sweetness she seemed anxious to wipe out the memory of the sufferings he had endured, and to earn forgiveness for the woes which, as she confessed, she had innocently caused him. She delighted in displaying for him the charms she knew he took pleasure in, while at the same time she assumed a kind of melancholy; for men are more especially accessible to certain ways, certain graces of the heart or of the mind which they cannot resist. She aimed at interesting him in her position, and appealing to his feelings so far as to take possession of his mind and control him despotically.

°°°°Ready for anything to attain her ends, she did not yet know what she was to do with this man; but at any rate she meant to annihilate him socially. On the evening of the third day she felt that in spite of her efforts she could not conceal her uneasiness as to the results of her manoeuvres. To give herself a minute's reprieve she went up to her room, sat down before her writing-table, and laid aside the mask of composure which she wore in Chabert's presence, like an actress who, returning to her dressing-room after a fatiguing fifth act, drops half dead, leaving with the audience an image of herself which she no longer resembles. She proceeded to finish a letter she had begun to Delbecq, whom she desired to go in her name and demand of Derville the deeds relating to Colonel Chabert, to copy them, and to come to her at once to Groslay. She had hardly finished when she heard the Colonel's step in the passage; uneasy at her absence, he had come to look for her.

°°°°"Alas!" she exclaimed, "I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable . . ."

°°°°"Why, what is the matter?" asked the good man.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing!" she replied.

°°°°She rose, left the Colonel, and went down to speak privately to her maid, whom she sent off to Paris, impressing on her that she was herself to deliver to Delbecq the letter just written, and to bring it back to the writer as soon as he had read it. Then the Countess went out to sit on a bench sufficiently in sight for the Colonel to join her as soon as he might choose. The Colonel, who was looking for her, hastened up and sat down by her.

°°°°"Rosine," said he, "what is the matter with you?"

°°°°She did not answer.

°°°°It was one of those glorious, calm evenings in the month of June, whose secret harmonies infuse such sweetness into the sunset. The air was clear, the stillness perfect, so that far away in the park they could hear the voices of some children, which added a kind of melody to the sublimity of the scene.

°°°°"You do not answer me?" the Colonel said to his wife.

°°°°"My husband----" said the Countess, who broke off, started a little, and with a blush stopped to ask him, "What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?"

°°°°"Call him your husband, my poor child," replied the Colonel, in a kind voice. "Is he not the father of your children?"

°°°°"Well, then," she said, "if he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out that I came here, alone, with a stranger, what am I to say to him? Listen, monsieur," she went on, assuming a dignified attitude, "decide my fate, I am resigned to anything--"

°°°°"My dear," said the Colonel, taking possession of his wife's hands, "I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness--"

°°°°"That is impossible!" she exclaimed, with a sudden spasmodic movement. "Remember that you would have to renounce your identity, and in an authenticated form."

°°°°"What?" said the Colonel. "Is not my word enough for you?"

°°°°The word "authenticated" fell on the old man's heart, and roused involuntary distrust. He looked at his wife in a way that made her color, she cast down her eyes, and he feared that he might find himself compelled to despise her. The Countess was afraid lest she had scared the shy modesty, the stern honesty, of a man whose generous temper and primitive virtues were known to her. Though these feelings had brought the clouds to her brow, they immediately recovered their harmony. This was the way of it. A child's cry was heard in the distance.

°°°°"Jules, leave your sister in peace," the Countess called out.

°°°°"What, are your children here?" said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but I told them not to trouble you."

°°°°The old soldier understood the delicacy, the womanly tact of so gracious a precaution, and took the Countess' hand to kiss it.

°°°°"But let them come," said he.

°°°°The little girl ran up to complain of her brother.

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"It was Jules--"

°°°°"It was her--"

°°°°Their little hands were held out to their mother, and the two childish voices mingled; it was an unexpected and charming picture.

°°°°"Poor little things!" cried the Countess, no longer restraining her tears, "I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother's heart cannot be divided; I want them, I want them."

°°°°"Are you making mamma cry?" said Jules, looking fiercely at the Colonel.

°°°°"Silence, Jules!" said the mother in a decided tone.

°°°°The two children stood speechless, examining their mother and the stranger with a curiosity which it is impossible to express in words.

°°°°"Oh yes!" she cried. "If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything . . ."

°°°°This was the decisive speech which gained all that she had hoped from it.

°°°°"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, as if he were ending a sentence already begun in his mind, "I must return underground again. I had told myself so already."

°°°°"Can I accept such a sacrifice?" replied his wife. "If some men have died to save a mistress' honor, they gave their life but once. But in this case you would be giving your life every day. No, no. It is impossible. If it were only your life, it would be nothing; but to sign a declaration that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to sacrifice your honor, and live a lie every hour of the day! Human devotion cannot go so far. Only think!--No. But for my poor children I would have fled with you by this time to the other end of the world."

°°°°"But," said Chabert, "cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn out as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but a little tobacco and the /Constitutionnel/."

°°°°The Countess melted into tears. There was a contest of generosity between the Comtesse Ferraud and Colonel Chabert, and the soldier came out victorious. One evening, seeing this mother with her children, the soldier was bewitched by the touching grace of a family picture in the country, in the shade and the silence; he made a resolution to remain dead, and, frightened no longer at the authentication of a deed, he asked what he could do to secure beyond all risk the happiness of this family.

°°°°"Do exactly as you like," said the Countess. "I declare to you that I will have nothing to do with this affair. I ought not."

°°°°Delbecq had arrived some days before, and in obedience to the Countess' verbal instructions, the intendant had succeeded in gaining the old soldier's confidence. So on the following morning Colonel Chabert went with the erewhile attorney to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had caused the notary to draw up an affidavit in such terms that, after hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

°°°°"Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!" he exclaimed.

°°°°"Indeed, monsieur," said Delbecq, "I should advise you not to sign in haste. In your place I would get at least thirty thousand francs a year out of the bargain. Madame would pay them."

°°°°After annihilating this scoundrel /emeritus/ by the lightning look of an honest man insulted, the Colonel rushed off, carried away by a thousand contrary emotions. He was suspicious, indignant, and calm again by turns.

°°°°Finally he made his way back into the park of Groslay by a gap in a fence, and slowly walked on to sit down and rest, and meditate at his ease, in a little room under a gazebo, from which the road to Saint- Leu could be seen. The path being strewn with the yellowish sand which is used instead of river-gravel, the Countess, who was sitting in the upper room of this little summer-house, did not hear the Colonel's approach, for she was too much preoccupied with the success of her business to pay the smallest attention to the slight noise made by her husband. Nor did the old man notice that his wife was in the room over him.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur Delbecq, has he signed?" the Countess asked her secretary, whom she saw alone on the road beyond the hedge of a haha.

°°°°"No, madame. I do not even know what has become of our man. The old horse reared."

°°°°"Then we shall be obliged to put him into Charenton," said she, "since we have got him."

°°°°The Colonel, who recovered the elasticity of youth to leap the haha, in the twinkling of an eye was standing in front of Delbecq, on whom he bestowed the two finest slaps that ever a scoundrel's cheeks received.

°°°°"And you may add that old horses can kick!" said he.

°°°°His rage spent, the Colonel no longer felt vigorous enough to leap the ditch. He had seen the truth in all its nakedness. The Countess' speech and Delbecq's reply had revealed the conspiracy of which he was to be the victim. The care taken of him was but a bait to entrap him in a snare. That speech was like a drop of subtle poison, bringing on in the old soldier a return of all his sufferings, physical and moral. He came back to the summer-house through the park gate, walking slowly like a broken man.

°°°°Then for him there was to be neither peace nor truce. From this moment he must begin the odious warfare with this woman of which Derville had spoken, enter on a life of litigation, feed on gall, drink every morning of the cup of bitterness. And then--fearful thought!--where was he to find the money needful to pay the cost of the first proceedings? He felt such disgust of life, that if there had been any water at hand he would have thrown himself into it; that if he had had a pistol, he would have blown out his brains. Then he relapsed into the indecision of mind which, since his conversation with Derville at the dairyman's had changed his character.

°°°°At last, having reached the kiosque, he went up to the gazebo, where little rose-windows afforded a view over each lovely landscape of the valley, and where he found his wife seated on a chair. The Countess was gazing at the distance, and preserved a calm countenance, showing that impenetrable face which women can assume when resolved to do their worst. She wiped her eyes as if she had been weeping, and played absently with the pink ribbons of her sash. Nevertheless, in spite of her apparent assurance, she could not help shuddering slightly when she saw before her her venerable benefactor, standing with folded arms, his face pale, his brow stern.

°°°°"Madame," he said, after gazing at her fixedly for a moment and compelling her to blush, "Madame, I do not curse you--I scorn you. I can now thank the chance that has divided us. I do not feel even a desire for revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on the strength of my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps have made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of the sunshine.--Farewell!"

°°°°The Countess threw herself at his feet; she would have detained him by taking his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust, saying:

°°°°"Do not touch me!"

°°°°The Countess' expression when she heard her husband's retreating steps is quite indescribable. Then, with the deep perspicacity given only by utter villainy, or by fierce worldly selfishness, she knew that she might live in peace on the word and the contempt of this loyal veteran.

°°°°Chabert, in fact, disappeared. The dairyman failed in business, and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel, perhaps, took up some similar industry for a time. Perhaps, like a stone flung into a chasm, he went falling from ledge to ledge, to be lost in the mire of rags that seethes through the streets of Paris.

°°°°Six months after this event, Derville, hearing no more of Colonel Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed that they had no doubt come to a compromise, which the Countess, out of revenge, had had arranged by some other lawyer. So one morning he added up the sums he had advanced to the said Chabert with the costs, and begged the Comtesse Ferraud to claim from M. le Comte Chabert the amount of the bill, assuming that she would know where to find her first husband.

°°°°The very next day Comte Ferraud's man of business, lately appointed President of the County Court in a town of some importance, wrote this distressing note to Derville:

°°°°"MONSIEUR,--

°°°°"Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your   client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the   individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he   came forward under false pretences. "Yours, etc.,                DELBECQ."

°°°°"One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half," cried Derville. "They don't deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand- franc notes!"

°°°°Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader to whom he wished to speak, and who was employed in the Police Court. As chance would have it, Derville went into Court Number 6 at the moment when the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months' imprisonment as a vagabond, and subsequently to be taken to the Mendicity House of Detention, a sentence which, by magistrates' law, is equivalent to perpetual imprisonment. On hearing the name of Hyacinthe, Derville looked at the deliquent, sitting between two /gendarmes/ on the bench for the accused, and recognized in the condemned man his false Colonel Chabert.

°°°°The old soldier was placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In spite of his rags, in spite of the misery stamped on his countenance, it gave evidence of noble pride. His eye had a stoical expression which no magistrate ought to have misunderstood; but as soon as a man has fallen into the hands of justice, he is no more than a moral entity, a matter of law or of fact, just as to statists he has become a zero.

°°°°When the veteran was taken back to the lock-up, to be removed later with the batch of vagabonds at that moment at the bar, Derville availed himself of the privilege accorded to lawyers of going wherever they please in the Courts, and followed him to the lock-up, where he stood scrutinizing him for some minutes, as well as the curious crew of beggars among whom he found himself. The passage to the lock-up at that moment afforded one of those spectacles which, unfortunately, neither legislators, nor philanthropists, nor painters, nor writers come to study. Like all the laboratories of the law, this ante-room is a dark and malodorous place; along the walls runs a wooden seat, blackened by the constant presence there of the wretches who come to this meeting-place of every form of social squalor, where not one of them is missing.

°°°°A poet might say that the day was ashamed to light up this dreadful sewer through which so much misery flows! There is not a spot on that plank where some crime has not sat, in embryo or matured; not a corner where a man has never stood who, driven to despair by the blight which justice has set upon him after his first fault, has not there begun a career, at the end of which looms the guillotine or the pistol-snap of the suicide. All who fall on the pavement of Paris rebound against these yellow-gray walls, on which a philanthropist who was not a speculator might read a justification of the numerous suicides complained of by hypocritical writers who are incapable of taking a step to prevent them--for that justification is written in that ante- room, like a preface to the dramas of the Morgue, or to those enacted on the Place de la Greve.

°°°°At this moment Colonel Chabert was sitting among these men--men with coarse faces, clothed in the horrible livery of misery, and silent at intervals, or talking in a low tone, for three gendarmes on duty paced to and fro, their sabres clattering on the floor.

°°°°"Do you recognize me?" said Derville to the old man, standing in front of him.

°°°°"Yes, sir," said Chabert, rising.

°°°°"If you are an honest man," Derville went on in an undertone, "how could you remain in my debt?"

°°°°The old soldier blushed as a young girl might when accused by her mother of a clandestine love affair.

°°°°"What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?" cried he in a loud voice.

°°°°"Paid me?" said Derville. "She wrote to me that you were a swindler."

°°°°The Colonel cast up his eyes in a sublime impulse of horror and imprecation, as if to call heaven to witness to this fresh subterfuge.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, in a voice that was calm by sheer huskiness, "get the gendarmes to allow me to go into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored."

°°°°At a word from Derville to the sergeant he was allowed to take his client into the room, where Hyacinthe wrote a few lines, and addressed them to the Comtesse Ferraud.

°°°°"Send her that," said the soldier, "and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is not the less there," and he laid his hand on his heart. "Yes, it is there, deep and sincere. But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all."

°°°°"What!" said Derville. "Did you not stipulate for an allowance?"

°°°°"Do not speak of it!" cried the old man. "You cannot conceive how deep my contempt is for the outside life to which most men cling. I was suddenly attacked by a sickness--disgust of humanity. When I think that Napoleon is at Saint-Helena, everything on earth is a matter of indifference to me. I can no longer be a soldier; that is my only real grief. After all," he added with a gesture of childish simplicity, "it is better to enjoy luxury of feeling than of dress. For my part, I fear nobody's contempt."

°°°°And the Colonel sat down on his bench again.

°°°°Derville went away. On returning to his office, he sent Godeschal, at that time his second clerk, to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert's lawyer.

°°°°In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now himself an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, to whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal's staff among beggars by living on at Bicetre as poor women live on at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures who are lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners, which consists in drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords to its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

°°°°"I say, Derville," said Godeschal to his traveling companion, "look at that old fellow. Isn't he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy."

°°°°Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

°°°°"That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?"

°°°°"Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious," said Godeschal.

°°°°"That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger's glare she shot at him at that moment."

°°°°This opening having excited Godeschal's curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

°°°°Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

°°°°"Good-morning, Colonel Chabert," said Derville.

°°°°"Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe," replied the veteran. "I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7," he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--"Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?" he asked after a moment's silence. "He is not married! He is very lucky!"

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Godeschal. "Would you like something to buy snuff?"

°°°°With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

°°°°"Brave troopers!"

°°°°He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

°°°°"Fire! both arms! /Vive Napoleon/!" And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

°°°°"The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish," said Derville.

°°°°"Childish! he?" said another old pauper, who was looking on. "Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, 'Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.'--'I was too young to be there,' said Hyacinthe. 'But I was at Jena.' And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions."

°°°°"What a destiny!" exclaimed Derville. "Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow," Derville went on after a pause, "there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

°°°°"How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris."

°°°°"I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches' office," replied Godeschal.

°°°°PARIS, February-March 1832.

°°°°End



°°°°Father Goriot

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage

°°°°To the great and illustrious Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a token of admiration for his works and genius. DE BALZAC.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans) is an elderly person, who for the past forty years has kept a lodging-house in the Rue Nueve- Sainte-Genevieve, in the district that lies between the Latin Quarter and the Faubourg Saint-Marcel. Her house (known in the neighborhood as the Maison Vauquer) receives men and women, old and young, and no word has ever been breathed against her respectable establishment; but, at the same time, it must be said that as a matter of fact no young woman has been under her roof for thirty years, and that if a young man stays there for any length of time it is a sure sign that his allowance must be of the slenderest. In 1819, however, the time when this drama opens, there was an almost penniless young girl among Mme. Vauquer's boarders.

°°°°That word drama has been somewhat discredited of late; it has been overworked and twisted to strange uses in these days of dolorous literature; but it must do service again here, not because this story is dramatic in the restricted sense of the word, but because some tears may perhaps be shed intra et extra muros before it is over.

°°°°Will any one without the walls of Paris understand it? It is open to doubt. The only audience who could appreciate the results of close observation, the careful reproduction of minute detail and local color, are dwellers between the heights of Montrouge and Montmartre, in a vale of crumbling stucco watered by streams of black mud, a vale of sorrows which are real and joys too often hollow; but this audience is so accustomed to terrible sensations, that only some unimaginable and well-neigh impossible woe could produce any lasting impression there. Now and again there are tragedies so awful and so grand by reason of the complication of virtues and vices that bring them about, that egotism and selfishness are forced to pause and are moved to pity; but the impression that they receive is like a luscious fruit, soon consumed. Civilization, like the car of Juggernaut, is scarcely stayed perceptibly in its progress by a heart less easy to break than the others that lie in its course; this also is broken, and Civilization continues on her course triumphant. And you, too, will do the like; you who with this book in your white hand will sink back among the cushions of your armchair, and say to yourself, "Perhaps this may amuse me." You will read the story of Father Goriot's secret woes, and, dining thereafter with an unspoiled appetite, will lay the blame of your insensibility upon the writer, and accuse him of exaggeration, of writing romances. Ah! once for all, this drama is neither a fiction nor a romance! ALL IS TRUE,--so true, that every one can discern the elements of the tragedy in his own house, perhaps in his own heart.

°°°°The lodging-house is Mme. Vauquer's own property. It is still standing in the lower end of the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, just where the road slopes so sharply down to the Rue de l'Arbalete, that wheeled traffic seldom passes that way, because it is so stony and steep. This position is sufficient to account for the silence prevalent in the streets shut in between the dome of the Pantheon and the dome of the Val-de-Grace, two conspicuous public buildings which give a yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies beneath the shadow of their leaden- hued cupolas.

°°°°In that district the pavements are clean and dry, there is neither mud nor water in the gutters, grass grows in the chinks of the walls. The most heedless passer-by feels the depressing influences of a place where the sound of wheels creates a sensation; there is a grim look about the houses, a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls. A Parisian straying into a suburb apparently composed of lodging-houses and public institutions would see poverty and dullness, old age lying down to die, and joyous youth condemned to drudgery. It is the ugliest quarter of Paris, and, it may be added, the least known. But, before all things, the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve is like a bronze frame for a picture for which the mind cannot be too well prepared by the contemplation of sad hues and sober images. Even so, step by step the daylight decreases, and the cicerone's droning voice grows hollower as the traveler descends into the Catacombs. The comparison holds good! Who shall say which is more ghastly, the sight of the bleached skulls or of dried-up human hearts?

°°°°The front of the lodging-house is at right angles to the road, and looks out upon a little garden, so that you see the side of the house in section, as it were, from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. Beneath the wall of the house front there lies a channel, a fathom wide, paved with cobble-stones, and beside it runs a graveled walk bordered by geraniums and oleanders and pomegranates set in great blue and white glazed earthenware pots. Access into the graveled walk is afforded by a door, above which the words MAISON VAUQUER may be read, and beneath, in rather smaller letters, "Lodgings for both sexes, etc."

°°°°During the day a glimpse into the garden is easily obtained through a wicket to which a bell is attached. On the opposite wall, at the further end of the graveled walk, a green marble arch was painted once upon a time by a local artist, and in this semblance of a shrine a statue representing Cupid is installed; a Parisian Cupid, so blistered and disfigured that he looks like a candidate for one of the adjacent hospitals, and might suggest an allegory to lovers of symbolism. The half-obliterated inscription on the pedestal beneath determines the date of this work of art, for it bears witness to the widespread enthusiasm felt for Voltaire on his return to Paris in 1777:

°°°°"Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;   He is, or was, or ought to be."

°°°°At night the wicket gate is replaced by a solid door. The little garden is no wider than the front of the house; it is shut in between the wall of the street and the partition wall of the neighboring house. A mantle of ivy conceals the bricks and attracts the eyes of passers-by to an effect which is picturesque in Paris, for each of the walls is covered with trellised vines that yield a scanty dusty crop of fruit, and furnish besides a subject of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her lodgers; every year the widow trembles for her vintage.

°°°°A straight path beneath the walls on either side of the garden leads to a clump of lime-trees at the further end of it; LINE- trees, as Mme. Vauquer persists in calling them, in spite of the fact that she was a de Conflans, and regardless of repeated corrections from her lodgers.

°°°°The central space between the walls is filled with artichokes and rows of pyramid fruit-trees, and surrounded by a border of lettuce, pot-herbs, and parsley. Under the lime-trees there are a few green-painted garden seats and a wooden table, and hither, during the dog-days, such of the lodgers as are rich enough to indulge in a cup of coffee come to take their pleasure, though it is hot enough to roast eggs even in the shade.

°°°°The house itself is three stories high, without counting the attics under the roof. It is built of rough stone, and covered with the yellowish stucco that gives a mean appearance to almost every house in Paris. There are five windows in each story in the front of the house; all the blinds visible through the small square panes are drawn up awry, so that the lines are all at cross purposes. At the side of the house there are but two windows on each floor, and the lowest of all are adorned with a heavy iron grating.

°°°°Behind the house a yard extends for some twenty feet, a space inhabited by a happy family of pigs, poultry, and rabbits; the wood-shed is situated on the further side, and on the wall between the wood-shed and the kitchen window hangs the meat-safe, just above the place where the sink discharges its greasy streams. The cook sweeps all the refuse out through a little door into the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, and frequently cleanses the yard with copious supplies of water, under pain of pestilence.

°°°°The house might have been built on purpose for its present uses. Access is given by a French window to the first room on the ground floor, a sitting-room which looks out upon the street through the two barred windows already mentioned. Another door opens out of it into the dining-room, which is separated from the kitchen by the well of the staircase, the steps being constructed partly of wood, partly of tiles, which are colored and beeswaxed. Nothing can be more depressing than the sight of that sitting- room. The furniture is covered with horse hair woven in alternate dull and glossy stripes. There is a round table in the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from Telemaque are depicted, the various classical personages being colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

°°°°The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the language, and which should be called the odeur de pension. The damp atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy, musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet, in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining dining- room.

°°°°The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which the lodgers' table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine, are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long table is so greasy that a waggish externe will write his name on the surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky, worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one- eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire, parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet, its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

°°°°This apartment is in all its glory at seven o'clock in the morning, when Mme. Vauquer's cat appears, announcing the near approach of his mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated countenance, and a nose like a parrot's beak set in the middle of it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn; there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and interpretation of her lodging- house, as surely as her lodging-house implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital. The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room, and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its mistress.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who "have seen a deal of trouble." She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still, "she is a good woman at bottom," said the lodgers who believed that the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

°°°°What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head. How had she lost her money? "Through trouble," was her answer. He had treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody, because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every possible misfortune.

°°°°Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress' shuffling footsteps, hastened to serve the lodgers' breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these externes usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty francs a month.

°°°°At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme. Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary- general in the service of the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred francs a year.

°°°°The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on the third floor were also let-- one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle. Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli, Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as "Father Goriot." The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of passage, to impecunious students, who like "Father Goriot" and Mlle. Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of better.

°°°°At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him. Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that their parents' hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as by those who had brought it to pass.

°°°°Above the third story there was a garret where the linen was hung to dry, and a couple of attics. Christophe, the man-of-all-work, slept in one, and Sylvie, the stout cook, in the other. Beside the seven inmates thus enumerated, taking one year with another, some eight law or medical students dined in the house, as well as two or three regular comers who lived in the neighborhood. There were usually eighteen people at dinner, and there was room, if need be, for twenty at Mme. Vauquer's table; at breakfast, however, only the seven lodgers appeared. It was almost like a family party. Every one came down in dressing-gown and slippers, and the conversation usually turned on anything that had happened the evening before; comments on the dress or appearance of the dinner contingent were exchanged in friendly confidence.

°°°°These seven lodgers were Mme. Vauquer's spoiled children. Among them she distributed, with astronomical precision, the exact proportion of respect and attention due to the varying amounts they paid for their board. One single consideration influenced all these human beings thrown together by chance. The two second- floor lodgers only paid seventy-two francs a month. Such prices as these are confined to the Faubourg Saint-Marcel and the district between La Bourbe and the Salpetriere; and, as might be expected, poverty, more or less apparent, weighed upon them all, Mme. Couture being the sole exception to the rule.

°°°°The dreary surroundings were reflected in the costumes of the inmates of the house; all were alike threadbare. The color of the men's coats were problematical; such shoes, in more fashionable quarters, are only to be seen lying in the gutter; the cuffs and collars were worn and frayed at the edges; every limp article of clothing looked like the ghost of its former self. The women's dresses were faded, old-fashioned, dyed and re-dyed; they wore gloves that were glazed with hard wear, much-mended lace, dingy ruffles, crumpled muslin fichus. So much for their clothing; but, for the most part, their frames were solid enough; their constitutions had weathered the storms of life; their cold, hard faces were worn like coins that have been withdrawn from circulation, but there were greedy teeth behind the withered lips. Dramas brought to a close or still in progress are foreshadowed by the sight of such actors as these, not the dramas that are played before the footlights and against a background of painted canvas, but dumb dramas of life, frost-bound dramas that sere hearts like fire, dramas that do not end with the actors' lives.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau, that elderly young lady, screened her weak eyes from the daylight by a soiled green silk shade with a rim of brass, an object fit to scare away the Angel of Pity himself. Her shawl, with its scanty, draggled fringe, might have covered a skeleton, so meagre and angular was the form beneath it. Yet she must have been pretty and shapely once. What corrosive had destroyed the feminine outlines? Was it trouble, or vice, or greed? Had she loved too well? Had she been a second-hand clothes dealer, a frequenter of the backstairs of great houses, or had she been merely a courtesan? Was she expiating the flaunting triumphs of a youth overcrowded with pleasures by an old age in which she was shunned by every passer-by? Her vacant gaze sent a chill through you; her shriveled face seemed like a menace. Her voice was like the shrill, thin note of the grasshopper sounding from the thicket when winter is at hand. She said that she had nursed an old gentleman, ill of catarrh of the bladder, and left to die by his children, who thought that he had nothing left. His bequest to her, a life annuity of a thousand francs, was periodically disputed by his heirs, who mingled slander with their persecutions. In spite of the ravages of conflicting passions, her face retained some traces of its former fairness and fineness of tissue, some vestiges of the physical charms of her youth still survived.

°°°°M. Poiret was a sort of automaton. He might be seen any day sailing like a gray shadow along the walks of the Jardin des Plantes, on his head a shabby cap, a cane with an old yellow ivory handle in the tips of his thin fingers; the outspread skirts of his threadbare overcoat failed to conceal his meagre figure; his breeches hung loosely on his shrunken limbs; the thin, blue-stockinged legs trembled like those of a drunken man; there was a notable breach of continuity between the dingy white waistcoat and crumpled shirt frills and the cravat twisted about a throat like a turkey gobbler's; altogether, his appearance set people wondering whether this outlandish ghost belonged to the audacious race of the sons of Japhet who flutter about on the Boulevard Italien. What devouring kind of toil could have so shriveled him? What devouring passions had darkened that bulbous countenance, which would have seemed outrageous as a caricature? What had he been? Well, perhaps he had been part of the machinery of justice, a clerk in the office to which the executioner sends in his accounts,--so much for providing black veils for parricides, so much for sawdust, so much for pulleys and cord for the knife. Or he might have been a receiver at the door of a public slaughter-house, or a sub-inspector of nuisances. Indeed, the man appeared to have been one of the beasts of burden in our great social mill; one of those Parisian Ratons whom their Bertrands do not even know by sight; a pivot in the obscure machinery that disposes of misery and things unclean; one of those men, in short, at sight of whom we are prompted to remark that, "After all, we cannot do without them."

°°°°Stately Paris ignores the existence of these faces bleached by moral or physical suffering; but, then, Paris is in truth an ocean that no line can plumb. You may survey its surface and describe it; but no matter how numerous and painstaking the toilers in this sea, there will always be lonely and unexplored regions in its depths, caverns unknown, flowers and pearls and monsters of the deep overlooked or forgotten by the divers of literature. The Maison Vauquer is one of these curious monstrosities.

°°°°Two, however, of Mme. Vauquer's boarders formed a striking contrast to the rest. There was a sickly pallor, such as is often seen in anaemic girls, in Mlle. Victorine Taillefer's face; and her unvarying expression of sadness, like her embarrassed manner and pinched look, was in keeping with the general wretchedness of the establishment in the Rue Nueve-Saint-Genevieve, which forms a background to this picture; but her face was young, there was youthfulness in her voice and elasticity in her movements. This young misfortune was not unlike a shrub, newly planted in an uncongenial soil, where its leaves have already begun to wither. The outlines of her figure, revealed by her dress of the simplest and cheapest materials, were also youthful. There was the same kind of charm about her too slender form, her faintly colored face and light-brown hair, that modern poets find in mediaeval statuettes; and a sweet expression, a look of Christian resignation in the dark gray eyes. She was pretty by force of contrast; if she had been happy, she would have been charming. Happiness is the poetry of woman, as the toilette is her tinsel. If the delightful excitement of a ball had made the pale face glow with color; if the delights of a luxurious life had brought the color to the wan cheeks that were slightly hollowed already; if love had put light into the sad eyes, then Victorine might have ranked among the fairest; but she lacked the two things which create woman a second time--pretty dresses and love- letters.

°°°°A book might have been made of her story. Her father was persuaded that he had sufficient reason for declining to acknowledge her, and allowed her a bare six hundred francs a year; he had further taken measures to disinherit his daughter, and had converted all his real estate into personalty, that he might leave it undivided to his son. Victorine's mother had died broken-hearted in Mme. Couture's house; and the latter, who was a near relation, had taken charge of the little orphan. Unluckily, the widow of the commissary-general to the armies of the Republic had nothing in the world but her jointure and her widow's pension, and some day she might be obliged to leave the helpless, inexperienced girl to the mercy of the world. The good soul, therefore, took Victorine to mass every Sunday, and to confession once a fortnight, thinking that, in any case, she would bring up her ward to be devout. She was right; religion offered a solution of the problem of the young girl's future. The poor child loved the father who refused to acknowledge her. Once every year she tried to see him to deliver her mother's message of forgiveness, but every year hitherto she had knocked at that door in vain; her father was inexorable. Her brother, her only means of communication, had not come to see her for four years, and had sent her no assistance; yet she prayed to God to unseal her father's eyes and to soften her brother's heart, and no accusations mingled with her prayers. Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exhausted the vocabulary of abuse, and failed to find words that did justice to the banker's iniquitous conduct; but while they heaped execrations on the millionaire, Victorine's words were as gentle as the moan of the wounded dove, and affection found expression even in the cry drawn from her by pain.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac was a thoroughly southern type; he had a fair complexion, blue eyes, black hair. In his figure, manner, and his whole bearing it was easy to see that he had either come of a noble family, or that, from his earliest childhood, he had been gently bred. If he was careful of his wardrobe, only taking last year's clothes into daily wear, still upon occasion he could issue forth as a young man of fashion. Ordinarily he wore a shabby coat and waistcoat, the limp black cravat, untidily knotted, that students affect, trousers that matched the rest of his costume, and boots that had been resoled.

°°°°Vautrin (the man of forty with the dyed whiskers) marked a transition stage between these two young people and the others. He was the kind of man that calls forth the remark: "He looks a jovial sort!" He had broad shoulders, a well-developed chest, muscular arms, and strong square-fisted hands; the joints of his fingers were covered with tufts of fiery red hair. His face was furrowed by premature wrinkles; there was a certain hardness about it in spite of his bland and insinuating manner. His bass voice was by no means unpleasant, and was in keeping with his boisterous laughter. He was always obliging, always in good spirits; if anything went wrong with one of the locks, he would soon unscrew it, take it to pieces, file it, oil and clean and set it in order, and put it back in its place again; "I am an old hand at it," he used to say. Not only so, he knew all about ships, the sea, France, foreign countries, men, business, law, great houses and prisons,--there was nothing that he did not know. If any one complained rather more than usual, he would offer his services at once. He had several times lent money to Mme. Vauquer, or to the boarders; but, somehow, those whom he obliged felt that they would sooner face death than fail to repay him; a certain resolute look, sometimes seen on his face, inspired fear of him, for all his appearance of easy good-nature. In the way he spat there was an imperturbable coolness which seemed to indicate that this was a man who would not stick at a crime to extricate himself from a false position. His eyes, like those of a pitiless judge, seemed to go to the very bottom of all questions, to read all natures, all feelings and thoughts. His habit of life was very regular; he usually went out after breakfast, returning in time for dinner, and disappeared for the rest of the evening, letting himself in about midnight with a latch key, a privilege that Mme. Vauquer accorded to no other boarder. But then he was on very good terms with the widow; he used to call her "mamma," and put his arm round her waist, a piece of flattery perhaps not appreciated to the full! The worthy woman might imagine this to be an easy feat; but, as a matter of fact, no arm but Vautrin's was long enough to encircle her.

°°°°It was a characteristic trait of his generously to pay fifteen francs a month for the cup of coffee with a dash of brandy in it, which he took after dinner. Less superficial observers than young men engulfed by the whirlpool of Parisian life, or old men, who took no interest in anything that did not directly concern them, would not have stopped short at the vaguely unsatisfactory impression that Vautrin made upon them. He knew or guessed the concerns of every one about him; but none of them had been able to penetrate his thoughts, or to discover his occupation. He had deliberately made his apparent good-nature, his unfailing readiness to oblige, and his high spirits into a barrier between himself and the rest of them, but not seldom he gave glimpses of appalling depths of character. He seemed to delight in scourging the upper classes of society with the lash of his tongue, to take pleasure in convicting it of inconsistency, in mocking at law and order with some grim jest worthy of Juvenal, as if some grudge against the social system rankled in him, as if there were some mystery carefully hidden away in his life.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer felt attracted, perhaps unconsciously, by the strength of the one man, and the good looks of the other; her stolen glances and secret thoughts were divided between them; but neither of them seemed to take any notice of her, although some day a chance might alter her position, and she would be a wealthy heiress. For that matter, there was not a soul in the house who took any trouble to investigate the various chronicles of misfortunes, real or imaginary, related by the rest. Each one regarded the others with indifference, tempered by suspicion; it was a natural result of their relative positions. Practical assistance not one could give, this they all knew, and they had long since exhausted their stock of condolence over previous discussions of their grievances. They were in something the same position as an elderly couple who have nothing left to say to each other. The routine of existence kept them in contact, but they were parts of a mechanism which wanted oil. There was not one of them but would have passed a blind man begging in the street, not one that felt moved to pity by a tale of misfortune, not one who did not see in death the solution of the all- absorbing problem of misery which left them cold to the most terrible anguish in others.

°°°°The happiest of these hapless beings was certainly Mme. Vauquer, who reigned supreme over this hospital supported by voluntary contributions. For her, the little garden, which silence, and cold, and rain, and drought combined to make as dreary as an Asian steppe, was a pleasant shaded nook; the gaunt yellow house, the musty odors of a back shop had charms for her, and for her alone. Those cells belonged to her. She fed those convicts condemned to penal servitude for life, and her authority was recognized among them. Where else in Paris would they have found wholesome food in sufficient quantity at the prices she charged them, and rooms which they were at liberty to make, if not exactly elegant or comfortable, at any rate clean and healthy? If she had committed some flagrant act of injustice, the victim would have borne it in silence.

°°°°Such a gathering contained, as might have been expected, the elements out of which a complete society might be constructed. And, as in a school, as in the world itself, there was among the eighteen men and women who met round the dinner table a poor creature, despised by all the others, condemned to be the butt of all their jokes. At the beginning of Eugene de Rastignac's second twelvemonth, this figure suddenly started out into bold relief against the background of human forms and faces among which the law student was yet to live for another two years to come. This laughing-stock was the retired vermicelli-merchant, Father Goriot, upon whose face a painter, like the historian, would have concentrated all the light in his picture.

°°°°How had it come about that the boarders regarded him with a half- malignant contempt? Why did they subject the oldest among their number to a kind of persecution, in which there was mingled some pity, but no respect for his misfortunes? Had he brought it on himself by some eccentricity or absurdity, which is less easily forgiven or forgotten than more serious defects? The question strikes at the root of many a social injustice. Perhaps it is only human nature to inflict suffering on anything that will endure suffering, whether by reason of its genuine humility, or indifference, or sheer helplessness. Do we not, one and all, like to feel our strength even at the expense of some one or of something? The poorest sample of humanity, the street arab, will pull the bell handle at every street door in bitter weather, and scramble up to write his name on the unsullied marble of a monument.

°°°°In the year 1813, at the age of sixty-nine or thereabouts, "Father Goriot" had sold his business and retired--to Mme. Vauquer's boarding house. When he first came there he had taken the rooms now occupied by Mme. Couture; he had paid twelve hundred francs a year like a man to whom five louis more or less was a mere trifle. For him Mme. Vauquer had made various improvements in the three rooms destined for his use, in consideration of a certain sum paid in advance, so it was said, for the miserable furniture, that is to say, for some yellow cotton curtains, a few chairs of stained wood covered with Utrecht velvet, several wretched colored prints in frames, and wall papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained. Possibly it was the careless generosity with which Father Goriot allowed himself to be overreached at this period of his life (they called him Monsieur Goriot very respectfully then) that gave Mme. Vauquer the meanest opinion of his business abilities; she looked on him as an imbecile where money was concerned.

°°°°Goriot had brought with him a considerable wardrobe, the gorgeous outfit of a retired tradesman who denies himself nothing. Mme. Vauquer's astonished eyes beheld no less than eighteen cambric- fronted shirts, the splendor of their fineness being enhanced by a pair of pins each bearing a large diamond, and connected by a short chain, an ornament which adorned the vermicelli-maker's shirt front. He usually wore a coat of corn-flower blue; his rotund and portly person was still further set off by a clean white waistcoat, and a gold chain and seals which dangled over that broad expanse. When his hostess accused him of being "a bit of a beau," he smiled with the vanity of a citizen whose foible is gratified. His cupboards (ormoires, as he called them in the popular dialect) were filled with a quantity of plate that he brought with him. The widow's eyes gleamed as she obligingly helped him to unpack the soup ladles, table-spoons, forks, cruet- stands, tureens, dishes, and breakfast services--all of silver, which were duly arranged upon shelves, besides a few more or less handsome pieces of plate, all weighing no inconsiderable number of ounces; he could not bring himself to part with these gifts that reminded him of past domestic festivals.

°°°°"This was my wife's present to me on the first anniversary of our wedding day," he said to Mme. Vauquer, as he put away a little silver posset dish, with two turtle-doves billing on the cover. "Poor dear! she spent on it all the money she had saved before we were married. Do you know, I would sooner scratch the earth with my nails for a living, madame, than part with that. But I shall be able to take my coffee out of it every morning for the rest of my days, thank the Lord! I am not to be pitied. There's not much fear of my starving for some time to come."

°°°°Finally, Mme. Vauquer's magpie's eye had discovered and read certain entries in the list of shareholders in the funds, and, after a rough calculation, was disposed to credit Goriot (worthy man) with something like ten thousand francs a year. From that day forward Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans), who, as a matter of fact, had seen forty-eight summers, though she would only own to thirty-nine of them--Mme. Vauquer had her own ideas. Though Goriot's eyes seemed to have shrunk in their sockets, though they were weak and watery, owing to some glandular affection which compelled him to wipe them continually, she considered him to be a very gentlemanly and pleasant-looking man. Moreover, the widow saw favorable indications of character in the well-developed calves of his legs and in his square-shaped nose, indications still further borne out by the worthy man's full-moon countenance and look of stupid good-nature. This, in all probability, was a strongly-build animal, whose brains mostly consisted in a capacity for affection. His hair, worn in ailes de pigeon, and duly powdered every morning by the barber from the Ecole Polytechnique, described five points on his low forehead, and made an elegant setting to his face. Though his manners were somewhat boorish, he was always as neat as a new pin and he took his snuff in a lordly way, like a man who knows that his snuff- box is always likely to be filled with maccaboy, so that when Mme. Vauquer lay down to rest on the day of M. Goriot's installation, her heart, like a larded partridge, sweltered before the fire of a burning desire to shake off the shroud of Vauquer and rise again as Goriot. She would marry again, sell her boarding-house, give her hand to this fine flower of citizenship, become a lady of consequence in the quarter, and ask for subscriptions for charitable purposes; she would make little Sunday excursions to Choisy, Soissy, Gentilly; she would have a box at the theatre when she liked, instead of waiting for the author's tickets that one of her boarders sometimes gave her, in July; the whole Eldorado of a little Parisian household rose up before Mme. Vauquer in her dreams. Nobody knew that she herself possessed forty thousand francs, accumulated sou by sou, that was her secret; surely as far as money was concerned she was a very tolerable match. "And in other respects, I am quite his equal," she said to herself, turning as if to assure herself of the charms of a form that the portly Sylvie found moulded in down feathers every morning.

°°°°For three months from that day Mme. Veuve Vauquer availed herself of the services of M. Goriot's coiffeur, and went to some expense over her toilette, expense justifiable on the ground that she owed it to herself and her establishment to pay some attention to appearances when such highly-respectable persons honored her house with their presence. She expended no small amount of ingenuity in a sort of weeding process of her lodgers, announcing her intention of receiving henceforward none but people who were in every way select. If a stranger presented himself, she let him know that M. Goriot, one of the best known and most highly- respected merchants in Paris, had singled out her boarding-house for a residence. She drew up a prospectus headed MAISON VAUQUER, in which it was asserted that hers was "one of the oldest and most highly recommended boarding-houses in the Latin Quarter." "From the windows of the house," thus ran the prospectus, "there is a charming view of the Vallee des Gobelins (so there is--from the third floor), and a BEAUTIFUL garden, EXTENDING down to AN AVENUE OF LINDENS at the further end." Mention was made of the bracing air of the place and its quiet situation.

°°°°It was this prospectus that attracted Mme. la Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil, a widow of six and thirty, who was awaiting the final settlement of her husband's affairs, and of another matter regarding a pension due to her as the wife of a general who had died "on the field of battle." On this Mme. Vauquer saw to her table, lighted a fire daily in the sitting-room for nearly six months, and kept the promise of her prospectus, even going to some expense to do so. And the Countess, on her side, addressed Mme. Vauquer as "my dear," and promised her two more boarders, the Baronne de Vaumerland and the widow of a colonel, the late Comte de Picquoisie, who were about to leave a boarding-house in the Marais, where the terms were higher than at the Maison Vauquer. Both these ladies, moreover, would be very well to do when the people at the War Office had come to an end of their formalities. "But Government departments are always so dilatory," the lady added.

°°°°After dinner the two widows went together up to Mme. Vauquer's room, and had a snug little chat over some cordial and various delicacies reserved for the mistress of the house. Mme. Vauquer's ideas as to Goriot were cordially approved by Mme. de l'Ambermesnil; it was a capital notion, which for that matter she had guessed from the very first; in her opinion the vermicelli maker was an excellent man.

°°°°"Ah! my dear lady, such a well-preserved man of his age, as sound as my eyesight--a man who might make a woman happy!" said the widow.

°°°°The good-natured Countess turned to the subject of Mme. Vauquer's dress, which was not in harmony with her projects. "You must put yourself on a war footing," said she.

°°°°After much serious consideration the two widows went shopping together--they purchased a hat adorned with ostrich feathers and a cap at the Palais Royal, and the Countess took her friend to the Magasin de la Petite Jeannette, where they chose a dress and a scarf. Thus equipped for the campaign, the widow looked exactly like the prize animal hung out for a sign above an a la mode beef shop; but she herself was so much pleased with the improvement, as she considered it, in her appearance, that she felt that she lay under some obligation to the Countess; and, though by no means open-handed, she begged that lady to accept a hat that cost twenty francs. The fact was that she needed the Countess' services on the delicate mission of sounding Goriot; the countess must sing her praises in his ears. Mme. de l'Ambermesnil lent herself very good-naturedly to this manoeuvre, began her operations, and succeeded in obtaining a private interview; but the overtures that she made, with a view to securing him for herself, were received with embarrassment, not to say a repulse. She left him, revolted by his coarseness.

°°°°"My angel," said she to her dear friend, "you will make nothing of that man yonder. He is absurdly suspicious, and he is a mean curmudgeon, an idiot, a fool; you would never be happy with him."

°°°°After what had passed between M. Goriot and Mme. de l'Ambermesnil, the Countess would no longer live under the same roof. She left the next day, forgot to pay for six months' board, and left behind her wardrobe, cast-off clothing to the value of five francs. Eagerly and persistently as Mme. Vauquer sought her quondam lodger, the Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil was never heard of again in Paris. The widow often talked of this deplorable business, and regretted her own too confiding disposition. As a matter of fact, she was as suspicious as a cat; but she was like many other people, who cannot trust their own kin and put themselves at the mercy of the next chance comer--an odd but common phenomenon, whose causes may readily be traced to the depths of the human heart.

°°°°Perhaps there are people who know that they have nothing more to look for from those with whom they live; they have shown the emptiness of their hearts to their housemates, and in their secret selves they are conscious that they are severely judged, and that they deserve to be judged severely; but still they feel an unconquerable craving for praises that they do not hear, or they are consumed by a desire to appear to possess, in the eyes of a new audience, the qualities which they have not, hoping to win the admiration or affection of strangers at the risk of forfeiting it again some day. Or, once more, there are other mercenary natures who never do a kindness to a friend or a relation simply because these have a claim upon them, while a service done to a stranger brings its reward to self-love. Such natures feel but little affection for those who are nearest to them; they keep their kindness for remoter circles of acquaintance, and show most to those who dwell on its utmost limits. Mme. Vauquer belonged to both these essentially mean, false, and execrable classes.

°°°°"If I had been there at the time," Vautrin would say at the end of the story, I would have shown her up, and that misfortune would not have befallen you. I know that kind of phiz!"

°°°°Like all narrow natures, Mme. Vauquer was wont to confine her attention to events, and did not go very deeply into the causes that brought them about; she likewise preferred to throw the blame of her own mistakes on other people, so she chose to consider that the honest vermicelli maker was responsible for her misfortune. It had opened her eyes, so she said, with regard to him. As soon as she saw that her blandishments were in vain, and that her outlay on her toilette was money thrown away, she was not slow to discover the reason of his indifference. It became plain to her at once that there was SOME OTHER ATTRACTION, to use her own expression. In short, it was evident that the hope she had so fondly cherished was a baseless delusion, and that she would "never make anything out of that man yonder," in the Countess' forcible phrase. The Countess seemed to have been a judge of character. Mme. Vauquer's aversion was naturally more energetic than her friendship, for her hatred was not in proportion to her love, but to her disappointed expectations. The human heart may find here and there a resting-place short of the highest height of affection, but we seldom stop in the steep, downward slope of hatred. Still, M. Goriot was a lodger, and the widow's wounded self-love could not vent itself in an explosion of wrath; like a monk harassed by the prior of his convent, she was forced to stifle her sighs of disappointment, and to gulp down her craving for revenge. Little minds find gratification for their feelings, benevolent or otherwise, by a constant exercise of petty ingenuity. The widow employed her woman's malice to devise a system of covert persecution. She began by a course of retrenchment--various luxuries which had found their way to the table appeared there no more.

°°°°"No more gherkins, no more anchovies; they have made a fool of me!" she said to Sylvie one morning, and they returned to the old bill of fare.

°°°°The thrifty frugality necessary to those who mean to make their way in the world had become an inveterate habit of life with M. Goriot. Soup, boiled beef, and a dish of vegetables had been, and always would be, the dinner he liked best, so Mme. Vauquer found it very difficult to annoy a boarder whose tastes were so simple. He was proof against her malice, and in desperation she spoke to him and of him slightingly before the other lodgers, who began to amuse themselves at his expense, and so gratified her desire for revenge.

°°°°Towards the end of the first year the widow's suspicions had reached such a pitch that she began to wonder how it was that a retired merchant with a secure income of seven or eight thousand livres, the owner of such magnificent plate and jewelry handsome enough for a kept mistress, should be living in her house. Why should he devote so small a proportion of his money to his expenses? Until the first year was nearly at an end, Goriot had dined out once or twice every week, but these occasions came less frequently, and at last he was scarcely absent from the dinner- table twice a month. It was hardly expected that Mme. Vauquer should regard the increased regularity of her boarder's habits with complacency, when those little excursions of his had been so much to her interest. She attributed the change not so much to a gradual diminution of fortune as to a spiteful wish to annoy his hostess. It is one of the most detestable habits of a Liliputian mind to credit other people with its own malignant pettiness.

°°°°Unluckily, towards the end of the second year, M. Goriot's conduct gave some color to the idle talk about him. He asked Mme. Vauquer to give him a room on the second floor, and to make a corresponding reduction in her charges. Apparently, such strict economy was called for, that he did without a fire all through the winter. Mme. Vauquer asked to be paid in advance, an arrangement to which M. Goriot consented, and thenceforward she spoke of him as "Father Goriot."

°°°°What had brought about this decline and fall? Conjecture was keen, but investigation was difficult. Father Goriot was not communicative; in the sham countess' phrase he was "a curmudgeon." Empty-headed people who babble about their own affairs because they have nothing else to occupy them, naturally conclude that if people say nothing of their doings it is because their doings will not bear being talked about; so the highly respectable merchant became a scoundrel, and the late beau was an old rogue. Opinion fluctuated. Sometimes, according to Vautrin, who came about this time to live in the Maison Vauquer, Father Goriot was a man who went on 'Change and DABBLED (to use the sufficiently expressive language of the Stock Exchange) in stocks and shares after he had ruined himself by heavy speculation. Sometimes it was held that he was one of those petty gamblers who nightly play for small stakes until they win a few francs. A theory that he was a detective in the employ of the Home Office found favor at one time, but Vautrin urged that "Goriot was not sharp enough for one of that sort." There were yet other solutions; Father Goriot was a skinflint, a shark of a money- lender, a man who lived by selling lottery tickets. He was by turns all the most mysterious brood of vice and shame and misery; yet, however vile his life might be, the feeling of repulsion which he aroused in others was not so strong that he must be banished from their society--he paid his way. Besides, Goriot had his uses, every one vented his spleen or sharpened his wit on him; he was pelted with jokes and belabored with hard words. The general consensus of opinion was in favor of a theory which seemed the most likely; this was Mme. Vauquer's view. According to her, the man so well preserved at his time of life, as sound as her eyesight, with whom a woman might be very happy, was a libertine who had strange tastes. These are the facts upon which Mme. Vauquer's slanders were based.

°°°°Early one morning, some few months after the departure of the unlucky Countess who had managed to live for six months at the widow's expense, Mme. Vauquer (not yet dressed) heard the rustle of a silk dress and a young woman's light footstep on the stair; some one was going to Goriot's room. He seemed to expect the visit, for his door stood ajar. The portly Sylvie presently came up to tell her mistress that a girl too pretty to be honest, "dressed like a goddess," and not a speck of mud on her laced cashmere boots, had glided in from the street like a snake, had found the kitchen, and asked for M. Goriot's room. Mme. Vauquer and the cook, listening, overheard several words affectionately spoken during the visit, which lasted for some time. When M. Goriot went downstairs with the lady, the stout Sylvie forthwith took her basket and followed the lover-like couple, under pretext of going to do her marketing.

°°°°"M. Goriot must be awfully rich, all the same, madame," she reported on her return, "to keep her in such style. Just imagine it! There was a splendid carriage waiting at the corner of the Place de l'Estrapade, and SHE got into it."

°°°°While they were at dinner that evening, Mme. Vauquer went to the window and drew the curtain, as the sun was shining into Goriot's eyes.

°°°°"You are beloved of fair ladies, M. Goriot--the sun seeks you out," she said, alluding to his visitor. "Peste! you have good taste; she was very pretty."

°°°°"That was my daughter," he said, with a kind of pride in his voice, and the rest chose to consider this as the fatuity of an old man who wishes to save appearances.

°°°°A month after this visit M. Goriot received another. The same daughter who had come to see him that morning came again after dinner, this time in evening dress. The boarders, in deep discussion in the dining-room, caught a glimpse of a lovely, fair-haired woman, slender, graceful, and much too distinguished- looking to be a daughter of Father Goriot's.

°°°°"Two of them!" cried the portly Sylvie, who did not recognize the lady of the first visit.

°°°°A few days later, and another young lady--a tall, well-moulded brunette, with dark hair and bright eyes--came to ask for M. Goriot.

°°°°"Three of them!" said Sylvie.

°°°°Then the second daughter, who had first come in the morning to see her father, came shortly afterwards in the evening. She wore a ball dress, and came in a carriage.

°°°°"Four of them!" commented Mme. Vauquer and her plump handmaid. Sylvie saw not a trace of resemblance between this great lady and the girl in her simple morning dress who had entered her kitchen on the occasion of her first visit.

°°°°At that time Goriot was paying twelve hundred francs a year to his landlady, and Mme. Vauquer saw nothing out of the common in the fact that a rich man had four or five mistresses; nay, she thought it very knowing of him to pass them off as his daughters. She was not at all inclined to draw a hard-and-fast line, or to take umbrage at his sending for them to the Maison Vauquer; yet, inasmuch as these visits explained her boarder's indifference to her, she went so far (at the end of the second year) as to speak of him as an "ugly old wretch." When at length her boarder declined to nine hundred francs a year, she asked him very insolently what he took her house to be, after meeting one of these ladies on he stairs. Father Goriot answered that the lady was his eldest daughter.

°°°°"So you have two or three dozen daughters, have you?" said Mme. Vauquer sharply.

°°°°"I have only two," her boarder answered meekly, like a ruined man who is broken in to all the cruel usage of misfortune.

°°°°Towards the end of the third year Father Goriot reduced his expenses still further; he went up to the third story, and now paid forty-five francs a month. He did without snuff, told his hairdresser that he no longer required his services, and gave up wearing powder. When Goriot appeared for the first time in this condition, an exclamation of astonishment broke from his hostess at the color of his hair--a dingy olive gray. He had grown sadder day by day under the influence of some hidden trouble; among all the faces round the table, his was the most woe-begone. There was no longer any doubt. Goriot was an elderly libertine, whose eyes had only been preserved by the skill of the physician from the malign influence of the remedies necessitated by the state of his health. The disgusting color of his hair was a result of his excesses and of the drugs which he had taken that he might continue his career. The poor old man's mental and physical condition afforded some grounds for the absurd rubbish talked about him. When his outfit was worn out, he replaced the fine linen by calico at fourteen sous the ell. His diamonds, his gold snuff-box, watch-chain and trinkets, disappeared one by one. He had left off wearing the corn-flower blue coat, and was sumptuously arrayed, summer as well as winter, in a coarse chestnut-brown coat, a plush waistcoat, and doeskin breeches. He grew thinner and thinner; his legs were shrunken, his cheeks, once so puffed out by contented bourgeois prosperity, were covered with wrinkles, and the outlines of the jawbones were distinctly visible; there were deep furrows in his forehead. In the fourth year of his residence in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve he was no longer like his former self. The hale vermicelli manufacturer, sixty-two years of age, who had looked scarce forty, the stout, comfortable, prosperous tradesman, with an almost bucolic air, and such a brisk demeanor that it did you good to look at him; the man with something boyish in his smile, had suddenly sunk into his dotage, and had become a feeble, vacillating septuagenarian.

°°°°The keen, bright blue eyes had grown dull, and faded to a steel- gray color; the red inflamed rims looked as though they had shed tears of blood. He excited feelings of repulsion in some, and of pity in others. The young medical students who came to the house noticed the drooping of his lower lip and the conformation of the facial angle; and, after teasing him for some time to no purpose, they declared that cretinism was setting in.

°°°°One evening after dinner Mme. Vauquer said half banteringly to him, "So those daughters of yours don't come to see you any more, eh?" meaning to imply her doubts as to his paternity; but Father Goriot shrank as if his hostess had touched him with a sword- point.

°°°°"They come sometimes," he said in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Aha! you still see them sometimes?" cried the students. "Bravo, Father Goriot!"

°°°°The old man scarcely seemed to hear the witticisms at his expense that followed on the words; he had relapsed into the dreamy state of mind that these superficial observers took for senile torpor, due to his lack of intelligence. If they had only known, they might have been deeply interested by the problem of his condition; but few problems were more obscure. It was easy, of course, to find out whether Goriot had really been a vermicelli manufacturer; the amount of his fortune was readily discoverable; but the old people, who were most inquisitive as to his concerns, never went beyond the limits of the Quarter, and lived in the lodging-house much as oysters cling to a rock. As for the rest, the current of life in Paris daily awaited them, and swept them away with it; so soon as they left the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, they forgot the existence of the old man, their butt at dinner. For those narrow souls, or for careless youth, the misery in Father Goriot's withered face and its dull apathy were quite incompatible with wealth or any sort of intelligence. As for the creatures whom he called his daughters, all Mme. Vauquer's boarders were of her opinion. With the faculty for severe logic sedulously cultivated by elderly women during long evenings of gossip till they can always find an hypothesis to fit all circumstances, she was wont to reason thus:

°°°°"If Father Goriot had daughters of his own as rich as those ladies who came here seemed to be, he would not be lodging in my house, on the third floor, at forty-five francs a month; and he would not go about dressed like a poor man."

°°°°No objection could be raised to these inferences. So by the end of the month of November 1819, at the time when the curtain rises on this drama, every one in the house had come to have a very decided opinion as to the poor old man. He had never had either wife or daughter; excesses had reduced him to this sluggish condition; he was a sort of human mollusk who should be classed among the capulidoe, so one of the dinner contingent, an employe at the Museum, who had a pretty wit of his own. Poiret was an eagle, a gentleman, compared with Goriot. Poiret would join the talk, argue, answer when he was spoken to; as a matter of fact, his talk, arguments, and responses contributed nothing to the conversation, for Poiret had a habit of repeating what the others said in different words; still, he did join in the talk; he was alive, and seemed capable of feeling; while Father Goriot (to quote the Museum official again) was invariably at zero--Reaumur.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac had just returned to Paris in a state of mind not unknown to young men who are conscious of unusual powers, and to those whose faculties are so stimulated by a difficult position, that for the time being they rise above the ordinary level.

°°°°Rastignac's first year of study for the preliminary examinations in law had left him free to see the sights of Paris and to enjoy some of its amusements. A student has not much time on his hands if he sets himself to learn the repertory of every theatre, and to study the ins and outs of the labyrinth of Paris. To know its customs; to learn the language, and become familiar with the amusements of the capital, he must explore its recesses, good and bad, follow the studies that please him best, and form some idea of the treasures contained in galleries and museums.

°°°°At this stage of his career a student grows eager and excited about all sorts of follies that seem to him to be of immense importance. He has his hero, his great man, a professor at the College de France, paid to talk down to the level of his audience. He adjusts his cravat, and strikes various attitudes for the benefit of the women in the first galleries at the Opera- Comique. As he passes through all these successive initiations, and breaks out of his sheath, the horizons of life widen around him, and at length he grasps the plan of society with the different human strata of which it is composed.

°°°°If he begins by admiring the procession of carriages on sunny afternoons in the Champs-Elysees, he soon reaches the further stage of envying their owners. Unconsciously, Eugene had served his apprenticeship before he went back to Angouleme for the long vacation after taking his degrees as bachelor of arts and bachelor of law. The illusions of childhood had vanished, so also had the ideas he brought with him from the provinces; he had returned thither with an intelligence developed, with loftier ambitions, and saw things as they were at home in the old manor house. His father and mother, his two brothers and two sisters, with an aged aunt, whose whole fortune consisted in annuities, lived on the little estate of Rastignac. The whole property brought in about three thousand francs; and though the amount varied with the season (as must always be the case in a vine- growing district), they were obliged to spare an unvarying twelve hundred francs out of their income for him. He saw how constantly the poverty, which they had generously hidden from him, weighed upon them; he could not help comparing the sisters, who had seemed so beautiful to his boyish eyes, with women in Paris, who had realized the beauty of his dreams. The uncertain future of the whole family depended upon him. It did not escape his eyes that not a crumb was wasted in the house, nor that the wine they drank was made from the second pressing; a multitude of small things, which it is useless to speak of in detail here, made him burn to distinguish himself, and his ambition to succeed increased tenfold.

°°°°He meant, like all great souls, that his success should be owing entirely to his merits; but his was pre-eminently a southern temperament, the execution of his plans was sure to be marred by the vertigo that seizes on youth when youth sees itself alone in a wide sea, uncertain how to spend its energies, whither to steer its course, how to adapt its sails to the winds. At first he determined to fling himself heart and soul into his work, but he was diverted from this purpose by the need of society and connections; then he saw how great an influence women exert in social life, and suddenly made up his mind to go out into this world to seek a protectress there. Surely a clever and high- spirited young man, whose wit and courage were set off to advantage by a graceful figure and the vigorous kind of beauty that readily strikes a woman's imagination, need not despair of finding a protectress. These ideas occurred to him in his country walks with his sisters, whom he had once joined so gaily. The girls thought him very much changed.

°°°°His aunt, Mme. de Marcillac, had been presented at court, and had moved among the brightest heights of that lofty region. Suddenly the young man's ambition discerned in those recollections of hers, which had been like nursery fairy tales to her nephews and nieces, the elements of a social success at least as important as the success which he had achieved at the Ecole de Droit. He began to ask his aunt about those relations; some of the old ties might still hold good. After much shaking of the branches of the family tree, the old lady came to the conclusion that of all persons who could be useful to her nephew among the selfish genus of rich relations, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was the least likely to refuse. To this lady, therefore, she wrote in the old-fashioned style, recommending Eugene to her; pointing out to her nephew that if he succeeded in pleasing Mme. de Beauseant, the Vicomtesse would introduce him to other relations. A few days after his return to Paris, therefore, Rastignac sent his aunt's letter to Mme. de Beauseant. The Vicomtesse replied by an invitation to a ball for the following evening. This was the position of affairs at the Maison Vauquer at the end of November 1819.

°°°°A few days later, after Mme. de Beauseant's ball, Eugene came in at two o'clock in the morning. The persevering student meant to make up for the lost time by working until daylight. It was the first time that he had attempted to spend the night in this way in that silent quarter. The spell of a factitious energy was upon him; he had beheld the pomp and splendor of the world. He had not dined at the Maison Vauquer; the boarders probably would think that he would walk home at daybreak from the dance, as he had done sometimes on former occasions, after a fete at the Prado, or a ball at the Odeon, splashing his silk stockings thereby, and ruining his pumps.

°°°°It so happened that Christophe took a look into the street before drawing the bolts of the door; and Rastignac, coming in at that moment, could go up to his room without making any noise, followed by Christophe, who made a great deal. Eugene exchanged his dress suit for a shabby overcoat and slippers, kindled a fire with some blocks of patent fuel, and prepared for his night's work in such a sort that the faint sounds he made were drowned by Christophe's heavy tramp on the stairs.

°°°°Eugene sat absorbed in thought for a few moments before plunging into his law books. He had just become aware of the fact that the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was one of the queens of fashion, that her house was thought to be the pleasantest in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. And not only so, she was, by right of her fortune, and the name she bore, one of the most conspicuous figures in that aristocratic world. Thanks to the aunt, thanks to Mme. de Marcillac's letter of introduction, the poor student had been kindly received in that house before he knew the extent of the favor thus shown to him. It was almost like a patent of nobility to be admitted to those gilded salons; he had appeared in the most exclusive circle in Paris, and now all doors were open for him. Eugene had been dazzled at first by the brilliant assembly, and had scarcely exchanged a few words with the Vicomtesse; he had been content to single out a goddess among this throng of Parisian divinities, one of those women who are sure to attract a young man's fancy.

°°°°The Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud was tall and gracefully made; she had one of the prettiest figures in Paris. Imagine a pair of great dark eyes, a magnificently moulded hand, a shapely foot. There was a fiery energy in her movements; the Marquis de Ronquerolles had called her "a thoroughbred," "a pure pedigree," these figures of speech have replaced the "heavenly angel" and Ossianic nomenclature; the old mythology of love is extinct, doomed to perish by modern dandyism. But for Rastignac, Mme. Anastasie de Restaud was the woman for whom he had sighed. He had contrived to write his name twice upon the list of partners upon her fan, and had snatched a few words with her during the first quadrille.

°°°°"Where shall I meet you again, Madame?" he asked abruptly, and the tones of his voice were full of the vehement energy that women like so well.

°°°°"Oh, everywhere!" said she, "in the Bois, at the Bouffons, in my own house."

°°°°With the impetuosity of his adventurous southern temper, he did all he could to cultivate an acquaintance with this lovely countess, making the best of his opportunities in the quadrille and during a waltz that she gave him. When he told her that he was a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's, the Countess, whom he took for a great lady, asked him to call at her house, and after her parting smile, Rastignac felt convinced that he must make this visit. He was so lucky as to light upon some one who did not laugh at his ignorance, a fatal defect among the gilded and insolent youth of that period; the coterie of Maulincourts, Maximes de Trailles, de Marsays, Ronquerolles, Ajuda-Pintos, and Vandenesses who shone there in all the glory of coxcombry among the best-dressed women of fashion in Paris--Lady Brandon, the Duchesse de Langeais, the Comtesse de Kergarouet, Mme. de Serizy, the Duchesse de Carigliano, the Comtesse Ferraud, Mme. de Lanty, the Marquise d'Aiglemont, Mme. Firmiani, the Marquise de Listomere and the Marquise d'Espard, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and the Grandlieus. Luckily, therefore, for him, the novice happened upon the Marquis de Montriveau, the lover of the Duchesse de Langeais, a general as simple as a child; from him Rastignac learned that the Comtesse lived in the Rue du Helder.

°°°°Ah, what it is to be young, eager to see the world, greedily on the watch for any chance that brings you nearer the woman of your dreams, and behold two houses open their doors to you! To set foot in the Vicomtesse de Beauseant's house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; to fall on your knees before a Comtesse de Restaud in the Chaussee d'Antin; to look at one glance across a vista of Paris drawing-rooms, conscious that, possessing sufficient good looks, you may hope to find aid and protection there in a feminine heart! To feel ambitious enough to spurn the tight-rope on which you must walk with the steady head of an acrobat for whom a fall is impossible, and to find in a charming woman the best of all balancing poles.

°°°°He sat there with his thoughts for a while, Law on the one hand, and Poverty on the other, beholding a radiant vision of a woman rise above the dull, smouldering fire. Who would not have paused and questioned the future as Eugene was doing? who would not have pictured it full of success? His wondering thoughts took wings; he was transported out of the present into that blissful future; he was sitting by Mme. de Restaud's side, when a sort of sigh, like the grunt of an overburdened St. Joseph, broke the silence of the night. It vibrated through the student, who took the sound for a death groan. He opened his door noiselessly, went out upon the landing, and saw a thin streak of light under Father Goriot's door. Eugene feared that his neighbor had been taken ill; he went over and looked through the keyhole; the old man was busily engaged in an occupation so singular and so suspicious that Rastignac thought he was only doing a piece of necessary service to society to watch the self-styled vermicelli maker's nocturnal industries.

°°°°The table was upturned, and Goriot had doubtless in some way secured a silver plate and cup to the bar before knotting a thick rope round them; he was pulling at this rope with such enormous force that they were being crushed and twisted out of shape; to all appearance he meant to convert the richly wrought metal into ingots.

°°°°"Peste! what a man!" said Rastignac, as he watched Goriot's muscular arms; there was not a sound in the room while the old man, with the aid of the rope, was kneading the silver like dough. "Was he then, indeed, a thief, or a receiver of stolen goods, who affected imbecility and decrepitude, and lived like a beggar that he might carry on his pursuits the more securely?" Eugene stood for a moment revolving these questions, then he looked again through the keyhole.

°°°°Father Goriot had unwound his coil of rope; he had covered the table with a blanket, and was now employed in rolling the flattened mass of silver into a bar, an operation which he performed with marvelous dexterity.

°°°°"Why, he must be as strong as Augustus, King of Poland!" said Eugene to himself when the bar was nearly finished.

°°°°Father Goriot looked sadly at his handiwork, tears fell from his eyes, he blew out the dip which had served him for a light while he manipulated the silver, and Eugene heard him sigh as he lay down again.

°°°°"He is mad," thought the student.

°°°°"Poor child!" Father Goriot said aloud. Rastignac, hearing those words, concluded to keep silence; he would not hastily condemn his neighbor. He was just in the doorway of his room when a strange sound from the staircase below reached his ears; it might have been made by two men coming up in list slippers. Eugene listened; two men there certainly were, he could hear their breathing. Yet there had been no sound of opening the street door, no footsteps in the passage. Suddenly, too, he saw a faint gleam of light on the second story; it came from M. Vautrin's room.

°°°°"There are a good many mysteries here for a lodging-house!" he said to himself.

°°°°He went part of the way downstairs and listened again. The rattle of gold reached his ears. In another moment the light was put out, and again he distinctly heard the breathing of two men, but no sound of a door being opened or shut. The two men went downstairs, the faint sounds growing fainter as they went.

°°°°"Who is there?" cried Mme. Vauquer out of her bedroom window.

°°°°"I, Mme. Vauquer," answered Vautrin's deep bass voice. "I am coming in."

°°°°"That is odd! Christophe drew the bolts," said Eugene, going back to his room. "You have to sit up at night, it seems, if you really mean to know all that is going on about you in Paris."

°°°°These incidents turned his thought from his ambitious dreams; he betook himself to his work, but his thought wandered back to Father Goriot's suspicious occupation; Mme. de Restaud's face swam again and again before his eyes like a vision of a brilliant future; and at last he lay down and slept with clenched fists. When a young man makes up his mind that he will work all night, the chances are that seven times out of ten he will sleep till morning. Such vigils do not begin before we are turned twenty.

°°°°The next morning Paris was wrapped in one of the dense fogs that throw the most punctual people out in their calculations as to the time; even the most business-like folk fail to keep their appointments in such weather, and ordinary mortals wake up at noon and fancy it is eight o'clock. On this morning it was half- past nine, and Mme. Vauquer still lay abed. Christophe was late, Sylvie was late, but the two sat comfortably taking their coffee as usual. It was Sylvie's custom to take the cream off the milk destined for the boarders' breakfast for her own, and to boil the remainder for some time, so that madame should not discover this illegal exaction.

°°°°"Sylvie," said Christophe, as he dipped a piece of toast into the coffee, "M. Vautrin, who is not such a bad sort, all the same, had two people come to see him again last night. If madame says anything, mind you say nothing about it."

°°°°"Has he given you something?"

°°°°"He gave me a five-franc piece this month, which is as good as saying, 'Hold your tongue.' "

°°°°"Except him and Mme. Couture, who doesn't look twice at every penny, there's no one in the house that doesn't try to get back with the left hand all that they give with the right at New Year," said Sylvie.

°°°°"And, after all," said Christophe, "what do they give you? A miserable five-franc piece. There is Father Goriot, who has cleaned his shoes himself these two years past. There is that old beggar Poiret, who goes without blacking altogether; he would sooner drink it than put it on his boots. Then there is that whipper-snapper of a student, who gives me a couple of francs, Two francs will not pay for my brushes, and he sells his old clothes, and gets more for them than they are worth. Oh! they're a shabby lot!"

°°°°"Pooh!" said Sylvie, sipping her coffee, "our places are the best in the Quarter, that I know. But about that great big chap Vautrin, Christophe; has any one told you anything about him?"

°°°°"Yes. I met a gentleman in the street a few days ago; he said to me, 'There's a gentleman in your place, isn't there? a tall man that dyes his whiskers?' I told him, 'No, sir; they aren't dyed. A gay fellow like him hasn't the time to do it.' And when I told M. Vautrin about it afterwards, he said, 'Quite right, my boy. That is the way to answer them. There is nothing more unpleasant than to have your little weaknesses known; it might spoil many a match.' "

°°°°"Well, and for my part," said Sylvie, "a man tried to humbug me at the market wanting to know if I had seen him put on his shirt. Such bosh! There," she cried, interrupting herself, "that's a quarter to ten striking at the Val-de-Grace, and not a soul stirring!"

°°°°"Pooh! they are all gone out. Mme. Couture and the girl went out at eight o'clock to take the wafer at Saint-Etienne. Father Goriot started off somewhere with a parcel, and the student won't be back from his lecture till ten o'clock. I saw them go while I was sweeping the stairs; Father Goriot knocked up against me, and his parcel was as hard as iron. What is the old fellow up to, I wonder? He is as good as a plaything for the rest of them; they can never let him alone; but he is a good man, all the same, and worth more than all of them put together. He doesn't give you much himself, but he sometimes sends you with a message to ladies who fork out famous tips; they are dressed grandly, too."

°°°°"His daughters, as he calls them, eh? There are a dozen of them."

°°°°"I have never been to more than two--the two who came here."

°°°°"There is madame moving overhead; I shall have to go, or she will raise a fine racket. Just keep an eye on the milk, Christophe; don't let the cat get at it."

°°°°Sylvie went up to her mistress' room.

°°°°"Sylvie! How is this? It's nearly ten o'clock, and you let me sleep like a dormouse! Such a thing has never happened before."

°°°°"It's the fog; it is that thick, you could cut it with a knife."

°°°°"But how about breakfast?"

°°°°"Bah! the boarders are possessed, I'm sure. They all cleared out before there was a wink of daylight."

°°°°"Do speak properly, Sylvie," Mme. Vauquer retorted; "say a blink of daylight."

°°°°"Ah, well, madame, whichever you please. Anyhow, you can have breakfast at ten o'clock. La Michonnette and Poiret have neither of them stirred. There are only those two upstairs, and they are sleeping like the logs they are."

°°°°"But, Sylvie, you put their names together as if----"

°°°°"As if what?" said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. "The two of them make a pair."

°°°°"It is a strange thing, isn't it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last night after Christophe had bolted the door?"

°°°°"Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?"

°°°°"Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears on the table, those at five a penny."

°°°°A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all haste.

°°°°"Mistigris!" she cried.

°°°°The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

°°°°"Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!" she said. "Sylvie! Sylvie!"

°°°°"Yes, madame; what is it?"

°°°°"Just see what the cat has done!"

°°°°"It is all that stupid Christophe's fault. I told him to stop and lay the table. What has become of him? Don't you worry, madame; Father Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won't know the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats."

°°°°"I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?" said Mme. Vauquer, setting the plates round the table.

°°°°"Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"I have overslept myself," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same."

°°°°The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the sitting-room, singing loudly:

°°°°" 'Tis the same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance . .

°°°°"Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!" he cried at the sight of his hostess, and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

°°°°"There! have done----"

°°°°" 'Impertinence!' Say it!" he answered. "Come, say it! Now, isn't that what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah! I am a nice man, am I not?

°°°°"For the locks of brown and the golden hair   A sighing lover . . .

°°°°"Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

°°°°. . . . led by chance."

°°°°"What?" asked the widow.

°°°°"Father Goriot in the goldsmith's shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there, and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that's not used to the trade."

°°°°"Really? You don't say so?"

°°°°"Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair. He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went into a money-lender's house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father's bones, a Turk, a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob HIM, for he puts all his coin into the Bank."

°°°°"Then what was Father Goriot doing there?"

°°°°"Doing?" said Vautrin. "Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----"

°°°°"There he is!" cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Christophe," cried Father Goriot's voice, "come upstairs with me."

°°°°Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

°°°°"Where are you going?" Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

°°°°"Out on an errand for M. Goriot."

°°°°"What may that be?" said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe's hand. "Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud," he read. "Where are you going with it?" he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

°°°°"To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands myself."

°°°°"What is there inside it?" said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the light. "A banknote? No." He peered into the envelope. "A receipted account!" he cried. "My word! 'tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you, old chap," he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe's head, and spinning the man round like a thimble; "you will have a famous tip."

°°°°By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme. Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

°°°°"The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance."

°°°°When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

°°°°"Where have you been this morning, fair lady?" said Mme. Vauquer, turning to Mme. Couture.

°°°°"We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She is trembling like a leaf," Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

°°°°"Warm yourself, Victorine," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften your father's heart," said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the orphan girl; "but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl needs a dowry nowadays."

°°°°"Poor child!" said Mme. Vauquer. "Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself."

°°°°Victorine's eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

°°°°"If we could only see him!" said the Commissary-General's widow; "if I could speak to him myself and give him his wife's last letter! I have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my handwriting----"

°°°°" 'Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!' " exclaimed Vautrin, breaking in upon her. "So that is how you are, is it? In a few days' time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall see."

°°°°"Oh! sir," said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin, who showed no sign of being touched by it, "if you know of any way of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his affection and my mother's honor are more to me than all the money in the world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----"

°°°°"The same old story everywhere," sang Vautrin, with a satirical intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven people thus assembled bade each other good- morning, and took their places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student's footstep was heard outside.

°°°°"Ah! here you are, M. Eugene," said Sylvie; "every one is breakfasting at home to-day."

°°°°The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside Goriot.

°°°°"I have just met with a queer adventure," he said, as he helped himself abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer's eyes gauged as usual.

°°°°"An adventure?" queried Poiret.

°°°°"Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?" Vautrin asked of Poiret. "M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing."

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

°°°°"Tell us about your adventure!" demanded M. Vautrin.

°°°°"Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a king---"

°°°°"Fisher," put in Vautrin, interrupting.

°°°°"What do you mean, sir?" said Eugene sharply.

°°°°"I said 'fisher,' because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than kings."

°°°°"Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a king," said Poiret the ditto-ist, "because----"

°°°°"In fact"--the law-student cut him short--"I danced with one of the handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this divine countess about nine o'clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how my heart beat! I began to think----"

°°°°"That she was coming here," said Vautrin, with a keen look at the student. "I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman's heart, you will find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder."

°°°°The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

°°°°"Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!" cried Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

°°°°"It is just as I guessed," said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme. Vauquer's ear.

°°°°Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own thoughts than he did at that moment.

°°°°"Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! there you are!" answered Vautrin. "Old Father Goriot there knew it quite well! and why should I not know it too?"

°°°°"M. Goriot?" the student cried.

°°°°"What is it?" asked the old man. "So she was very beautiful, was she, yesterday night?"

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"Look at the old wretch," said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; "how his eyes light up!"

°°°°"Then does he really keep her?" said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to the student.

°°°°"Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty," Eugene answered. Father Goriot watched him with eager eyes. "If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there, my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list, and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a galloping horse, or a woman dancing."

°°°°"So the wheel turns," said Vautrin; "yesterday night at a duchess' ball, this morning in a money-lender's office, on the lowest rung of the ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers' hearts to find something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside down. Just a Parisienne through and through!"

°°°°Father Goriot's face, which had shone at the student's words like the sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of Vautrin's.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. Vauquer, "but where is your adventure? Did you speak to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?"

°°°°"She did not see me," said Eugene. "But only think of meeting one of the prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o'clock! She could not have reached home after the ball till two o'clock this morning. Wasn't it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of adventures."

°°°°"Pshaw! much funnier things than THAT happen here!" exclaimed Vautrin.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

°°°°"Well, did you see?" said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest of the circle. "He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain."

°°°°"Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de Restaud is anything to Father Goriot," cried the student.

°°°°"Well, and if you don't," broke in Vautrin, "we are not set on convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed to be like the sound of a trumpet to a trooper's horse. "Aha!" said Vautrin, stopping in his speech to give her a searching glance, "so we have had our little experiences, have we?"

°°°°The old maid lowered her eyes like a nun who sees a statue.

°°°°"Well," he went on, "when folk of that kind get a notion into their heads, they cannot drop it. They must drink the water from some particular spring--it is stagnant as often as not; but they will sell their wives and families, they will sell their own souls to the devil to get it. For some this spring is play, or the stock-exchange, or music, or a collection of pictures or insects; for others it is some woman who can give them the dainties they like. You might offer these last all the women on earth--they would turn up their noses; they will have the only one who can gratify their passion. It often happens that the woman does not care for them at all, and treats them cruelly; they buy their morsels of satisfaction very dear; but no matter, the fools are never tired of it; they will take their last blanket to the pawnbroker's to give their last five-franc piece to her. Father Goriot here is one of that sort. He is discreet, so the Countess exploits him--just the way of the gay world. The poor old fellow thinks of her and of nothing else. In all other respects you see he is a stupid animal; but get him on that subject, and his eyes sparkle like diamonds. That secret is not difficult to guess. He took some plate himself this morning to the melting-pot, and I saw him at Daddy Gobseck's in the Rue des Gres. And now, mark what follows--he came back here, and gave a letter for the Comtesse de Restaud to that noodle of a Christophe, who showed us the address; there was a receipted bill inside it. It is clear that it was an urgent matter if the Countess also went herself to the old money lender. Father Goriot has financed her handsomely. There is no need to tack a tale together; the thing is self-evident. So that shows you, sir student, that all the time your Countess was smiling, dancing, flirting, swaying her peach-flower crowned head, with her gown gathered into her hand, her slippers were pinching her, as they say; she was thinking of her protested bills, or her lover's protested bills."

°°°°"You have made me wild to know the truth," cried Eugene; "I will go to call on Mme. de Restaud to-morrow."

°°°°"Yes," echoed Poiret; "you must go and call on Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"And perhaps you will find Father Goriot there, who will take payment for the assistance he politely rendered."

°°°°Eugene looked disgusted. "Why, then, this Paris of yours is a slough."

°°°°"And an uncommonly queer slough, too," replied Vautrin. "The mud splashes you as you drive through it in your carriage--you are a respectable person; you go afoot and are splashed--you are a scoundrel. You are so unlucky as to walk off with something or other belonging to somebody else, and they exhibit you as a curiosity in the Place du Palais-de-Justice; you steal a million, and you are pointed out in every salon as a model of virtue. And you pay thirty millions for the police and the courts of justice, for the maintenance of law and order! A pretty slate of things it is!"

°°°°"What," cried Mme. Vauquer, "has Father Goriot really melted down his silver posset-dish?"

°°°°"There were two turtle-doves on the lid, were there not?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that there were."

°°°°"Then, was he fond of it?" said Eugene. "He cried while he was breaking up the cup and plate. I happened to see him by accident."

°°°°"It was dear to him as his own life," answered the widow.

°°°°"There! you see how infatuated the old fellow is!" cried Vautrin. "The woman yonder can coax the soul out of him"

°°°°The student went up to his room. Vautrin went out, and a few moments later Mme. Couture and Victorine drove away in a cab which Sylvie had called for them. Poiret gave his arm to Mlle. Michonneau, and they went together to spend the two sunniest hours of the day in the Jardin des Plantes.

°°°°"Well, those two are as good as married," was the portly Sylvie's comment. "They are going out together to-day for the first time. They are such a couple of dry sticks that if they happen to strike against each other they will draw sparks like flint and steel."

°°°°"Keep clear of Mlle. Michonneau's shawl, then, said Mme. Vauquer, laughing; "it would flare up like tinder."

°°°°At four o'clock that evening, when Goriot came in, he saw, by the light of two smoky lamps, that Victorine's eyes were red. Mme. Vauquer was listening to the history of the visit made that morning to M. Taillefer; it had been made in vain. Taillefer was tired of the annual application made by his daughter and her elderly friend; he gave them a personal interview in order to arrive at an understanding with them.

°°°°"My dear lady," said Mme. Couture, addressing Mme. Vauquer, "just imagine it; he did not even ask Victorine to sit down, she was standing the whole time. He said to me quite coolly, without putting himself in a passion, that we might spare ourselves the trouble of going there; that the young lady (he would not call her his daughter) was injuring her cause by importuning him (IMPORTUNING! once a year, the wretch!); that as Victorine's mother had nothing when he married her, Victorine ought not to expect anything from him; in fact, he said the most cruel things, that made the poor child burst out crying. The little thing threw herself at her father's feet and spoke up bravely; she said that she only persevered in her visits for her mother's sake; that she would obey him without a murmur, but that she begged him to read her poor dead mother's farewell letter. She took it up and gave it to him, saying the most beautiful things in the world, most beautifully expressed; I do not know where she learned them; God

°°°°must have put them into her head, for the poor child was inspired to speak so nicely that it made me cry like a fool to hear her talk. And what do you think the monster was doing all the time? Cutting his nails! He took the letter that poor Mme. Taillefer had soaked with tears, and flung it on to the chimney-piece. 'That is all right,' he said. He held out his hands to raise his daughter, but she covered them with kisses, and he drew them away again. Scandalous, isn't it? And his great booby of a son came in and took no notice of his sister."

°°°°"What inhuman wretches they must be!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"And then they both went out of the room," Mme. Couture went on, without heeding the worthy vermicelli maker's exclamation; "father and son bowed to me, and asked me to excuse them on account of urgent business! That is the history of our call. Well, he has seen his daughter at any rate. How he can refuse to acknowledge her I cannot think, for they are as alike as two peas."

°°°°The boarders dropped in one after another, interchanging greetings and empty jokes that certain classes of Parisians regard as humorous and witty. Dulness is their prevailing ingredient, and the whole point consists in mispronouncing a word or a gesture. This kind of argot is always changing. The essence of the jest consists in some catchword suggested by a political event, an incident in the police courts, a street song, or a bit of burlesque at some theatre, and forgotten in a month. Anything and everything serves to keep up a game of battledore and shuttlecock with words and ideas. The diorama, a recent invention, which carried an optical illusion a degree further than panoramas, had given rise to a mania among art students for ending every word with RAMA. The Maison Vauquer had caught the infection from a young artist among the boarders.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur-r-r Poiret," said the employe from the Museum, "how is your health-orama?" Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned to Mme. Couture and Victorine with a "Ladies, you seem melancholy."

°°°°"Is dinner ready?" cried Horace Bianchon, a medical student, and a friend of Rastignac's; "my stomach is sinking usque ad talones."

°°°°"There is an uncommon frozerama outside," said Vautrin. "Make room there, Father Goriot! Confound it, your foot covers the whole front of the stove."

°°°°"Illustrious M. Vautrin," put in Bianchon, "why do you say frozerama? It is incorrect; it should be frozenrama."

°°°°"No, it shouldn't," said the official from the Museum; "frozerama is right by the same rule that you say 'My feet are froze.' "

°°°°"Ah! ah!"

°°°°"Here is his Excellency the Marquis de Rastignac, Doctor of the Law of Contraries," cried Bianchon, seizing Eugene by the throat, and almost throttling him.

°°°°"Hallo there! hallo!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau came noiselessly in, bowed to the rest of the party, and took her place beside the three women without saying a word.

°°°°"That old bat always makes me shudder," said Bianchon in a low voice, indicating Mlle. Michonneau to Vautrin. "I have studied Gall's system, and I am sure she has the bump of Judas."

°°°°"Then you have seen a case before?" said Vautrin.

°°°°"Who has not?" answered Bianchon. "Upon my word, that ghastly old maid looks just like one of the long worms that will gnaw a beam through, give them time enough."

°°°°"That is the way, young man," returned he of the forty years and the dyed whiskers:

°°°°"The rose has lived the life of a rose--   A morning's space."

°°°°"Aha! here is a magnificent soupe-au-rama," cried Poiret as Christophe came in bearing the soup with cautious heed.

°°°°"I beg your pardon, sir," said Mme. Vauquer; "it is soupe aux choux."

°°°°All the young men roared with laughter.

°°°°"Had you there, Poiret!"

°°°°"Poir-r-r-rette! she had you there!"

°°°°"Score two points to Mamma Vauquer," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Did any of you notice the fog this morning?" asked the official.

°°°°"It was a frantic fog," said Bianchon, "a fog unparalleled, doleful, melancholy, sea-green, asthmatical--a Goriot of a fog!"

°°°°"A Goriorama," said the art student, "because you couldn't see a thing in it."

°°°°"Hey! Milord Gaoriotte, they air talking about yoo-o-ou!"

°°°°Father Goriot, seated at the lower end of the table, close to the door through which the servant entered, raised his face; he had smelt at a scrap of bread that lay under his table napkin, an old trick acquired in his commercial capacity, that still showed itself at times.

°°°°"Well," Madame Vauquer cried in sharp tones, that rang above the rattle of spoons and plates and the sound of other voices, "and is there anything the matter with the bread?"

°°°°"Nothing whatever, madame," he answered; "on the contrary, it is made of the best quality of corn; flour from Etampes."

°°°°"How could you tell?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"By the color, by the flavor."

°°°°"You knew the flavor by the smell, I suppose," said Mme. Vauquer. "You have grown so economical, you will find out how to live on the smell of cooking at last."

°°°°"Take out a patent for it, then," cried the Museum official; "you would make a handsome fortune."

°°°°"Never mind him," said the artist; "he does that sort of thing to delude us into thinking that he was a vermicelli maker."

°°°°"Your nose is a corn-sampler, it appears?" inquired the official.

°°°°"Corn WHAT?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"Corn-el."

°°°°"Corn-et."

°°°°"Corn-elian."

°°°°"Corn-ice."

°°°°"Corn-ucopia."

°°°°"Corn-crake."

°°°°"Corn-cockle."

°°°°"Corn-orama."

°°°°The eight responses came like a rolling fire from every part of the room, and the laughter that followed was the more uproarious because poor Father Goriot stared at the others with a puzzled look, like a foreigner trying to catch the meaning of words in a language which he does not understand.

°°°°"Corn? . . ." he said, turning to Vautrin, his next neighbor.

°°°°"Corn on your foot, old man!" said Vautrin, and he drove Father Goriot's cap down over his eyes by a blow on the crown.

°°°°The poor old man thus suddenly attacked was for a moment too bewildered to do anything. Christophe carried off his plate, thinking that he had finished his soup, so that when Goriot had pushed back his cap from his eyes his spoon encountered the table. Every one burst out laughing. "You are a disagreeable joker, sir," said the old man, "and if you take any further liberties with me----"

°°°°"Well, what then, old boy?" Vautrin interrupted.

°°°°"Well, then, you shall pay dearly for it some day----"

°°°°"Down below, eh?" said the artist, "in the little dark corner where they put naughty boys."

°°°°"Well, mademoiselle," Vautrin said, turning to Victorine, "you are eating nothing. So papa was refractory, was he?"

°°°°"A monster!" said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"Mademoiselle might make application for aliment pending her suit; she is not eating anything. Eh! eh! just see how Father Goriot is staring at Mlle. Victorine."

°°°°The old man had forgotten his dinner, he was so absorbed in gazing at the poor girl; the sorrow in her face was unmistakable,--the slighted love of a child whose father would not recognize her.

°°°°"We are mistaken about Father Goriot, my dear boy," said Eugene in a low voice. "He is not an idiot, nor wanting in energy. Try your Gall system on him, and let me know what you think. I saw him crush a silver dish last night as if it had been made of wax; there seems to be something extra-ordinary going on in his mind just now, to judge by his face. His life is so mysterious that it must be worth studying. Oh! you may laugh, Bianchon; I am not joking."

°°°°"The man is a subject, is he?" said Bianchon; "all right! I will dissect him, if he will give me the chance."

°°°°"No; feel his bumps."

°°°°"Hm!--his stupidity might perhaps be contagious."

°°°°The next day Rastignac dressed himself very elegantly, and about three o'clock in the afternoon went to call on Mme. de Restaud. On the way thither he indulged in the wild intoxicating dreams which fill a young head so full of delicious excitement. Young men at his age take no account of obstacles nor of dangers; they see success in every direction; imagination has free play, and turns their lives into a romance; they are saddened or discouraged by the collapse of one of the visionary schemes that have no existence save in their heated fancy. If youth were not ignorant and timid, civilization would be impossible.

°°°°Eugene took unheard-of pains to keep himself in a spotless condition, but on his way through the streets he began to think about Mme. de Restaud and what he should say to her. He equipped himself with wit, rehearsed repartees in the course of an imaginary conversation, and prepared certain neat speeches a la Talleyrand, conjuring up a series of small events which should prepare the way for the declaration on which he had based his future; and during these musings the law student was bespattered with mud, and by the time he reached the Palais Royal he was obliged to have his boots blacked and his trousers brushed.

°°°°"If I were rich," he said, as he changed the five-franc piece he had brought with him in case anything might happen, "I would take a cab, then I could think at my ease."

°°°°At last he reached the Rue du Helder, and asked for the Comtesse de Restaud. He bore the contemptuous glances of the servants, who had seen him cross the court on foot, with the cold fury of a man who knows that he will succeed some day. He understood the meaning of their glances at once, for he had felt his inferiority as soon as he entered the court, where a smart cab was waiting. All the delights of life in Paris seemed to be implied by this visible and manifest sign of luxury and extravagance. A fine horse, in magnificent harness, was pawing the ground, and all at once the law student felt out of humor with himself. Every compartment in his brain which he had thought to find so full of wit was bolted fast; he grew positively stupid. He sent up his name to the Countess, and waited in the ante-chamber, standing on one foot before a window that looked out upon the court; mechanically he leaned his elbow against the sash, and stared before him. The time seemed long; he would have left the house but for the southern tenacity of purpose which works miracles when it is single-minded.

°°°°"Madame is in her boudoir, and cannot see any one at present, sir," said the servant. "She gave me no answer; but if you will go into the dining-room, there is some one already there."

°°°°Rastignac was impressed with a sense of the formidable power of the lackey who can accuse or condemn his masters by a word; he coolly opened the door by which the man had just entered the ante-chamber, meaning, no doubt, to show these insolent flunkeys that he was familiar with the house; but he found that he had thoughtlessly precipitated himself into a small room full of dressers, where lamps were standing, and hot-water pipes, on which towels were being dried; a dark passage and a back staircase lay beyond it. Stifled laughter from the ante-chamber added to his confusion.

°°°°"This way to the drawing-room, sir," said the servant, with the exaggerated respect which seemed to be one more jest at his expense.

°°°°Eugene turned so quickly that he stumbled against a bath. By good luck, he managed to keep his hat on his head, and saved it from immersion in the water; but just as he turned, a door opened at the further end of the dark passage, dimly lighted by a small lamp. Rastignac heard voices and the sound of a kiss; one of the speakers was Mme. de Restaud, the other was Father Goriot. Eugene followed the servant through the dining-room into the drawing- room; he went to a window that looked out into the courtyard, and stood there for a while. He meant to know whether this Goriot was really the Goriot that he knew. His heart beat unwontedly fast; he remembered Vautrin's hideous insinuations. A well-dressed young man suddenly emerged from the room almost as Eugene entered it, saying impatiently to the servant who stood at the door: "I am going, Maurice. Tell Madame la Comtesse that I waited more than half an hour for her."

°°°°Whereupon this insolent being, who, doubtless, had a right to be insolent, sang an Italian trill, and went towards the window where Eugene was standing, moved thereto quite as much by a desire to see the student's face as by a wish to look out into the courtyard.

°°°°"But M. le Comte had better wait a moment longer; madame is disengaged," said Maurice, as he returned to the ante-chamber.

°°°°Just at that moment Father Goriot appeared close to the gate; he had emerged from a door at the foot of the back staircase. The worthy soul was preparing to open his umbrella regardless of the fact that the great gate had opened to admit a tilbury, in which a young man with a ribbon at his button-hole was seated. Father Goriot had scarcely time to start back and save himself. The horse took fright at the umbrella, swerved, and dashed forward towards the flight of steps. The young man looked round in annoyance, saw Father Goriot, and greeted him as he went out with constrained courtesy, such as people usually show to a money- lender so long as they require his services, or the sort of respect they feel it necessary to show for some one whose reputation has been blown upon, so that they blush to acknowledge his acquaintance. Father Goriot gave him a little friendly nod and a good-natured smile. All this happened with lightning speed. Eugene was so deeply interested that he forgot that he was not alone till he suddenly heard the Countess' voice.

°°°°"Oh! Maxime, were you going away?" she said reproachfully, with a shade of pique in her manner. The Countess had not seen the incident nor the entrance of the tilbury. Rastignac turned abruptly and saw her standing before him, coquettishly dressed in a loose white cashmere gown with knots of rose-colored ribbon here and there; her hair was carelessly coiled about her head, as is the wont of Parisian women in the morning; there was a soft fragrance about her--doubtless she was fresh from a bath;--her graceful form seemed more flexible, her beauty more luxuriant. Her eyes glistened. A young man can see everything at a glance; he feels the radiant influence of woman as a plant discerns and absorbs its nutriment from the air; he did not need to touch her hands to feel their cool freshness. He saw faint rose tints through the cashmere of the dressing gown; it had fallen slightly open, giving glimpses of a bare throat, on which the student's eyes rested. The Countess had no need of the adventitious aid of corsets; her girdle defined the outlines of her slender waist; her throat was a challenge to love; her feet, thrust into slippers, were daintily small. As Maxime took her hand and kissed it, Eugene became aware of Maxime's existence, and the Countess saw Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! is that you M. de Rastignac? I am very glad to see you," she said, but there was something in her manner that a shrewd observer would have taken as a hint to depart.

°°°°Maxime, as the Countess Anastasie had called the young man with the haughty insolence of bearing, looked from Eugene to the lady, and from the lady to Eugene; it was sufficiently evident that he wished to be rid of the latter. An exact and faithful rendering of the glance might be given in the words: "Look here, my dear; I hope you intend to send this little whipper-snapper about his business."

°°°°The Countess consulted the young man's face with an intent submissiveness that betrays all the secrets of a woman's heart, and Rastignac all at once began to hate him violently. To begin with, the sight of the fair carefully arranged curls on the other's comely head had convinced him that his own crop was hideous; Maxime's boots, moreover, were elegant and spotless, while his own, in spite of all his care, bore some traces of his recent walk; and, finally, Maxime's overcoat fitted the outline of his figure gracefully, he looked like a pretty woman, while Eugene was wearing a black coat at half-past two. The quick- witted child of the Charente felt the disadvantage at which he was placed beside this tall, slender dandy, with the clear gaze and the pale face, one of those men who would ruin orphan children without scruple. Mme. de Restaud fled into the next room without waiting for Eugene to speak; shaking out the skirts of her dressing-gown in her flight, so that she looked like a white butterfly, and Maxime hurried after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant's ball; he guessed the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he said to himself, "This is my rival; I mean to cut him out."

°°°°Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls's eye twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and so sulkily, that Anastasie's fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, "Why do you not go?" a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make their exit.

°°°°Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

°°°°"Madame," he began, "I hastened to call upon you----"

°°°°He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess; he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime with a cordial "Good morning," that astonished Eugene not a little. The young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

°°°°"M. de Restaud," said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law student.

°°°°Eugene bowed profoundly.

°°°°"This gentleman," she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband, "is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last ball."

°°°°Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs! These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house, produced a magical effect. The Count's stiff manner relaxed at once as he returned the student's bow.

°°°°"Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance," he said.

°°°°Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a fairy's wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open again; Rastignac's carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer's lodging- house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

°°°°"I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct," the Comte de Restaud said, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, they are extinct," answered the law student. "My great- uncle, the Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family. They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault, Mme. de Beauseant's grandfather on the mother's side. We are the younger branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King's service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated."

°°°°"Was not your great-uncle in command of the Vengeur before 1789?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the Warwick."

°°°°Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who should say, "If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that fellow, it is all over with us." Anastasie understood the glance that M. de Trailles gave her. With a woman's admirable tact, she began to smile and said:

°°°°"Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the Warwick and the Vengeur."

°°°°She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the boudoir. The morganatic couple (to use a convenient German expression which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

°°°°"Anastasie!" he cried pettishly, "just stay a moment, dear; you know very well that----"

°°°°"I am coming back in a minute," she interrupted; "I have a commission for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it."

°°°°She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her husband's voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands' characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, "You are busy, I do not want to interrupt you; good-day," and he went.

°°°°"Just wait a moment, Maxime!" the Count called after him.

°°°°"Come and dine with us," said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure that Rastignac had taken his leave.

°°°°The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover, for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate, hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair typical Parisian.

°°°°"Anastasie!" the Count called again to his wife.

°°°°"Poor Maxime!" she said, addressing the young man. "Come, we must resign ourselves. This evening----"

°°°°"I hope, Nasie," he said in her ear, "that you will give orders not to admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you will compel me to kill him."

°°°°"Are you mad, Maxime?" she said. "A young lad of a student is, on the contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him."

°°°°Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip, and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had been closed after him.

°°°°"What do you think, dear?" cried the Count, her husband, "this gentleman's family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted."

°°°°"Delighted to find that we have acquaintances in common," said the Countess, with a preoccupied manner.

°°°°"More than you think," said Eugene, in a low voice.

°°°°"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

°°°°"Why, only just now," said the student, "I saw a gentleman go out at the gate, Father Goriot, my next door neighbor in the house where I am lodging."

°°°°At the sound of this name, and the prefix that embellished it, the Count, who was stirring the fire, let the tongs fall as though they had burned his fingers, and rose to his feet.

°°°°"Sir," he cried, "you might have called him 'Monsieur Goriot'!"

°°°°The Countess turned pale at first at the sight of her husband's vexation, then she reddened; clearly she was embarrassed, her answer was made in a tone that she tried to make natural, and with an air of assumed carelessness:

°°°°"You could not know any one who is dearer to us both . . ."

°°°°She broke off, glanced at the piano as if some fancy had crossed her mind, and asked, "Are you fond of music, M. de Rastignac?"

°°°°"Exceedingly," answered Eugene, flushing, and disconcerted by a dim suspicion that he had somehow been guilty of a clumsy piece of folly.

°°°°"Do you sing?" she cried, going to the piano, and, sitting down before it, she swept her fingers over the keyboard from end to end. R-r-r-rah!

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°The Comte de Restaud walked to and fro.

°°°°"That is a pity; you are without one great means of success.--Ca- ro, ca-a-ro, ca-a-a-ro, non du-bi-ta-re," sang the Countess.

°°°°Eugene had a second time waved a magic wand when he uttered Goriot's name, but the effect seemed to be entirely opposite to that produced by the formula "related to Mme. de Beauseant." His position was not unlike that of some visitor permitted as a favor to inspect a private collection of curiosities, when by inadvertence he comes into collision with a glass case full of sculptured figures, and three or four heads, imperfectly secured, fall at the shock. He wished the earth would open and swallow him. Mme. de Restaud's expression was reserved and chilly, her eyes had grown indifferent, and sedulously avoided meeting those of the unlucky student of law.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "you wish to talk with M. de Restaud; permit me to wish you good-day----"

°°°°The Countess interrupted him by a gesture, saying hastily, "Whenever you come to see us, both M. de Restaud and I shall be delighted to see you."

°°°°Eugene made a profound bow and took his leave, followed by M. de Restaud, who insisted, in spite of his remonstrances, on accompanying him into the hall.

°°°°"Neither your mistress nor I are at home to that gentleman when he calls," the Count said to Maurice.

°°°°As Eugene set foot on the steps, he saw that it was raining.

°°°°"Come," said he to himself, "somehow I have just made a mess of it, I do not know how. And now I am going to spoil my hat and coat into the bargain. I ought to stop in my corner, grind away at law, and never look to be anything but a boorish country magistrate. How can I go into society, when to manage properly you want a lot of cabs, varnished boots, gold watch chains, and all sorts of things; you have to wear white doeskin gloves that cost six francs in the morning, and primrose kid gloves every evening? A fig for that old humbug of a Goriot!"

°°°°When he reached the street door, the driver of a hackney coach, who had probably just deposited a wedding party at their door, and asked nothing better than a chance of making a little money for himself without his employer's knowledge, saw that Eugene had no umbrella, remarked his black coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, and varnished boots, and stopped and looked at him inquiringly. Eugene, in the blind desperation that drives a young man to plunge deeper and deeper into an abyss, as if he might hope to find a fortunate issue in its lowest depths, nodded in reply to the driver's signal, and stepped into the cab; a few stray petals of orange blossom and scraps of wire bore witness to its recent occupation by a wedding party.

°°°°"Where am I to drive, sir?" demanded the man, who, by this time, had taken off his white gloves.

°°°°"Confound it!" Eugene said to himself, "I am in for it now, and at least I will not spend cab-hire for nothing!--Drive to the Hotel Beauseant," he said aloud.

°°°°"Which?" asked the man, a portentous word that reduced Eugene to confusion. This young man of fashion, species incerta, did not know that there were two Hotels Beauseant; he was not aware how rich he was in relations who did not care about him.

°°°°"The Vicomte de Beauseant, Rue----"

°°°°"De Grenelle," interrupted the driver, with a jerk of his head. "You see, there are the hotels of the Marquis and Comte de Beauseant in the Rue Saint-Dominique," he added, drawing up the step.

°°°°"I know all about that," said Eugene, severely.--"Everybody is laughing at me to-day, it seems!" he said to himself, as he deposited his hat on the opposite seat. "This escapade will cost me a king's ransom, but, at any rate, I shall call on my so- called cousin in a thoroughly aristocratic fashion. Goriot has cost me ten francs already, the old scoundrel. My word! I will tell Mme. de Beauseant about my adventure; perhaps it may amuse her. Doubtless she will know the secret of the criminal relation between that handsome woman and the old rat without a tail. It would be better to find favor in my cousin's eyes than to come in contact with that shameless woman, who seems to me to have very expensive tastes. Surely the beautiful Vicomtesse's personal interest would turn the scale for me, when the mere mention of her name produces such an effect. Let us look higher. If you set yourself to carry the heights of heaven, you must face God."

°°°°The innumerable thoughts that surged through his brain might be summed up in these phrases. He grew calmer, and recovered something of his assurance as he watched the falling rain. He told himself that though he was about to squander two of the precious five-franc pieces that remained to him, the money was well laid out in preserving his coat, boots, and hat; and his cabman's cry of "Gate, if you please," almost put him in spirits. A Swiss, in scarlet and gold, appeared, the great door groaned on its hinges, and Rastignac, with sweet satisfaction, beheld his equipage pass under the archway and stop before the flight of steps beneath the awning. The driver, in a blue-and-red greatcoat, dismounted and let down the step. As Eugene stepped out of the cab, he heard smothered laughter from the peristyle. Three or four lackeys were making merry over the festal appearance of the vehicle. In another moment the law student was enlightened as to the cause of their hilarity; he felt the full force of the contrast between his equipage and one of the smartest broughams in Paris; a coachman, with powdered hair, seemed to find it difficult to hold a pair of spirited horses, who stood chafing the bit. In Mme. de Restaud's courtyard, in the Chaussee d'Antin, he had seen the neat turnout of a young man of six-and-twenty; in the Faubourg Saint-Germain he found the luxurious equipage of a man of rank; thirty thousand francs would not have purchased it.

°°°°"Who can be here?" said Eugene to himself. He began to understand, though somewhat tardily, that he must not expect to find many women in Paris who were not already appropriated, and that the capture of one of these queens would be likely to cost something more than bloodshed. "Confound it all! I expect my cousin also has her Maxime."

°°°°He went up the steps, feeling that he was a blighted being. The glass door was opened for him; the servants were as solemn as jackasses under the curry comb. So far, Eugene had only been in the ballroom on the ground floor of the Hotel Beauseant; the fete had followed so closely on the invitation, that he had not had time to call on his cousin, and had therefore never seen Mme. de Beauseant's apartments; he was about to behold for the first time a great lady among the wonderful and elegant surroundings that reveal her character and reflect her daily life. He was the more curious, because Mme. de Restaud's drawing-room had provided him with a standard of comparison.

°°°°At half-past four the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was visible. Five minutes earlier she would not have received her cousin, but Eugene knew nothing of the recognized routine of various houses in Paris. He was conducted up the wide, white-painted, crimson- carpeted staircase, between the gilded balusters and masses of flowering plants, to Mme. de Beauseant's apartments. He did not know the rumor current about Mme. de Beauseant, one of the biographies told, with variations, in whispers, every evening in the salons of Paris.

°°°°For three years past her name had been spoken of in connection with that of one of the most wealthy and distinguished Portuguese nobles, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto. It was one of those innocent liaisons which possess so much charm for the two thus attached to each other that they find the presence of a third person intolerable. The Vicomte de Beauseant, therefore, had himself set an example to the rest of the world by respecting, with as good a grace as might be, this morganatic union. Any one who came to call on the Vicomtesse in the early days of this friendship was sure to find the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto there. As, under the circumstances, Mme. de Beauseant could not very well shut her door against these visitors, she gave them such a cold reception, and showed so much interest in the study of the ceiling, that no one could fail to understand how much he bored her; and when it became known in Paris that Mme. de Beauseant was bored by callers between two and four o'clock, she was left in perfect solitude during that interval. She went to the Bouffons or to the Opera with M. de Beauseant and M. d'Ajuda-Pinto; and M. de Beauseant, like a well-bred man of the world, always left his wife and the Portuguese as soon as he had installed them. But M. d'Ajuda-Pinto must marry, and a Mlle. de Rochefide was the young lady. In the whole fashionable world there was but one person who as yet knew nothing of the arrangement, and that was Mme. de Beauseant. Some of her friends had hinted at the possibility, and she had laughed at them, believing that envy had prompted those ladies to try to make mischief. And now, though the bans were about to be published, and although the handsome Portuguese had come that day to break the news to the Vicomtesse, he had not found courage as yet to say one word about his treachery. How was it? Nothing is doubtless more difficult than the notification of an ultimatum of this kind. There are men who feel more at their ease when they stand up before another man who threatens their lives with sword or pistol than in the presence of a woman who, after two hours of lamentations and reproaches, falls into a dead swoon and requires salts. At this moment, therefore, M. d'Ajuda-Pinto was on thorns, and anxious to take his leave. He told himself that in some way or other the news would reach Mme. de Beauseant; he would write, it would be much better to do it by letter, and not to utter the words that should stab her to the heart.

°°°°So when the servant announced M. Eugene de Rastignac, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto trembled with joy. To be sure, a loving woman shows even more ingenuity in inventing doubts of her lover than in varying the monotony of his happiness; and when she is about to be forsaken, she instinctively interprets every gesture as rapidly as Virgil's courser detected the presence of his companion by snuffing the breeze. It was impossible, therefore, that Mme. de Beauseant should not detect that involuntary thrill of satisfaction; slight though it was, it was appalling in its artlessness.

°°°°Eugene had yet to learn that no one in Paris should present himself in any house without first making himself acquainted with the whole history of its owner, and of its owner's wife and family, so that he may avoid making any of the terrible blunders which in Poland draw forth the picturesque exclamation, "Harness five bullocks to your cart!" probably because you will need them all to pull you out of the quagmire into which a false step has plunged you. If, down to the present day, our language has no name for these conversational disasters, it is probably because they are believed to be impossible, the publicity given in Paris to every scandal is so prodigious. After the awkward incident at Mme. de Restaud's, no one but Eugene could have reappeared in his character of bullock-driver in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room. But if Mme. de Restaud and M. de Trailles had found him horribly in the way, M. d'Ajuda hailed his coming with relief.

°°°°"Good-bye," said the Portuguese, hurrying to the door, as Eugene made his entrance into a dainty little pink-and-gray drawing- room, where luxury seemed nothing more than good taste.

°°°°"Until this evening," said Mme. de Beauseant, turning her head to give the Marquis a glance. "We are going to the Bouffons, are we not?"

°°°°"I cannot go," he said, with his fingers on the door handle.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant rose and beckoned to him to return. She did not pay the slightest attention to Eugene, who stood there dazzled by the sparkling marvels around him; he began to think that this was some story out of the Arabian Nights made real, and did not know where to hide himself, when the woman before him seemed to be unconscious of his existence. The Vicomtesse had raised the forefinger of her right hand, and gracefully signed to the Marquis to seat himself beside her. The Marquis felt the imperious sway of passion in her gesture; he came back towards her. Eugene watched him, not without a feeling of envy.

°°°°"That is the owner of the brougham!" he said to himself. "But is it necessary to have a pair of spirited horses, servants in livery, and torrents of gold to draw a glance from a woman here in Paris?"

°°°°The demon of luxury gnawed at his heart, greed burned in his veins, his throat was parched with the thirst of gold.

°°°°He had a hundred and thirty francs every quarter. His father, mother, brothers, sisters, and aunt did not spend two hundred francs a month among them. This swift comparison between his present condition and the aims he had in view helped to benumb his faculties.

°°°°"Why not?" the Vicomtesse was saying, as she smiled at the Portuguese. "Why cannot you come to the Italiens?"

°°°°"Affairs! I am to dine with the English Ambassador."

°°°°"Throw him over."

°°°°When a man once enters on a course of deception, he is compelled to add lie to lie. M. d'Ajuda therefore said, smiling, "Do you lay your commands on me?"

°°°°"Yes, certainly."

°°°°"That was what I wanted to have you say to me," he answered, dissembling his feelings in a glance which would have reassured any other woman.

°°°°He took the Vicomtesse's hand, kissed it, and went.

°°°°Eugene ran his fingers through his hair, and constrained himself to bow. He thought that now Mme. de Beauseant would give him her attention; but suddenly she sprang forward, rushed to a window in the gallery, and watched M. d'Ajuda step into his carriage; she listened to the order that he gave, and heard the Swiss repeat it to the coachman:

°°°°"To M. de Rochefide's house."

°°°°Those words, and the way in which M. d'Ajuda flung himself back in the carriage, were like a lightning flash and a thunderbolt for her; she walked back again with a deadly fear gnawing at her heart. The most terrible catastrophes only happen among the heights. The Vicomtesse went to her own room, sat down at a table, and took up a sheet of dainty notepaper.

°°°°"When, instead of dining with the English Ambassador,"   she wrote, "you go to the Rochefides, you owe me an   explanation, which I am waiting to hear."

°°°°She retraced several of the letters, for her hand was trembling so that they were indistinct; then she signed the note with an initial C for "Claire de Bourgogne," and rang the bell.

°°°°"Jacques," she said to the servant, who appeared immediately, "take this note to M. de Rochefide's house at half-past seven and ask for the Marquis d'Ajuda. If M. d'Ajuda is there, leave the note without waiting for an answer; if he is not there, bring the note back to me."

°°°°"Madame la Vicomtess, there is a visitor in the drawing-room."

°°°°"Ah! yes, of course," she said, opening the door.

°°°°Eugene was beginning to feel very uncomfortable, but at last the Vicomtesse appeared; she spoke to him, and the tremulous tones of her voice vibrated through his heart.

°°°°"Pardon me, monsieur," she said; "I had a letter to write. Now I am quite at liberty."

°°°°She scarcely knew what she was saying, for even as she spoke she thought, "Ah! he means to marry Mlle. de Rochefide? But is he still free? This evening the marriage shall be broken off, or else . . . But before to-morrow I shall know."

°°°°"Cousin . . ." the student replied.

°°°°"Eh?" said the Countess, with an insolent glance that sent a cold shudder through Eugene; he understood what that "Eh?" meant; he had learned a great deal in three hours, and his wits were on the alert. He reddened:

°°°°"Madame . . ." he began; he hesitated a moment, and then went on. "Pardon me; I am in such need of protection that the nearest scrap of relationship could do me no harm."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant smiled but there was sadness in her smile; even now she felt forebodings of the coming pain, the air she breathed was heavy with the storm that was about to burst.

°°°°"If you knew how my family are situated," he went on, "you would love to play the part of a beneficent fairy godmother who graciously clears the obstacles from the path of her protege."

°°°°"Well, cousin," she said, laughing, "and how can I be of service to you?"

°°°°"But do I know even that? I am distantly related to you, and this obscure and remote relationship is even now a perfect godsend to me. You have confused my ideas; I cannot remember the things that I meant to say to you. I know no one else here in Paris. . . . Ah! if I could only ask you to counsel me, ask you to look upon me as a poor child who would fain cling to the hem of your dress, who would lay down his life for you."

°°°°"Would you kill a man for me?"

°°°°"Two," said Eugene.

°°°°"You, child. Yes, you are a child," she said, keeping back the tears that came to her eyes; "you would love sincerely."

°°°°"Oh!" he cried, flinging up his head.

°°°°The audacity of the student's answer interested the Vicomtesse in him. The southern brain was beginning to scheme for the first time. Between Mme. de Restaud's blue boudoir and Mme. de Beauseant's rose-colored drawing-room he had made a three years' advance in a kind of law which is not a recognized study in Paris, although it is a sort of higher jurisprudence, and, when well understood, is a highroad to success of every kind.

°°°°"Ah! that is what I meant to say!" said Eugene. "I met Mme. de Restaud at your ball, and this morning I went to see her.

°°°°"You must have been very much in the way," said Mme. de Beauseant, smiling as she spoke.

°°°°"Yes, indeed. I am a novice, and my blunders will set every one against me, if you do not give me your counsel. I believe that in Paris it is very difficult to meet with a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion who would be willing to teach me, what you women can explain so well--life. I shall find a M. de Trailles everywhere. So I have come to you to ask you to give me a key to a puzzle, to entreat you to tell me what sort of blunder I made this morning. I mentioned an old man----"

°°°°"Madame la Duchess de Langeais," Jacques cut the student short; Eugene gave expression to his intense annoyance by a gesture.

°°°°"If you mean to succeed," said the Vicomtesse in a low voice, "in the first place you must not be so demonstrative."

°°°°"Ah! good morning, dear," she continued, and rising and crossing the room, she grasped the Duchess' hands as affectionately as if they had been sisters; the Duchess responded in the prettiest and most gracious way.

°°°°"Two intimate friends!" said Rastignac to himself. "Henceforward I shall have two protectresses; those two women are great friends, no doubt, and this newcomer will doubtless interest herself in her friend's cousin."

°°°°"To what happy inspiration do I owe this piece of good fortune, dear Antoinette?" asked Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°"Well, I saw M. d'Ajuda-Pinto at M. de Rochefide's door, so I thought that if I came I should find you alone."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant's mouth did not tighten, her color did not rise, her expression did not alter, or rather, her brow seemed to clear as the Duchess uttered those deadly words.

°°°°"If I had known that you were engaged----" the speaker added, glancing at Eugene.

°°°°"This gentleman is M. Eugene de Rastignac, one of my cousins," said the Vicomtesse. "Have you any news of General de Montriveau?" she continued. "Serizy told me yesterday that he never goes anywhere now; has he been to see you to-day?"

°°°°It was believed that the Duchess was desperately in love with M. de Montriveau, and that he was a faithless lover; she felt the question in her very heart, and her face flushed as she answered:

°°°°"He was at the Elysee yesterday."

°°°°"In attendance?"

°°°°"Claire," returned the Duchess, and hatred overflowed in the glances she threw at Mme. de Beauseant; "of course you know that M. d'Ajuda-Pinto is going to marry Mlle. de Rochefide; the bans will be published to-morrow."

°°°°This thrust was too cruel; the Vicomtesse's face grew white, but she answered, laughing, "One of those rumors that fools amuse themselves with. What should induce M. d'Ajuda to take one of the noblest names in Portugal to the Rochefides? The Rochefides were only ennobled yesterday."

°°°°"But Bertha will have two hundred thousand livres a year, they say."

°°°°"M. d'Ajuda is too wealthy to marry for money."

°°°°"But, my dear, Mlle. de Rochefide is a charming girl."

°°°°"Indeed?"

°°°°"And, as a matter of fact, he is dining with them to-day; the thing is settled. It is very surprising to me that you should know so little about it."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant turned to Rastignac. "What was the blunder that you made, monsieur?" she asked. "The poor boy is only just launched into the world, Antoinette, so that he understands nothing of all this that we are speaking of. Be merciful to him, and let us finish our talk to-morrow. Everything will be announced to-morrow, you know, and your kind informal communication can be accompanied by official confirmation."

°°°°The Duchess gave Eugene one of those insolent glances that measure a man from head to foot, and leave him crushed and annihilated.

°°°°"Madame, I have unwittingly plunged a dagger into Mme. de Restaud's heart; unwittingly--therein lies my offence," said the student of law, whose keen brain had served him sufficiently well, for he had detected the biting epigrams that lurked beneath this friendly talk. "You continue to receive, possibly you fear, those who know the amount of pain that they deliberately inflict; but a clumsy blunderer who has no idea how deeply he wounds is looked upon as a fool who does not know how to make use of his opportunities, and every one despise him."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant gave the student a glance, one of those glances in which a great soul can mingle dignity and gratitude. It was like balm to the law student, who was still smarting under the Duchess' insolent scrutiny; she had looked at him as an auctioneer might look at some article to appraise its value.

°°°°"Imagine, too, that I had just made some progress with the Comte de Restaud; for I should tell you, madame," he went on, turning to the Duchess with a mixture of humility and malice in his manner, "that as yet I am only a poor devil of a student, very much alone in the world, and very poor----"

°°°°"You should not tell us that, M. de Rastignac. We women never care about anything that no one else will take."

°°°°"Bah!" said Eugene. "I am only two-and-twenty, and I must make up my mind to the drawbacks of my time of life. Besides, I am confessing my sins, and it would be impossible to kneel in a more charming confessional; you commit your sins in one drawing-room, and receive absolution for them in another."

°°°°The Duchess' expression grew colder, she did not like the flippant tone of these remarks, and showed that she considered them to be in bad taste by turning to the Vicomtesse with--"This gentleman has only just come----"

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant began to laugh outright at her cousin and at the Duchess both.

°°°°"He has only just come to Paris, dear, and is in search of some one who will give him lessons in good taste."

°°°°"Mme. la Duchesse," said Eugene, "is it not natural to wish to be initiated into the mysteries which charm us?" ("Come, now," he said to himself, "my language is superfinely elegant, I'm sure.")

°°°°"But Mme. de Restaud is herself, I believe, M. de Trailles' pupil," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Of that I had no idea, madame," answered the law student, "so I rashly came between them. In fact, I got on very well with the lady's husband, and his wife tolerated me for a time until I took it into my head to tell them that I knew some one of whom I had just caught a glimpse as he went out by a back staircase, a man who had given the Countess a kiss at the end of a passage."

°°°°"Who was it?" both women asked together.

°°°°"An old man who lives at the rate of two louis a month in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, where I, a poor student, lodge likewise. He is a truly unfortunate creature, everybody laughs at him--we all call him 'Father Goriot.' "

°°°°"Why, child that you are," cried the Vicomtesse, "Mme. de Restaud was a Mlle. Goriot!"

°°°°"The daughter of a vermicelli manufacturer," the Duchess added; "and when the little creature went to Court, the daughter of a pastry-cook was presented on the same day. Do you remember, Claire? The King began to laugh, and made some joke in Latin about flour. People--what was it?--people----"

°°°°"Ejusdem farinae," said Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that was it," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Oh! is that her father?" the law student continued, aghast.

°°°°"Yes, certainly; the old man had two daughters; he dotes on them, so to speak, though they will scarcely acknowledge him."

°°°°"Didn't the second daughter marry a banker with a German name?" the Vicomtesse asked, turning to Mme. de Langeais, "a Baron de Nucingen? And her name is Delphine, is it not? Isn't she a fair- haired woman who has a side-box at the Opera? She comes sometimes to the Bouffons, and laughs loudly to attract attention."

°°°°The Duchess smiled and said:

°°°°"I wonder at you, dear. Why do you take so much interest in people of that kind? One must have been as madly in love as Restaud was, to be infatuated with Mlle. Anastasie and her flour sacks. Oh! he will not find her a good bargain! She is in M. de Trailles' hands, and he will ruin her."

°°°°"And they do not acknowledge their father!" Eugene repeated.

°°°°"Oh! well, yes, their father, the father, a father," replied the Vicomtesse, "a kind father who gave them each five or six hundred thousand francs, it is said, to secure their happiness by marrying them well; while he only kept eight or ten thousand livres a year for himself, thinking that his daughters would always be his daughters, thinking that in them he would live his life twice over again, that in their houses he should find two homes, where he would be loved and looked up to, and made much of. And in two years' time both his sons-in-law had turned him out of their houses as if he were one of the lowest outcasts."

°°°°Tears came into Eugene's eyes. He was still under the spell of youthful beliefs, he had just left home, pure and sacred feelings had been stirred within him, and this was his first day on the battlefield of civilization in Paris. Genuine feeling is so infectious that for a moment the three looked at each other in silence.

°°°°"Eh, mon Dieu!" said Mme. de Langeais; "yes, it seems very horrible, and yet we see such things every day. Is there not a reason for it? Tell me, dear, have you ever really thought what a son-in-law is? A son-in-law is the man for whom we bring up, you and I, a dear little one, bound to us very closely in innumerable ways; for seventeen years she will be the joy of her family, its 'white soul,' as Lamartine says, and suddenly she will become its scourge. When HE comes and takes her from us, his love from the very beginning is like an axe laid to the root of all the old affection in our darling's heart, and all the ties that bound her to her family are severed. But yesterday our little daughter thought of no one but her mother and father, as we had no thought that was not for her; by to-morrow she will have become a hostile stranger. The tragedy is always going on under our eyes. On the one hand you see a father who has sacrificed himself to his son, and his daughter-in-law shows him the last degree of insolence. On the other hand, it is the son-in-law who turns his wife's mother out of the house. I sometimes hear it said that there is nothing dramatic about society in these days; but the Drama of the Son-in-law is appalling, to say nothing of our marriages, which have come to be very poor farces. I can explain how it all came about in the old vermicelli maker's case. I think I recollect that Foriot----"

°°°°"Goriot, madame."

°°°°"Yes, that Moriot was once President of his Section during the Revolution. He was in the secret of the famous scarcity of grain, and laid the foundation of his fortune in those days by selling flour for ten times its cost. He had as much flour as he wanted. My grandmother's steward sold him immense quantities. No doubt Noriot shared the plunder with the Committee of Public Salvation, as that sort of person always did. I recollect the steward telling my grandmother that she might live at Grandvilliers in complete security, because her corn was as good as a certificate of civism. Well, then, this Loriot, who sold corn to those butchers, has never had but one passion, they say--he idolizes his daughters. He settled one of them under Restaud's roof, and grafted the other into the Nucingen family tree, the Baron de Nucingen being a rich banker who had turned Royalist. You can quite understand that so long as Bonaparte was Emperor, the two sons-in-law could manage to put up with the old Ninety-three; but after the restoration of the Bourbons, M. de Restaud felt bored by the old man's society, and the banker was still more tired of it. His daughters were still fond of him; they wanted 'to keep the goat and the cabbage,' so they used to see Joriot whenever there was no one there, under pretence of affection. 'Come to- day, papa, we shall have you all to ourselves, and that will be much nicer!' and all that sort of thing. As for me, dear, I believe that love has second-sight: poor Ninety-three; his heart must have bled. He saw that his daughters were ashamed of him, that if they loved their husbands his visits must make mischief. So he immolated himself. He made the sacrifice because he was a father; he went into voluntary exile. His daughters were satisfied, so he thought that he had done the best thing he could; but it was a family crime, and father and daughters were accomplices. You see this sort of thing everywhere. What could this old Doriot have been but a splash of mud in his daughters' drawing-rooms? He would only have been in the way, and bored other people, besides being bored himself. And this that happened between father and daughters may happen to the prettiest woman in

°°°°Paris and the man she loves the best; if her love grows tiresome, he will go; he will descend to the basest trickery to leave her. It is the same with all love and friendship. Our heart is a treasury; if you pour out all its wealth at once, you are bankrupt. We show no more mercy to the affection that reveals its utmost extent than we do to another kind of prodigal who has not a penny left. Their father had given them all he had. For twenty years he had given his whole heart to them; then, one day, he gave them all his fortune too. The lemon was squeezed; the girls left the rest in the gutter."

°°°°"The world is very base," said the Vicomtesse, plucking at the threads of her shawl. She did not raise her head as she spoke; the words that Mme. de Langeais had meant for her in the course of her story had cut her to the quick.

°°°°"Base? Oh, no," answered the Duchess; "the world goes its own way, that is all. If I speak in this way, it is only to show that I am not duped by it. I think as you do," she said, pressing the Vicomtesse's hand. "The world is a slough; let us try to live on the heights above it."

°°°°She rose to her feet and kissed Mme. de Beauseant on the forehead as she said: "You look very charming to-day, dear. I have never seen such a lovely color in your cheeks before."

°°°°Then she went out with a slight inclination of the head to the cousin.

°°°°"Father Goriot is sublime!" said Eugene to himself, as he remembered how he had watched his neighbor work the silver vessel into a shapeless mass that night.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant did not hear him; she was absorbed in her own thoughts. For several minutes the silence remained unbroken till the law student became almost paralyzed with embarrassment, and was equally afraid to go or stay or speak a word.

°°°°"The world is basely ungrateful and ill-natured," said the Vicomtesse at last. "No sooner does a trouble befall you than a friend is ready to bring the tidings and to probe your heart with the point of a dagger while calling on you to admire the handle. Epigrams and sarcasms already! Ah! I will defend myself!"

°°°°She raised her head like the great lady that she was, and lightnings flashed from her proud eyes.

°°°°"Ah!" she said, as she saw Eugene, "are you there?"

°°°°"Still," he said piteously.

°°°°"Well, then, M. de Rastignac, deal with the world as it deserves. You are determined to succeed? I will help you. You shall sound the depths of corruption in woman; you shall measure the extent of man's pitiful vanity. Deeply as I am versed in such learning, there were pages in the book of life that I had not read. Now I know all. The more cold-blooded your calculations, the further you will go. Strike ruthlessly; you will be feared. Men and women for you must be nothing more than post-horses; take a fresh relay, and leave the last to drop by the roadside; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition. You will be nothing here, you see, unless a woman interests herself in you; and she must be young and wealthy, and a woman of the world. Yet, if you have a heart, lock it carefully away like a treasure; do not let any one suspect it, or you will be lost; you would cease to be the executioner, you would take the victim's place. And if ever you should love, never let your secret escape you! Trust no one until you are very sure of the heart to which you open your heart. Learn to mistrust every one; take every precaution for the sake of the love which does not exist as yet. Listen, Miguel"-- the name slipped from her so naturally that she did not notice her mistake--"there is something still more appalling than the ingratitude of daughters who have cast off their old father and wish that he were dead, and that is a rivalry between two sisters. Restaud comes of a good family, his wife has been received into their circle; she has been presented at court; and her sister, her wealthy sister, Mme. Delphine de Nucingen, the wife of a great capitalist, is consumed with envy, and ready to die of spleen. There is gulf set between the sisters--indeed, they are sisters no longer--the two women who refuse to acknowledge their father do not acknowledge each other. So Mme. de Nucingen would lap up all the mud that lies between the Rue Saint-Lazare and the Rue de Grenelle to gain admittance to my salon. She fancied that she should gain her end through de Marsay; she has made herself de Marsay's slave, and she bores him. De Marsay cares very little about her. If you will introduce her to me, you will be her darling, her Benjamin; she will idolize you. If, after that, you can love her, do so; if not, make her useful. I will ask her to come once or twice to one of my great crushes, but I will never receive her here in the morning. I will bow to her when I see her, and that will be quite sufficient. You have shut the Comtesse de Restaud's door against you by mentioning Father Goriot's name. Yes, my good friend, you may call at her house twenty times, and every time out of the twenty you will find that she is not at home. The servants have their orders, and will not admit you. Very well, then, now let Father Goriot gain the right of entry into her sister's house for you. The beautiful Mme. de Nucingen will give the signal for a battle. As soon as she singles you out, other women will begin to lose their heads about you, and her enemies and rivals and intimate friends will all try to take you from her. There are women who will fall in love with a man because another woman has chosen him; like the city madams, poor things, who copy our millinery, and hope thereby to acquire our manners. You will have a success, and in Paris success is everything; it is the key of power. If the women credit you with wit and talent, the men will follow suit so long as you do not undeceive them yourself. There will be nothing you may not aspire to; you will go everywhere, and you will find out what the world is--an assemblage of fools and knaves. But you must be neither the one nor the other. I am giving you my name like Ariadne's clue of thread to take with you into the labyrinth; make no unworthy use of it," she said, with a queenly glance and curve of her throat; "give it back to me unsullied. And now, go; leave me. We women also have our battles to fight."

°°°°"And if you should ever need some one who would gladly set a match to a train for you----"

°°°°"Well?" she asked.

°°°°He tapped his heart, smiled in answer to his cousin's smile, and went.

°°°°It was five o'clock, and Eugene was hungry; he was afraid lest he should not be in time for dinner, a misgiving which made him feel that it was pleasant to be borne so quickly across Paris. This sensation of physical comfort left his mind free to grapple with the thoughts that assailed him. A mortification usually sends a young man of his age into a furious rage; he shakes his fist at society, and vows vengeance when his belief in himself is shaken. Just then Rastignac was overwhelmed by the words, "You have shut the Countess' door against you."

°°°°"I shall call!" he said to himself, "and if Mme. de Beauseant is right, if I never find her at home--I . . . well, Mme. de Restaud shall meet me in every salon in Paris. I will learn to fence and have some pistol practice, and kill that Maxime of hers!"

°°°°"And money?" cried an inward monitor. "How about money, where is that to come from?" And all at once the wealth displayed in the Countess de Restaud's drawing-room rose before his eyes. That was the luxury which Goriot's daughter had loved too well, the gilding, the ostentatious splendor, the unintelligent luxury of the parvenu, the riotous extravagance of a courtesan. Then the attractive vision suddenly went under an eclipse as he remembered the stately grandeur of the Hotel de Beauseant. As his fancy wandered among these lofty regions in the great world of Paris, innumerable dark thoughts gathered in his heart; his ideas widened, and his conscience grew more elastic. He saw the world as it is; saw how the rich lived beyond the jurisdiction of law and public opinion, and found in success the ultima ratio mundi.

°°°°"Vautrin is right, success is virtue!" he said to himself.

°°°°Arrived in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, he rushed up to his room for ten francs wherewith to satisfy the demands of the cabman, and went in to dinner. He glanced round the squalid room, saw the eighteen poverty-stricken creatures about to feed like cattle in their stalls, and the sight filled him with loathing. The transition was too sudden, and the contrast was so violent that it could not but act as a powerful stimulant; his ambition developed and grew beyond all social bounds. On the one hand, he beheld a vision of social life in its most charming and refined forms, of quick-pulsed youth, of fair, impassioned faces invested with all the charm of poetry, framed in a marvelous setting of luxury or art; and, on the other hand, he saw a sombre picture, the miry verge beyond these faces, in which passion was extinct and nothing was left of the drama but the cords and pulleys and bare mechanism. Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, the words uttered in anger by the forsaken lady, her petulant offer, came to his mind, and poverty was a ready expositor. Rastignac determined to open two parallel trenches so as to insure success; he would be a learned doctor of law and a man of fashion. Clearly he was still a child! Those two lines are asymptotes, and will never meet.

°°°°"You are very dull, my lord Marquis," said Vautrin, with one of the shrewd glances that seem to read the innermost secrets of another mind.

°°°°"I am not in the humor to stand jokes from people who call me 'my lord Marquis,' " answered Eugene. "A marquis here in Paris, if he is not the veriest sham, ought to have a hundred thousand livres a year at least; and a lodger in the Maison Vauquer is not exactly Fortune's favorite."

°°°°Vautrin's glance at Rastignac was half-paternal, half- contemptuous. "Puppy!" it seemed to say; "I should make one mouthful of him!" Then he answered:

°°°°"You are in a bad humor; perhaps your visit to the beautiful Comtesse de Restaud was not a success."

°°°°"She has shut her door against me because I told her that her father dined at our table," cried Rastignac.

°°°°Glances were exchanged all round the room; Father Goriot looked down.

°°°°"You have sent some snuff into my eye," he said to his neighbor, turning a little aside to rub his hand over his face.

°°°°"Any one who molests Father Goriot will have henceforward to reckon with me," said Eugene, looking at the old man's neighbor; "he is worth all the rest of us put together.--I am not speaking of the ladies," he added, turning in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer.

°°°°Eugene's remarks produced a sensation, and his tone silenced the dinner-table. Vautrin alone spoke. "If you are going to champion Father Goriot, and set up for his responsible editor into the bargain, you had need be a crack shot and know how to handle the foils," he said, banteringly.

°°°°"So I intend," said Eugene.

°°°°"Then you are taking the field today?"

°°°°"Perhaps," Rastignac answered. "But I owe no account of myself to any one, especially as I do not try to find out what other people do of a night."

°°°°Vautrin looked askance at Rastignac.

°°°°"If you do not mean to be deceived by the puppets, my boy, you must go behind and see the whole show, and not peep through holes in the curtain. That is enough," he added, seeing that Eugene was about to fly into a passion. "We can have a little talk whenever you like."

°°°°There was a general feeling of gloom and constraint. Father Goriot was so deeply dejected by the student's remark that he did not notice the change in the disposition of his fellow-lodgers, nor know that he had met with a champion capable of putting an end to the persecution.

°°°°"Then, M. Goriot sitting there is the father of a countess," said Mme. Vauquer in a low voice.

°°°°"And of a baroness," answered Rastignac.

°°°°"That is about all he is capable of," said Bianchon to Rastignac; "I have taken a look at his head; there is only one bump--the bump of Paternity; he must be an ETERNAL FATHER."

°°°°Eugene was too intent on his thoughts to laugh at Bianchon's joke. He determined to profit by Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, and was asking himself how he could obtain the necessary money. He grew grave. The wide savannas of the world stretched before his eyes; all things lay before him, nothing was his. Dinner came to an end, the others went, and he was left in the dining-room.

°°°°"So you have seen my daughter?" Goriot spoke tremulously, and the sound of his voice broke in upon Eugene's dreams. The young man took the elder's hand, and looked at him with something like kindness in his eyes.

°°°°"You are a good and noble man," he said. "We will have some talk about your daughters by and by."

°°°°He rose without waiting for Goriot's answer, and went to his room. There he wrote the following letter to his mother:--

°°°°"My Dear Mother,--Can you nourish your child from your breast again? I am in a position to make a rapid fortune, but I want twelve hundred francs--I must have them at all costs. Say nothing about this to my father; perhaps he might make objections, and unless I have the money, I may be led to put an end to myself, and so escape the clutches of despair. I will tell you everything when I see you. I will not begin to try to describe my present situation; it would take volumes to put the whole story clearly and fully. I have not been gambling, my kind mother, I owe no one a penny; but if you would preserve the life that you gave me, you must send me the sum I mention. As a matter of fact, I go to see the Vicomtesse de Beauseant; she is using her influence for me; I am obliged to go into society, and I have not a penny to lay out on clean gloves. I can manage to exist on bread and water, or go without food, if need be, but I cannot do without the tools with which they cultivate the vineyards in this country. I must resolutely make up my mind at once to make my way, or stick in the mire for the rest of my days. I know that all your hopes are set on me, and I want to realize them quickly. Sell some of your old jewelry, my kind mother; I will give you other jewels very soon. I know enough of our affairs at home to know all that such a sacrifice means, and you must not think that I would lightly ask you to make it; I should be a monster if I could. You must think of my entreaty as a cry forced from me by imperative necessity. Our whole future lies in the subsidy with which I must begin my first campaign, for life in Paris is one continual battle. If you cannot otherwise procure the whole of the money, and are forced to sell our aunt's lace, tell her that I will send her some still handsomer," and so forth.

°°°°He wrote to ask each of his sisters for their savings--would they despoil themselves for him, and keep the sacrifice a secret from the family? To his request he knew that they would not fail to respond gladly, and he added to it an appeal to their delicacy by touching the chord of honor that vibrates so loudly in young and high-strung natures.

°°°°Yet when he had written the letters, he could not help feeling misgivings in spite of his youthful ambition; his heart beat fast, and he trembled. He knew the spotless nobleness of the lives buried away in the lonely manor house; he knew what trouble and what joy his request would cause his sisters, and how happy they would be as they talked at the bottom of the orchard of that dear brother of theirs in Paris. Visions rose before his eyes; a sudden strong light revealed his sisters secretly counting over their little store, devising some girlish stratagem by which the money could be sent to him incognito, essaying, for the first time in their lives, a piece of deceit that reached the sublime in its unselfishness.

°°°°"A sister's heart is a diamond for purity, a deep sea of tenderness!" he said to himself. He felt ashamed of those letters.

°°°°What power there must be in the petitions put up by such hearts; how pure the fervor that bears their souls to Heaven in prayer! What exquisite joy they would find in self-sacrifice! What a pang for his mother's heart if she could not send him all that he asked for! And this noble affection, these sacrifices made at such terrible cost, were to serve as the ladder by which he meant to climb to Delphine de Nucingen. A few tears, like the last grains of incense flung upon the sacred alter fire of the hearth, fell from his eyes. He walked up and down, and despair mingled with his emotion. Father Goriot saw him through the half-open door.

°°°°"What is the matter, sir?" he asked from the threshold.

°°°°"Ah! my good neighbor, I am as much a son and brother as you are a father. You do well to fear for the Comtesse Anastasie; there is one M. Maxime de Trailles, who will be her ruin."

°°°°Father Goriot withdrew, stammering some words, but Eugene failed to catch their meaning.

°°°°The next morning Rastignac went out to post his letters. Up to the last moment he wavered and doubted, but he ended by flinging them into the box. "I shall succeed!" he said to himself. So says the gambler; so says the great captain; but the three words that have been the salvation of some few, have been the ruin of many more.

°°°°A few days after this Eugene called at Mme. de Restaud's house; she was not at home. Three times he tried the experiment, and three times he found her doors closed against him, though he was careful to choose an hour when M. de Trailles was not there. The Vicomtesse was right.

°°°°The student studied no longer. He put in an appearance at lectures simply to answer to his name, and after thus attesting his presence, departed forthwith. He had been through a reasoning process familiar to most students. He had seen the advisability of deferring his studies to the last moment before going up for his examinations; he made up his mind to cram his second and third years' work into the third year, when he meant to begin to work in earnest, and to complete his studies in law with one great effort. In the meantime he had fifteen months in which to navigate the ocean of Paris, to spread the nets and set the lines that would bring him a protectress and a fortune. Twice during that week he saw Mme. de Beauseant; he did not go to her house until he had seen the Marquis d'Ajuda drive away.

°°°°Victory for yet a few more days was with the great lady, the most poetic figure in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; and the marriage of the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto with Mlle. de Rochefide was postponed. The dread of losing her happiness filled those days with a fever of joy unknown before, but the end was only so much the nearer. The Marquis d'Ajuda and the Rochefides agreed that this quarrel and reconciliation was a very fortunate thing; Mme. de Beauseant (so they hoped) would gradually become reconciled to the idea of the marriage, and in the end would be brought to sacrifice d'Ajuda's morning visits to the exigencies of a man's career, exigencies which she must have foreseen. In spite of the most solemn promises, daily renewed, M. d'Ajuda was playing a part, and the Vicomtesse was eager to be deceived. "Instead of taking a leap heroically from the window, she is falling headlong down the staircase," said her most intimate friend, the Duchesse de Langeais. Yet this after-glow of happiness lasted long enough for the Vicomtesse to be of service to her young cousin. She had a half-superstitious affection for him. Eugene had shown her sympathy and devotion at a crisis when a woman sees no pity, no real comfort in any eyes; when if a man is ready with soothing flatteries, it is because he has an interested motive.

°°°°Rastignac made up his mind that he must learn the whole of Goriot's previous history; he would come to his bearings before attempting to board the Maison de Nucingen. The results of his inquiries may be given briefly as follows:--

°°°°In the days before the Revolution, Jean-Joachim Goriot was simply a workman in the employ of a vermicelli maker. He was a skilful, thrifty workman, sufficiently enterprising to buy his master's business when the latter fell a chance victim to the disturbances of 1789. Goriot established himself in the Rue de la Jussienne, close to the Corn Exchange. His plain good sense led him to accept the position of President of the Section, so as to secure for his business the protection of those in power at that dangerous epoch. This prudent step had led to success; the foundations of his fortune were laid in the time of the Scarcity (real or artificial), when the price of grain of all kinds rose enormously in Paris. People used to fight for bread at the bakers' doors; while other persons went to the grocers' shops and bought Italian paste foods without brawling over it. It was during this year that Goriot made the money, which, at a later time, was to give him all the advantage of the great capitalist over the small buyer; he had, moreover, the usual luck of average ability; his mediocrity was the salvation of him. He excited no one's envy, it was not even suspected that he was rich till the peril of being rich was over, and all his intelligence was concentrated, not on political, but on commercial speculations. Goriot was an authority second to none on all questions relating to corn, flour, and "middlings"; and the production, storage, and quality of grain. He could estimate the yield of the harvest, and foresee market prices; he bought his cereals in Sicily, and imported Russian wheat. Any one who had heard him hold forth on the regulations that control the importation and exportation of grain, who had seen his grasp of the subject, his clear insight into the principles involved, his appreciation of weak points in the way that the system worked, would have thought that here was the stuff of which a minister is made. Patient, active, and persevering, energetic and prompt in action, he surveyed his business horizon with an eagle eye. Nothing there took him by surprise; he foresaw all things, knew all that was happening, and kept his own counsel; he was a diplomatist in his quick comprehension of a situation; and in the routine of business he was as patient and plodding as a soldier on the march. But beyond this business horizon he could not see. He used to spend his hours of leisure on the threshold of his shop, leaning against the framework of the door. Take him from his dark little counting-house, and he became once more the rough, slow-witted workman, a man who cannot understand a piece of reasoning, who is indifferent to all intellectual pleasures, and falls asleep at the play, a Parisian Dolibom in short, against whose stupidity other minds are powerless.

°°°°Natures of this kind are nearly all alike; in almost all of them you will find some hidden depth of sublime affection. Two all- absorbing affections filled the vermicelli maker's heart to the exclusion of every other feeling; into them he seemed to put all the forces of his nature, as he put the whole power of his brain into the corn trade. He had regarded his wife, the only daughter of a rich farmer of La Brie, with a devout admiration; his love for her had been boundless. Goriot had felt the charm of a lovely and sensitive nature, which, in its delicate strength, was the very opposite of his own. Is there any instinct more deeply implanted in the heart of man than the pride of protection, a protection which is constantly exerted for a fragile and defenceless creature? Join love thereto, the warmth of gratitude that all generous souls feel for the source of their pleasures, and you have the explanation of many strange incongruities in human nature.

°°°°After seven years of unclouded happiness, Goriot lost his wife. It was very unfortunate for him. She was beginning to gain an ascendency over him in other ways; possibly she might have brought that barren soil under cultivation, she might have widened his ideas and given other directions to his thoughts. But when she was dead, the instinct of fatherhood developed in him till it almost became a mania. All the affection balked by death seemed to turn to his daughters, and he found full satisfaction for his heart in loving them. More or less brilliant proposals were made to him from time to time; wealthy merchants or farmers with daughters vied with each other in offering inducements to him to marry again; but he determined to remain a widower. His father-in-law, the only man for whom he felt a decided friendship, gave out that Goriot had made a vow to be faithful to his wife's memory. The frequenters of the Corn Exchange, who could not comprehend this sublime piece of folly, joked about it among themselves, and found a ridiculous nickname for him. One of them ventured (after a glass over a bargain) to call him by it, and a blow from the vermicelli maker's fist sent him headlong into a gutter in the Rue Oblin. He could think of nothing else when his children were concerned; his love for them made him fidgety and anxious; and this was so well known, that one day a competitor, who wished to get rid of him to secure the field to himself, told Goriot that Delphine had just been knocked down by a cab. The vermicelli maker turned ghastly pale, left the Exchange at once, and did not return for several days afterwards; he was ill in consequence of the shock and the subsequent relief on discovering that it was a false alarm. This time, however, the offender did not escape with a bruised shoulder; at a critical moment in the man's affairs, Goriot drove him into bankruptcy, and forced him to disappear from the Corn Exchange.

°°°°As might have been expected, the two girls were spoiled. With an income of sixty thousand francs, Goriot scarcely spent twelve hundred on himself, and found all his happiness in satisfying the whims of the two girls. The best masters were engaged, that Anastasie and Delphine might be endowed with all the accomplishments which distinguish a good education. They had a chaperon--luckily for them, she was a woman who had good sense and good taste;--they learned to ride; they had a carriage for their use; they lived as the mistress of a rich old lord might live; they had only to express a wish, their father would hasten to give them their most extravagant desires, and asked nothing of them in return but a kiss. Goriot had raised the two girls to the level of the angels; and, quite naturally, he himself was left beneath them. Poor man! he loved them even for the pain that they gave him.

°°°°When the girls were old enough to be married, they were left free to choose for themselves. Each had half her father's fortune as her dowry; and when the Comte de Restaud came to woo Anastasie for her beauty, her social aspirations led her to leave her father's house for a more exalted sphere. Delphine wished for money; she married Nucingen, a banker of German extraction, who became a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire. Goriot remained a vermicelli maker as before. His daughters and his sons-in-law began to demur; they did not like to see him still engaged in trade, though his whole life was bound up with his business. For five years he stood out against their entreaties, then he yielded, and consented to retire on the amount realized by the sale of his business and the savings of the last few years. It was this capital that Mme. Vauquer, in the early days of his residence with her, had calculated would bring in eight or ten thousand livres in a year. He had taken refuge in her lodging- house, driven there by despair when he knew that his daughters were compelled by their husbands not only to refuse to receive him as an inmate in their houses, but even to see him no more except in private.

°°°°This was all the information which Rastignac gained from a M. Muret who had purchased Goriot's business, information which confirmed the Duchesse de Langeais' suppositions, and herewith the preliminary explanation of this obscure but terrible Parisian tragedy comes to an end.

°°°°Towards the end of the first week in December Rastignac received two letters--one from his mother, and one from his eldest sister. His heart beat fast, half with happiness, half with fear, at the sight of the familiar handwriting. Those two little scraps of paper contained life or death for his hopes. But while he felt a shiver of dread as he remembered their dire poverty at home, he knew their love for him so well that he could not help fearing that he was draining their very life-blood. His mother's letter ran as follows:--

°°°°"My Dear Child,--I am sending you the money that you asked for. Make a good use of it. Even to save your life I could not raise so large a sum a second time without your father's knowledge, and there would be trouble about it. We should be obliged to mortgage the land. It is impossible to judge of the merits of schemes of which I am ignorant; but what sort of schemes can they be, that you should fear to tell me about them? Volumes of explanation would not have been needed; we mothers can understand at a word, and that word would have spared me the anguish of uncertainty. I do not know how to hide the painful impression that your letter has made upon me, my dear son. What can you have felt when you were moved to send this chill of dread through my heart? It must have been very painful to you to write the letter that gave me so much pain as I read it. To what courses are you committed? You are going to appear to be something that you are not, and your whole life and success depends upon this? You are about to see a society into which you cannot enter without rushing into expense that you cannot afford, without losing precious time that is needed for your studies. Ah! my dear Eugene, believe your mother, crooked ways cannot lead to great ends. Patience and endurance are the two qualities most needed in your position. I am not scolding you; I do not want any tinge of bitterness to spoil our offering. I am only talking like a mother whose trust in you is as great as her foresight for you. You know the steps that you must take, and I, for my part, know the purity of heart, and how good your intentions are; so I can say to you without a doubt, 'Go forward, beloved!' If I tremble, it is because I am a mother, but my prayers and blessings will be with you at every step. Be very careful, dear boy. You must have a man's prudence, for it lies with you to shape the destinies of five others who are dear to you, and must look to you. Yes, our fortunes depend upon you, and your success is ours. We all pray to God to be with you in all that you do. Your aunt Marcillac has been most generous beyond words in this matter; she saw at once how it was, even down to your gloves. 'But I have a weakness for the eldest!' she said gaily. You must love your aunt very much, dear Eugene. I shall wait till you have succeeded before telling you all that she has done for you, or her money would burn your fingers. You, who are young, do not know what it is to part with something that is a piece of your past! But what would we not sacrifice for your sakes? Your aunt says that I am to send you a kiss on the forehead from her, and that kiss is to bring you luck again and again, she says. She would have written you herself, the dear kind-hearted woman, but she is troubled with the gout in her fingers just now. Your father is very well. The vintage of 1819 has turned out better than we expected. Good-bye, dear boy; I will say nothing about your sisters, because Laure is writing to you, and I must let her have the pleasure of giving you all the home news. Heaven send that you may succeed! Oh! yes, dear Eugene, you must succeed. I have come, through you, to a knowledge of a pain so sharp that I do not think I could endure it a second time. I have come to know what it is to be poor, and to long for money for my children's sake. There, good-bye! Do not leave us for long without news of you; and here, at the last, take a kiss from your mother."

°°°°By the time Eugene had finished the letter he was in tears. He thought of Father Goriot crushing his silver keepsake into a shapeless mass before he sold it to meet his daughter's bill of exchange.

°°°°"Your mother has broken up her jewels for you," he said to himself; "your aunt shed tears over those relics of hers before she sold them for your sake. What right have you to heap execrations on Anastasie? You have followed her example; you have selfishly sacrificed others to your own future, and she sacrifices her father to her lover; and of you two, which is the worse?"

°°°°He was ready to renounce his attempts; he could not bear to take that money. The fires of remorse burned in his heart, and gave him intolerable pain, the generous secret remorse which men seldom take into account when they sit in judgment upon their fellow-men; but perhaps the angels in heaven, beholding it, pardon the criminal whom our justice condemns. Rastignac opened his sister's letter; its simplicity and kindness revived his heart.

°°°°"Your letter came just at the right time, dear brother. Agathe and I had thought of so many different ways of spending our money, that we did not know what to buy with it; and now you have come in, and, like the servant who upset all the watches that belonged to the King of Spain, you have restored harmony; for, really and truly, we did not know which of all the things we wanted we wanted most, and we were always quarreling about it, never thinking, dear Eugene, of a way of spending our money which would satisfy us completely. Agathe jumped for you. Indeed, we have been like two mad things all day, 'to such a prodigious degree' (as aunt would say), that mother said, with her severe expression, 'Whatever can be the matter with you, mesdemoiselles?' I think if we had been scolded a little, we should have been still better pleased. A woman ought to be very glad to suffer for one she loves! I, however, in my inmost soul, was doleful and cross in the midst of all my joy. I shall make a bad wife, I am afraid, I am too fond of spending. I had bought two sashes and a nice little stiletto for piercing eyelet-holes in my stays, trifles that I really did not want, so that I have less than that slow-coach Agathe, who is so economical, and hoards her money like a magpie. She had two hundred francs! And I have only one hundred and fifty! I am nicely punished; I could throw my sash down the well; it will be painful to me to wear it now. Poor dear, I have robbed you. And Agathe was so nice about it. She said, 'Let us send the three hundred and fifty francs in our two names!' But I could not help telling you everything just as it happened.

°°°°"Do you know how we managed to keep your commandments? We took our glittering hoard, we went out for a walk, and when once fairly on the highway we ran all the way to Ruffec, where we handed over the coin, without more ado, to M. Grimbert of the Messageries Royales. We came back again like swallows on the wing. 'Don't you think that happiness has made us lighter?' Agathe said. We said all sorts of things, which I shall not tell you, Monsieur le Parisien, because they were all about you. Oh, we love you dearly, dear brother; it was all summed up in those few words. As for keeping the secret, little masqueraders like us are capable of anything (according to our aunt), even of holding our tongues. Our mother has been on a mysterious journey to Angouleme, and the aunt went with her, not without solemn councils, from which we were shut out, and M. le Baron likewise. They are silent as to the weighty political considerations that prompted their mission, and conjectures are rife in the State of Rastignac. The Infantas are embroidering a muslin robe with open- work sprigs for her Majesty the Queen; the work progresses in the most profound secrecy. There be but two more breadths to finish. A decree has gone forth that no wall shall be built on the side of Verteuil, but that a hedge shall be planted instead thereof. Our subjects may sustain some disappointment of fruit and espaliers, but strangers will enjoy a fair prospect. Should the heir-presumptive lack pocket-handkerchiefs, be it known unto him that the dowager Lady of Marcillac, exploring the recesses of her drawers and boxes (known respectively as Pompeii and Herculaneum), having brought to light a fair piece of cambric whereof she wotted not, the Princesses Agathe and Laure place at their brother's disposal their thread, their needles, and hands somewhat of the reddest. The two young Princes, Don Henri and Don Gabriel, retain their fatal habits of stuffing themselves with grape-jelly, of teasing their sisters, of taking their pleasure by going a-bird-nesting, and of cutting switches for themselves from the osier-beds, maugre the laws of the realm. Moreover, they list not to learn naught, wherefore the Papal Nuncio (called of the commonalty, M. le Cure) threateneth them with excommunication, since that they neglect the sacred canons of grammatical construction for the construction of other canon, deadly engines made of the stems of elder.

°°°°"Farewell, dear brother, never did letter carry so many wishes for your success, so much love fully satisfied. You will have a great deal to tell us when you come home! You will tell me everything, won't you? I am the oldest. From something the aunt let fall, we think you must have had some success.

°°°°"Something was said of a lady, but nothing more was said . . .

°°°°"Of course not, in our family! Oh, by-the-by, Eugene, would you rather that we made that piece of cambric into shirts for you instead of pocket-handkerchiefs? If you want some really nice shirts at once, we ought to lose no time in beginning upon them; and if the fashion is different now in Paris, send us one for a pattern; we want more particularly to know about the cuffs. Good- bye! Good-bye! Take my kiss on the left side of your forehead, on the temple that belongs to me, and to no one else in the world. I am leaving the other side of the sheet for Agathe, who has solemnly promised not to read a word that I have written; but, all the same, I mean to sit by her side while she writes, so as to be quite sure that she keeps her word.--Your loving sister, "Laure de Rastignac."

°°°°"Yes!" said Eugene to himself. "Yes! Success at all costs now! Riches could not repay such devotion as this. I wish I could give them every sort of happiness! Fifteen hundred and fifty francs," he went on after a pause. "Every shot must go to the mark! Laure is right. Trust a woman! I have only calico shirts. Where some one else's welfare is concerned, a young girl becomes as ingenious as a thief. Guileless where she herself is in question, and full of foresight for me,--she is like a heavenly angel forgiving the strange incomprehensible sins of earth."

°°°°The world lay before him. His tailor had been summoned and sounded, and had finally surrendered. When Rastignac met M. de Trailles, he had seen at once how great a part the tailor plays in a young man's career; a tailor is either a deadly enemy or a staunch friend, with an invoice for a bond of friendship; between these two extremes there is, alack! no middle term. In this representative of his craft Eugene discovered a man who understood that his was a sort of paternal function for young men at their entrance into life, who regarded himself as a stepping- stone between a young man's present and future. And Rastignac in gratitude made the man's fortune by an epigram of a kind in which he excelled at a later period of his life.

°°°°"I have twice known a pair of trousers turned out by him make a match of twenty thousand livres a year!"

°°°°Fifteen hundred francs, and as many suits of clothes as he chose to order! At that moment the poor child of the South felt no more doubts of any kind. The young man went down to breakfast with the indefinable air which the consciousness of the possession of money gives to youth. No sooner are the coins slipped into a student's pocket than his wealth, in imagination at least, is piled into a fantastic column, which affords him a moral support. He begins to hold up his head as he walks; he is conscious that he has a means of bringing his powers to bear on a given point; he looks you straight in the face; his gestures are quick and decided; only yesterday he was diffident and shy, any one might have pushed him aside; to-morrow, he will take the wall of a prime minister. A miracle has been wrought in him. Nothing is beyond the reach of his ambition, and his ambition soars at random; he is light-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic; in short, the fledgling bird has discovered that he has wings. A poor student snatches at every chance pleasure much as a dog runs all sorts of risks to steal a bone, cracking it and sucking the marrow as he flies from pursuit; but a young man who can rattle a few runaway gold coins in his pocket can take his pleasure deliberately, can taste the whole of the sweets of secure possession; he soars far above earth; he has forgotten what the word POVERTY means; all Paris is his. Those are days when the whole world shines radiant with light, when everything glows and sparkles before the eyes of youth, days that bring joyous energy that is never brought into harness, days of debts and of painful fears that go hand in hand with every delight. Those who do not know the left bank of the Seine between the Rue Saint-Jacques and the Rue des Saints-Peres know nothing of life.

°°°°"Ah! if the women of Paris but knew," said Rastignac, as he devoured Mme. Vauquer's stewed pears (at five for a penny), "they would come here in search of a lover."

°°°°Just then a porter from the Messageries Royales appeared at the door of the room; they had previously heard the bell ring as the wicket opened to admit him. The man asked for M. Eugene de Rastignac, holding out two bags for him to take, and a form of receipt for his signature. Vautrin's keen glance cut Eugene like a lash.

°°°°"Now you will be able to pay for those fencing lessons and go to the shooting gallery," he said.

°°°°"Your ship has come in," said Mme. Vauquer, eyeing the bags.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau did not dare to look at the money, for fear her eyes should betray her cupidity.

°°°°"You have a kind mother," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"You have a kind mother, sir," echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, mamma has been drained dry," said Vautrin, "and now you can have your fling, go into society, and fish for heiresses, and dance with countesses who have peach blossom in their hair. But take my advice, young man, and don't neglect your pistol practice."

°°°°Vautrin struck an attitude, as if he were facing an antagonist. Rastignac, meaning to give the porter a tip, felt in his pockets and found nothing. Vautrin flung down a franc piece on the table.

°°°°"Your credit is good," he remarked, eyeing the student, and Rastignac was forced to thank him, though, since the sharp encounter of wits at dinner that day, after Eugene came in from calling on Mme. de Beauseant, he had made up his mind that Vautrin was insufferable. For a week, in fact, they had both kept silence in each other's presence, and watched each other. The student tried in vain to account to himself for this attitude.

°°°°An idea, of course, gains in force by the energy with which it is expressed; it strikes where the brain sends it, by a law as mathematically exact as the law that determines the course of a shell from a mortar. The amount of impression it makes is not to be determined so exactly. Sometimes, in an impressible nature, the idea works havoc, but there are, no less, natures so robustly protected, that this sort of projectile falls flat and harmless on skulls of triple brass, as cannon-shot against solid masonry; then there are flaccid and spongy-fibred natures into which ideas from without sink like spent bullets into the earthworks of a redoubt. Rastignac's head was something of the powder-magazine order; the least shock sufficed to bring about an explosion. He was too quick, too young, not to be readily accessible to ideas; and open to that subtle influence of thought and feeling in others which causes so many strange phenomena that make an impression upon us of which we are all unconscious at the time. Nothing escaped his mental vision; he was lynx-eyed; in him the mental powers of perception, which seem like duplicates of the senses, had the mysterious power of swift projection that astonishes us in intellects of a high order--slingers who are quick to detect the weak spot in any armor.

°°°°In the past month Eugene's good qualities and defects had rapidly developed with his character. Intercourse with the world and the endeavor to satisfy his growing desires had brought out his defects. But Rastignac came from the South side of the Loire, and had the good qualities of his countrymen. He had the impetuous courage of the South, that rushes to the attack of a difficulty, as well as the southern impatience of delay or suspense. These traits are held to be defects in the North; they made the fortune of Murat, but they likewise cut short his career. The moral would appear to be that when the dash and boldness of the South side of the Loire meets, in a southern temperament, with the guile of the North, the character is complete, and such a man will gain (and keep) the crown of Sweden.

°°°°Rastignac, therefore, could not stand the fire from Vautrin's batteries for long without discovering whether this was a friend or a foe. He felt as if this strange being was reading his inmost soul, and dissecting his feelings, while Vautrin himself was so close and secretive that he seemed to have something of the profound and unmoved serenity of a sphinx, seeing and hearing all things and saying nothing. Eugene, conscious of that money in his pocket, grew rebellious.

°°°°"Be so good as to wait a moment," he said to Vautrin, as the latter rose, after slowly emptying his coffee-cup, sip by sip.

°°°°"What for?" inquired the older man, as he put on his large- brimmed hat and took up the sword-cane that he was wont to twirl like a man who will face three or four footpads without flinching.

°°°°"I will repay you in a minute," returned Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he spoke, counted out a hundred and forty francs, and pushed them towards Mme. Vauquer. "Short reckonings make good friends" he added, turning to the widow; "that clears our accounts till the end of the year. Can you give me change for a five-franc piece?"

°°°°"Good friends make short reckonings," echoed Poiret, with a glance at Vautrin.

°°°°"Here is your franc," said Rastignac, holding out the coin to the sphinx in the black wig.

°°°°"Any one might think that you were afraid to owe me a trifle," exclaimed this latter, with a searching glance that seemed to read the young man's inmost thoughts; there was a satirical and cynical smile on Vautrin's face such as Eugene had seen scores of times already; every time he saw it, it exasperated him almost beyond endurance.

°°°°"Well . . . so I am," he answered. He held both the bags in his hand, and had risen to go up to his room.

°°°°Vautrin made as if he were going out through the sitting-room, and the student turned to go through the second door that opened into the square lobby at the foot of the staircase.

°°°°"Do you know, Monsieur le Marquis de Rastignacorama, that what you were saying just now was not exactly polite?" Vautrin remarked, as he rattled his sword-cane across the panels of the sitting-room door, and came up to the student.

°°°°Rastignac looked coolly at Vautrin, drew him to the foot of the staircase, and shut the dining-room door. They were standing in the little square lobby between the kitchen and the dining-room; the place was lighted by an iron-barred fanlight above a door that gave access into the garden. Sylvie came out of her kitchen, and Eugene chose that moment to say:

°°°°MONSIEUR Vautrin, I am not a marquis, and my name is not Rastignacorama."

°°°°"They will fight," said Mlle. Michonneau, in an indifferent tone.

°°°°"Fight!" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Not they," replied Mme. Vauquer, lovingly fingering her pile of coins.

°°°°"But there they are under the lime-trees," cried Mlle. Victorine, who had risen so that she might see out into the garden. "Poor young man! he was in the right, after all."

°°°°"We must go upstairs, my pet," said Mme. Couture; "it is no business of ours."

°°°°At the door, however, Mme. Couture and Victorine found their progress barred by the portly form of Sylvie the cook.

°°°°"What ever can have happened?" she said. "M. Vautrin said to M. Eugene, 'Let us have an explanation!' then he took him by the arm, and there they are, out among the artichokes."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking. "Mamma Vauquer," he said smiling, "don't frighten yourself at all. I am only going to try my pistols under the lime-trees."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur," cried Victorine, clasping her hands as she spoke, "why do you want to kill M. Eugene?"

°°°°Vautrin stepped back a pace or two, and gazed at Victorine.

°°°°"Oh! this is something fresh!" he exclaimed in a bantering tone, that brought the color into the poor girl's face. "That young fellow yonder is very nice, isn't he?" he went on. "You have given me a notion, my pretty child; I will make you both happy."

°°°°Mme. Couture laid her hand on the arm of her ward, and drew the girl away, as she said in her ear:

°°°°"Why, Victorine, I cannot imagine what has come over you this morning."

°°°°"I don't want any shots fired in my garden," said Mme. Vauquer. "You will frighten the neighborhood and bring the police up here all in a moment."

°°°°"Come, keep cool, Mamma Vauquer," answered Vautrin. "There, there; it's all right; we will go to the shooting-gallery."

°°°°He went back to Rastignac, laying his hand familiarly on the young man's arm.

°°°°"When I have given you ocular demonstration of the fact that I can put a bullet through the ace on a card five times running at thirty-five paces," he said, "that won't take away your appetite, I suppose? You look to me to be inclined to be a trifle quarrelsome this morning, and as if you would rush on your death like a blockhead."

°°°°"Do you draw back?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Don't try to raise my temperature," answered Vautrin, "it is not cold this morning. Let us go and sit over there," he added, pointing to the green-painted garden seats; "no one can overhear us. I want a little talk with you. You are not a bad sort of youngster, and I have no quarrel with you. I like you, take Trump--(confound it!)--take Vautrin's word for it. What makes me like you? I will tell you by-and-by. Meantime, I can tell you that I know you as well as if I had made you myself, as I will prove to you in a minute. Put down your bags," he continued, pointing to the round table.

°°°°Rastignac deposited his money on the table, and sat down. He was consumed with curiosity, which the sudden change in the manner of the man before him had excited to the highest pitch. Here was a strange being who, a moment ago, had talked of killing him, and now posed as his protector.

°°°°"You would like to know who I really am, what I was, and what I do now," Vautrin went on. "You want to know too much, youngster. Come! come! keep cool! You will hear more astonishing things than that. I have had my misfortunes. Just hear me out first, and you shall have your turn afterwards. Here is my past in three words. Who am I? Vautrin. What do I do? Just what I please. Let us change the subject. You want to know my character. I am good- natured to those who do me a good turn, or to those whose hearts speak to mine. These last may do anything they like with me; they may bruise my shins, and I shall not tell them to 'mind what they are about'; but, nom d'une pipe, the devil himself is not an uglier customer than I can be if people annoy me, or if I don't happen to take to them; and you may just as well know at once that I think no more of killing a man than of that," and he spat before him as he spoke. "Only when it is absolutely necessary to do so, I do my best to kill him properly. I am what you call an artist. I have read Benvenuto Cellini's Memoirs, such as you see me; and, what is more, in Italian: A fine-spirited fellow he was! From him I learned to follow the example set us by Providence, who strikes us down at random, and to admire the beautiful whenever and wherever it is found. And, setting other questions aside, is it not a glorious part to play, when you pit yourself against mankind, and the luck is on your side? I have thought a good deal about the constitution of your present social Dis- order. A duel is downright childish, my boy! utter nonsense and folly! When one of two living men must be got out of the way, none but an idiot would leave chance to decide which it is to be; and in a duel it is a toss-up--heads or tails--and there you are! Now I, for instance, can hit the ace in the middle of a card five times running, send one bullet after another through the same hole, and at thirty-five paces, moreover! With that little accomplishment you might think yourself certain of killing your man, mightn't you. Well, I have fired, at twenty paces, and missed, and the rogue who had never handled a pistol in his life-- look here!"--(he unbuttoned his waistcoat and exposed his chest, covered, like a bear's back, with a shaggy fell; the student gave a startled shudder)--"he was a raw lad, but he made his mark on me," the extraordinary man went on, drawing Rastignac's fingers over a deep scar on his breast. But that happened when I myself was a mere boy; I was one-and-twenty then (your age), and I had some beliefs left--in a woman's love, and in a pack of rubbish that you will be over head and ears in directly. You and I were to have fought just now, weren't we? You might have killed me. Suppose that I were put under the earth, where would you be? You would have to clear out of this, go to Switzerland, draw on papa's purse--and he has none too much in it as it is. I mean to open your eyes to your real position, that is what I am going to do: but I shall do it from the point of view of a man who, after studying the world very closely, sees that there are but two alternatives--stupid obedience or revolt. I obey nobody; is that clear? Now, do you know how much you will want at the pace you are going? A million; and promptly, too, or that little head of ours will be swaying to and fro in the drag-nets at Saint-Cloud, while we are gone to find out whether or no there is a Supreme Being. I will put you in the way of that million."

°°°°He stopped for a moment and looked at Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! you do not look so sourly at papa Vautrin now! At the mention of the million you look like a young girl when somebody has said, 'I will come for you this evening!' and she betakes herself to her toilette as a cat licks its whiskers over a saucer of milk. All right. Come, now, let us go into the question, young man; all between ourselves, you know. We have a papa and mamma down yonder, a great-aunt, two sisters (aged eighteen and seventeen), two young brothers (one fifteen, and the other ten), that is about the roll-call of the crew. The aunt brings up the two sisters; the cure comes and teaches the boys Latin. Boiled chestnuts are oftener on the table than white bread. Papa makes a suit of clothes last a long while; if mamma has a different dress winter and summer, it is about as much as she has; the sisters manage as best they can. I know all about it; I have lived in the south.

°°°°"That is how things are at home. They send you twelve hundred francs a year, and the whole property only brings in three thousand francs all told. We have a cook and a manservant; papa is a baron, and we must keep up appearances. Then we have our ambitions; we are connected with the Beauseants, and we go afoot through the streets; we want to be rich, and we have not a penny; we eat Mme. Vauquer's messes, and we like grand dinners in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; we sleep on a truckle-bed, and dream of a mansion! I do not blame you for wanting these things. What sort of men do the women run after? Men of ambition. Men of ambition have stronger frames, their blood is richer in iron, their hearts are warmer than those of ordinary men. Women feel that when their power is greatest, they look their best, and that those are their happiest hours; they like power in men, and prefer the strongest even if it is a power that may be their own destruction. I am going to make an inventory of your desires in order to put the question at issue before you. Here it is:--

°°°°"We are as hungry as a wolf, and those newly-cut teeth of ours are sharp; what are we to do to keep the pot boiling? In the first place, we have the Code to browse upon; it is not amusing, and we are none the wiser for it, but that cannot be helped. So far so good. We mean to make an advocate of ourselves with a prospect of one day being made President of a Court of Assize, when we shall send poor devils, our betters, to the galleys with a T.F.* [*Travaux forces.] on their shoulders, so that the rich may be convinced that they can sleep in peace. There is no fun in that; and you are a long while coming to it; for, to begin with, there are two years of nauseous drudgery in Paris, we see all the lollipops that we long for out of our reach. It is tiresome to want things and never to have them. If you were a pallid creature of the mollusk order, you would have nothing to fear, but it is different when you have the hot blood of a lion and are ready to get into a score of scrapes every day of your life. This is the ghastliest form of torture known in this inferno of God's making, and you will give in to it. Or suppose that you are a good boy, drink nothing stronger than milk, and bemoan your hard lot; you, with your generous nature, will endure hardships that would drive a dog mad, and make a start, after long waiting, as deputy to some rascal or other in a hole of a place where the Government will fling you a thousand francs a year like the scraps that are thrown to the butcher's dog. Bark at thieves, plead the cause of the rich, send men of heart to the guillotine, that is your work! Many thanks! If you have no influence, you may rot in your provincial tribunal. At thirty you will be a Justice with twelve hundred francs a year (if you have not flung off the gown for good before then). By the time you are forty you may look to marry a miller's daughter, an heiress with some six thousand livres a year. Much obliged! If you have influence, you may possibly be a Public Prosecutor by the time you are thirty; with a salary of a thousand crowns, you could look to marry the mayor's daughter. Some petty piece of political trickery, such as mistaking Villele for Manuel in a bulletin (the names rhyme, and that quiets your conscience), and you will probably be a Procureur General by the time you are forty, with a chance of becoming a deputy. Please to observe, my dear boy, that our conscience will have been a little damaged in the process, and that we shall endure twenty years of drudgery and hidden poverty, and that our sisters are wearing Dian's livery. I have the honor to call your attention to another fact: to wit, that there are but twenty Procureurs Generaux at a time in all France, while there are some twenty thousand of you young men who aspire to that elevated position; that there are some mountebanks among you who would sell their family to screw their fortunes a peg higher. If this sort of thing sickens you, try another course. The Baron de Rastignac thinks of becoming an advocate, does he? There's a nice prospect for you! Ten years of drudgery straight away. You are obliged to live at the rate of a thousand francs a month; you must have a library of law books, live in chambers, go into society, go down on your knees to ask a solicitor for briefs, lick the dust off the floor of the Palais de Justice. If this kind of business led to anything, I should not say no; but just give me the names of five advocates here in Paris who by the time that they are fifty are making fifty thousand francs a year! Bah! I would sooner turn pirate on the high seas than have my soul shrivel up inside me like that. How will you find the capital? There is but one way, marry a woman who has money. There is no fun in it. Have you a mind to marry? You hang a stone around your neck; for if you marry for money, what becomes of our exalted notions of honor and so forth? You might as well fly in the face of social conventions at once. Is it nothing to crawl like a serpent before your wife, to lick her mother's feet, to descend to dirty actions that would sicken swine--faugh!--never mind if you at least make your fortune. But you will be as doleful as a dripstone if you marry for money. It is better to wrestle with men than to wrangle at home with your wife. You are at the crossway of the roads of life, my boy; choose your way.

°°°°"But you have chosen already. You have gone to see your cousin of Beauseant, and you have had an inkling of luxury; you have been to Mme. de Restaud's house, and in Father Goriot's daughter you have seen a glimpse of the Parisienne for the first time. That day you came back with a word written on your forehead. I knew it, I could read it--'SUCCESS!' Yes, success at any price. 'Bravo,' said I to myself, 'here is the sort of fellow for me.' You wanted money. Where was it all to come from? You have drained your sisters' little hoard (all brothers sponge more or less on their sisters). Those fifteen hundred francs of yours (got together, God knows how! in a country where there are more chestnuts than five-franc pieces) will slip away like soldiers after pillage. And, then, what will you do? Shall you begin to work? Work, or what you understand by work at this moment, means, for a man of Poiret's calibre, an old age in Mamma Vauquer's lodging-house. There are fifty thousand young men in your position at this moment, all bent as you are on solving one and the same problem--how to acquire a fortune rapidly. You are but a unit in that aggregate. You can guess, therefore, what efforts you must make, how desperate the struggle is. There are not fifty thousand good positions for you; you must fight and devour one another like spiders in a pot. Do you know how a man makes his way here? By brilliant genius or by skilful corruption. You must either cut your way through these masses of men like a cannon ball, or steal among them like a plague. Honesty is nothing to the purpose. Men bow before the power of genius; they hate it, and try to slander it, because genius does not divide the spoil; but if genius persists, they bow before it. To sum it all up in a phrase, if they fail to smother genius in the mud, they fall on their knees and worship it. Corruption is a great power in the world, and talent is scarce. So corruption is the weapon of superfluous mediocrity; you will be made to feel the point of it everywhere. You will see women who spend more than ten thousand francs a year on dress, while their husband's salary (his whole income) is six thousand francs. You will see officials buying estates on twelve thousand francs a year. You will see women who sell themselves body and soul to drive in a carriage belonging to the son of a peer of France, who has a right to drive in the middle rank at Longchamp. You have seen that poor simpleton of a Goriot obliged to meet a bill with his daughter's name at the back of it, though her husband has fifty thousand francs a year. I defy you to walk a couple of yards anywhere in Paris without stumbling on some infernal complication. I'll bet my head to a head of that salad that you will stir up a hornet's nest by taking a fancy to the first young, rich, and pretty woman you meet. They are all dodging the law, all at loggerheads with their husbands. If I were to begin to tell you all that vanity or necessity (virtue is not often mixed up in it, you may be sure), all that vanity and necessity drive them to do for lovers, finery, housekeeping, or children, I should never come to an end. So an honest man is the common enemy.

°°°°"But do you know what an honest man is? Here, in Paris, an honest man is the man who keeps his own counsel, and will not divide the plunder. I am not speaking now of those poor bond-slaves who do the work of the world without a reward for their toil--God Almighty's outcasts, I call them. Among them, I grant you, is virtue in all the flower of its stupidity, but poverty is no less their portion. At this moment, I think I see the long faces those good folk would pull if God played a practical joke on them and stayed away at the Last Judgment.

°°°°"Well, then, if you mean to make a fortune quickly, you must either be rich to begin with, or make people believe that you are rich. It is no use playing here except for high stakes; once take to low play, it is all up with you. If in the scores of professions that are open to you, there are ten men who rise very rapidly, people are sure to call them thieves. You can draw your own conclusions. Such is life. It is no cleaner than a kitchen; it reeks like a kitchen; and if you mean to cook your dinner, you must expect to soil your hands; the real art is in getting them clean again, and therein lies the whole morality of our epoch. If I take this tone in speaking of the world to you, I have the right to do so; I know it well. Do you think that I am blaming it? Far from it; the world has always been as it is now. Moralists' strictures will never change it. Mankind are not perfect, but one age is more or less hypocritical than another, and then simpletons say that its morality is high or low. I do not think that the rich are any worse than the poor; man is much the same, high or low, or wherever he is. In a million of these human cattle there may be half a score of bold spirits who rise above the rest, above the laws; I am one of them. And you, if you are cleverer than your fellows, make straight to your end, and hold your head high. But you must lay your account with envy and slander and mediocrity, and every man's hand will be against you. Napoleon met with a Minister of War, Aubry by name, who all but sent him to the colonies.

°°°°"Feel your pulse. Think whether you can get up morning after morning, strengthened in yesterday's purpose. In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline. Listen attentively. You see, I have an idea of my own. My idea is to live a patriarchal life on a vast estate, say a hundred thousand acres, somewhere in the Southern States of America. I mean to be a planter, to have slaves, to make a few snug millions by selling my cattle, timber, and tobacco; I want to live an absolute monarch, and to do just as I please; to lead such a life as no one here in these squalid dens of lath and plaster ever imagines. I am a great poet; I do not write my poems, I feel them, and act them. At this moment I have fifty thousand francs, which might possibly buy forty negroes. I want two hundred thousand francs, because I want to have two hundred negroes to carry out my notions of the patriarachal life properly. Negroes, you see, are like a sort of family ready grown, and there are no inquisitive public prosecutors out there to interfere with you. That investment in ebony ought to mean three or four million francs in ten years' time. If I am successful, no one will ask me who I am. I shall be Mr. Four Millions, an American citizen. I shall be fifty years old by then, and sound and hearty still; I shall enjoy life after my own fashion. In two words, if I find you an heiress with a million, will you give me two hundred thousand francs? Twenty per cent commission, eh? Is that too much? Your little wife will be very much in love with you. Once married, you will show signs of uneasiness and remorse; for a couple of weeks you will be depressed. Then, some night after sundry grimacings, comes the confession, between two kisses, 'Two hundred thousand francs of debts, my darling!' This sort of farce is played every day in Paris, and by young men of the highest fashion. When a young wife has given her heart, she will not refuse her purse. Perhaps you are thinking that you will lose the money for good? Not you. You will make two hundred thousand francs again by some stroke of business. With your capital and your brains you should be able to accumulate as large a fortune as you could wish. ERGO, in six months you will have made your own fortune, and our old friend Vautrin's, and made an amiable woman very happy, to say nothing of your people at home, who must blow on their fingers to warm them, in the winter, for lack of firewood. You need not be surprised at my proposal, nor at the demand I make. Forty-seven out of every sixty great matches here in Paris are made after just such a bargain as this. The Chamber of Notaries compels my gentleman to----"

°°°°"What must I do?" said Rastignac, eagerly interrupting Vautrin's speech.

°°°°"Next to nothing," returned the other, with a slight involuntary movement, the suppressed exultation of the angler when he feels a bite at the end of his line. "Follow me carefully! The heart of a girl whose life is wretched and unhappy is a sponge that will thirstily absorb love; a dry sponge that swells at the first drop of sentiment. If you pay court to a young girl whose existence is a compound of loneliness, despair, and poverty, and who has no suspicion that she will come into a fortune, good Lord! it is quint and quatorze at piquet; it is knowing the numbers of the lottery before-hand; it is speculating in the funds when you have news from a sure source; it is building up a marriage on an indestructible foundation. The girl may come in for millions, and she will fling them, as if they were so many pebbles, at your feet. 'Take it, my beloved! Take it, Alfred, Adolphe, Eugene!' or whoever it was that showed his sense by sacrificing himself for her. And as for sacrificing himself, this is how I understand it. You sell a coat that is getting shabby, so that you can take her to the Cadran bleu, treat her to mushrooms on toast, and then go to the Ambigu-Comique in the evening; you pawn your watch to buy her a shawl. I need not remind you of the fiddle-faddle sentimentality that goes down so well with all women; you spill a few drops of water on your stationery, for instance; those are the tears you shed while far away from her. You look to me as if you were perfectly acquainted with the argot of the heart. Paris, you see, is like a forest in the New World, where you have to deal with a score of varieties of savages--Illinois and Hurons, who live on the proceed of their social hunting. You are a hunter of millions; you set your snares; you use lures and nets; there are many ways of hunting. Some hunt heiresses, others a legacy; some fish for souls, yet others sell their clients, bound hand and foot. Every one who comes back from the chase with his game- bag well filled meets with a warm welcome in good society. In justice to this hospitable part of the world, it must be said that you have to do with the most easy and good-natured of great cities. If the proud aristocracies of the rest of Europe refuse admittance among their ranks to a disreputable millionaire, Paris stretches out a hand to him, goes to his banquets, eats his dinners, and hobnobs with his infamy."

°°°°"But where is such a girl to be found?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Under your eyes; she is yours already."

°°°°"Mlle. Victorine?"

°°°°"Precisely."

°°°°"And what was that you said?"

°°°°"She is in love with you already, your little Baronne de Rastignac!"

°°°°"She has not a penny," Eugene continued, much mystified.

°°°°"Ah! now we are coming to it! Just another word or two, and it will all be clear enough. Her father, Taillefer, is an old scoundrel; it is said that he murdered one of his friends at the time of the Revolution. He is one of your comedians that sets up to have opinions of his own. He is a banker--senior partner in the house of Frederic Taillefer and Company. He has one son, and means to leave all he has to the boy, to the prejudice of Victorine. For my part, I don't like to see injustice of this sort. I am like Don Quixote, I have a fancy for defending the weak against the strong. If it should please God to take that youth away from him, Taillefer would have only his daughter left; he would want to leave his money to some one or other; an absurd notion, but it is only human nature, and he is not likely to have any more children, as I know. Victorine is gentle and amiable; she will soon twist her father round her fingers, and set his head spinning like a German top by plying him with sentiment! She will be too much touched by your devotion to forget you; you will marry her. I mean to play Providence for you, and Providence is to do my will. I have a friend whom I have attached closely to myself, a colonel in the Army of the Loire, who has just been transferred into the garde royale. He has taken my advice and turned ultra-royalist; he is not one of those fools who never change their opinions. Of all pieces of advice, my cherub, I would give you this--don't stick to your opinions any more than to your words. If any one asks you for them, let him have them-- at a price. A man who prides himself on going in a straight line through life is an idiot who believes in infallibility. There are no such things as principles; there are only events, and there are no laws but those of expediency: a man of talent accepts events and the circumstances in which he finds himself, and turns everything to his own ends. If laws and principles were fixed and invariable, nations would not change them as readily as we change our shirts. The individual is not obliged to be more particular than the nation. A man whose services to France have been of the very slightest is a fetich looked on with superstitious awe because he has always seen everything in red; but he is good, at the most, to be put into the Museum of Arts and Crafts, among the automatic machines, and labeled La Fayette; while the prince at whom everybody flings a stone, the man who despises humanity so much that he spits as many oaths as he is asked for in the face of humanity, saved France from being torn in pieces at the Congress of Vienna; and they who should have given him laurels fling mud at him. Oh! I know something of affairs, I can tell you; I have the secrets of many men! Enough. When I find three minds in agreement as to the application of a principle, I shall have a fixed and immovable opinion--I shall have to wait a long while first. In the Tribunals you will not find three judges of the same opinion on a single point of law. To return to the man I was telling you of. He would crucify Jesus Christ again, if I bade him. At a word from his old chum Vautrin he will pick a quarrel with a scamp that will not send so much as five francs to his sister, poor girl, and" (here Vautrin rose to his feet and stood like a fencing-master about to lunge)--"turn him off into the dark!" he added.

°°°°"How frightful!" said Eugene. "You do not really mean it? M. Vautrin, you are joking!"

°°°°"There! there! Keep cool!" said the other. "Don't behave like a baby. But if you find any amusement in it, be indignant, flare up! Say that I am a scoundrel, a rascal, a rogue, a bandit; but do not call me a blackleg nor a spy! There, out with it, fire away! I forgive you; it is quite natural at your age. I was like that myself once. Only remember this, you will do worse things yourself some day. You will flirt with some pretty woman and take her money. You have thought of that, of course," said Vautrin, "for how are you to succeed unless love is laid under contribution? There are no two ways about virtue, my dear student; it either is, or it is not. Talk of doing penance for your sins! It is a nice system of business, when you pay for your crime by an act of contrition! You seduce a woman that you may set your foot on such and such a rung of the social ladder; you sow dissension among the children of a family; you descend, in short, to every base action that can be committed at home or abroad, to gain your own ends for your own pleasure or your profit; and can you imagine that these are acts of faith, hope, or charity? How is it that a dandy, who in a night has robbed a boy of half his fortune, gets only a couple of months in prison; while a poor devil who steals a banknote for a thousand francs, with aggravating circumstances, is condemned to penal servitude? Those are your laws. Not a single provision but lands you in some absurdity. That man with yellow gloves and a golden tongue commits many a murder; he sheds no blood, but he drains his victim's veins as surely; a desperado forces open a door with a crowbar, dark deeds both of them! You yourself will do every one of those things that I suggest to you to-day, bar the bloodshed. Do you believe that there is any absolute standard in this world? Despise mankind and find out the meshes that you can slip through in the net of the Code. The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out, because it was properly executed."

°°°°"Silence, sir! I will not hear any more; you make me doubt myself. At this moment my sentiments are all my science."

°°°°"Just as you please, my fine fellow; I did think you were so weak-minded," said Vautrin, "I shall say no more about it. One last word, however," and he looked hard at the student--"you have my secret," he said.

°°°°"A young man who refuses your offer knows that he must forget it."

°°°°"Quite right, quite right; I am glad to hear you say so. Somebody else might not be so scrupulous, you see. Keep in mind what I want to do for you. I will give you a fortnight. The offer is still open."

°°°°"What a head of iron the man has!" said Eugene to himself, as he watched Vautrin walk unconcernedly away with his cane under his arm. "Yet Mme. de Beauseant said as much more gracefully; he has only stated the case in cruder language. He would tear my heart with claws of steel. What made me think of going to Mme. de Nucingen? He guessed my motives before I knew them myself. To sum it up, that outlaw has told me more about virtue than all I have learned from men and books. If virtue admits of no compromises, I have certainly robbed my sisters," he said, throwing down the bags on the table.

°°°°He sat down again and fell, unconscious of his surroundings, into deep thought.

°°°°"To be faithful to an ideal of virtue! A heroic martyrdom! Pshaw! every one believes in virtue, but who is virtuous? Nations have made an idol of Liberty, but what nation on the face of the earth is free? My youth is still like a blue and cloudless sky. If I set myself to obtain wealth or power, does it mean that I must make up my mind to lie, and fawn, and cringe, and swagger, and flatter, and dissemble? To consent to be the servant of others who have likewise fawned, and lied, and flattered? Must I cringe to them before I can hope to be their accomplice? Well, then, I decline. I mean to work nobly and with a single heart. I will work day and night; I will owe my fortune to nothing but my own exertions. It may be the slowest of all roads to success, but I shall lay my head on the pillow at night untroubled by evil thoughts. Is there a greater thing than this--to look back over your life and know that it is stainless as a lily? I and my life are like a young man and his betrothed. Vautrin has put before me all that comes after ten years of marriage. The devil! my head is swimming. I do not want to think at all; the heart is a sure guide."

°°°°Eugene was roused from his musings by the voice of the stout Sylvie, who announced that the tailor had come, and Eugene therefore made his appearance before the man with the two money bags, and was not ill pleased that it should be so. When he had tried on his dress suit, he put on his new morning costume, which completely metamorphosed him.

°°°°"I am quite equal to M. de Trailles," he said to himself. "In short, I look like a gentleman."

°°°°"You asked me, sir, if I knew the houses where Mme. de Nucingen goes," Father Goriot's voice spoke from the doorway of Eugene's room."

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Very well then, she is going to the Marechale Carigliano's ball on Monday. If you can manage to be there, I shall hear from you whether my two girls enjoyed themselves, and how they were dressed, and all about it in fact."

°°°°"How did you find that out, my good Goriot?" said Eugene, putting a chair by the fire for his visitor.

°°°°"Her maid told me. I hear all about their doings from Therese and Constance," he added gleefully.

°°°°The old man looked like a lover who is still young enough to be made happy by the discovery of some little stratagem which brings him information of his lady-love without her knowledge.

°°°°"YOU will see them both!" he said, giving artless expression to a pang of jealousy.

°°°°"I do not know," answered Eugene. "I will go to Mme. de Beauseant and ask her for an introduction to the Marechale."

°°°°Eugene felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought of appearing before the Vicomtesse, dressed as henceforward he always meant to be. The "abysses of the human heart," in the moralists' phrase, are only insidious thoughts, involuntary promptings of personal interest. The instinct of enjoyment turns the scale; those rapid changes of purpose which have furnished the text for so much rhetoric are calculations prompted by the hope of pleasure. Rastignac beholding himself well dressed and impeccable as to gloves and boots, forgot his virtuous resolutions. Youth, moreover, when bent upon wrongdoing does not dare to behold himself in the mirror of consciousness; mature age has seen itself; and therein lies the whole difference between these two phases of life.

°°°°A friendship between Eugene and his neighbor, Father Goriot, had been growing up for several days past. This secret friendship and the antipathy that the student had begun to entertain for Vautrin arose from the same psychological causes. The bold philosopher who shall investigate the effects of mental action upon the physical world will doubtless find more than one proof of the material nature of our sentiments in other animals. What physiognomist is as quick to discern character as a dog is to discover from a stranger's face whether this is a friend or no? Those by-words--"atoms," "affinities"--are facts surviving in modern languages for the confusion of philosophic wiseacres who amuse themselves by winnowing the chaff of language to find its grammatical roots. We FEEL that we are loved. Our sentiments make themselves felt in everything, even at a great distance. A letter is a living soul, and so faithful an echo of the voice that speaks in it, that finer natures look upon a letter as one of love's most precious treasures. Father Goriot's affection was of the instinctive order, a canine affection raised to a sublime pitch; he had scented compassion in the air, and the kindly respect and youthful sympathy in the student's heart. This friendship had, however, scarcely reached the stage at which confidences are made. Though Eugene had spoken of his wish to meet Mme. de Nucingen, it was not because he counted on the old man to introduce him to her house, for he hoped that his own audacity might stand him in good stead. All that Father Goriot had said as yet about his daughters had referred to the remarks that the student had made so freely in public on that day of the two visits.

°°°°"How could you think that Mme. de Restaud bore you a grudge for mentioning my name?" he had said on the day following that scene at dinner. "My daughters are very fond of me; I am a happy father; but my sons-in-law have behaved badly to me, and rather than make trouble between my darlings and their husbands, I choose to see my daughters secretly. Fathers who can see their daughters at any time have no idea of all the pleasure that all this mystery gives me; I cannot always see mine when I wish, do you understand? So when it is fine I walk out in the Champs- Elysees, after finding out from their waiting-maids whether my daughters mean to go out. I wait near the entrance; my heart beats fast when the carriages begin to come; I admire them in their dresses, and as they pass they give me a little smile, and it seems as if everything was lighted up for me by a ray of bright sunlight. I wait, for they always go back the same way, and then I see them again; the fresh air has done them good and brought color into their cheeks; all about me people say, 'What a beautiful woman that is!' and it does my heart good to hear them.

°°°°"Are they not my own flesh and blood? I love the very horses that draw them; I envy the little lap-dog on their knees. Their happiness is my life. Every one loves after his own fashion, and mine does no one any harm; why should people trouble their heads about me? I am happy in my own way. Is there any law against going to see my girls in the evening when they are going out to a ball? And what a disappointment it is when I get there too late, and am told that 'Madame has gone out!' Once I waited till three o'clock in the morning for Nasie; I had not seen her for two whole days. I was so pleased, that it was almost too much for me! Please do not speak of me unless it is to say how good my daughters are to me. They are always wanting to heap presents upon me, but I will not have it. 'Just keep your money,' I tell them. 'What should I do with it? I want nothing.' And what am I, sir, after all? An old carcase, whose soul is always where my daughters are. When you have seen Mme. de Nucingen, tell me which you like the most," said the old man after a moment's pause, while Eugene put the last touches to his toilette. The student was about to go out to walk in the Garden of the Tuileries until the hour when he could venture to appear in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room.

°°°°That walk was a turning-point in Eugene's career. Several women noticed him; he looked so handsome, so young, and so well dressed. This almost admiring attention gave a new turn to his thoughts. He forgot his sisters and the aunt who had robbed herself for him; he no longer remembered his own virtuous scruples. He had seen hovering above his head the fiend so easy to mistake for an angel, the Devil with rainbow wings, who scatters rubies, and aims his golden shafts at palace fronts, who invests women with purple, and thrones with a glory that dazzles the eyes of fools till they forget the simple origins of royal dominion; he had heard the rustle of that Vanity whose tinsel seems to us to be the symbol of power. However cynical Vautrin's words had been, they had made an impression on his mind, as the sordid features of the old crone who whispers, "A lover, and gold in torrents," remain engraven on a young girl's memory.

°°°°Eugene lounged about the walks till it was nearly five o'clock, then he went to Mme. de Beauseant, and received one of the terrible blows against which young hearts are defenceless. Hitherto the Vicomtesse had received him with the kindly urbanity, the bland grace of manner that is the result of fine breeding, but is only complete when it comes from the heart.

°°°°Today Mme. de Beauseant bowed constrainedly, and spoke curtly:

°°°°"M. de Rastignac, I cannot possibly see you, at least not at this moment. I am engaged . . ."

°°°°An observer, and Rastignac instantly became an observer, could read the whole history, the character and customs of caste, in the phrase, in the tones of her voice, in her glance and bearing. He caught a glimpse of the iron hand beneath the velvet glove-- the personality, the egoism beneath the manner, the wood beneath the varnish. In short, he heard that unmistakable I THE KING that issues from the plumed canopy of the throne, and finds its last echo under the crest of the simplest gentleman.

°°°°Eugene had trusted too implicitly to the generosity of a woman; he could not believe in her haughtiness. Like all the unfortunate, he had subscribed, in all good faith, the generous compact which should bind the benefactor to the recipient, and the first article in that bond, between two large-hearted natures, is a perfect equality. The kindness which knits two souls together is as rare, as divine, and as little understood as the passion of love, for both love and kindness are the lavish generosity of noble natures. Rastignac was set upon going to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball, so he swallowed down this rebuff.

°°°°"Madame," he faltered out, "I would not have come to trouble you about a trifling matter; be so kind as to permit me to see you later, I can wait."

°°°°"Very well, come and dine with me," she said, a little confused by the harsh way in which she had spoken, for this lady was as genuinely kind-hearted as she was high-born.

°°°°Eugene was touched by this sudden relenting, but none the less he said to himself as he went away, "Crawl in the dust, put up with every kind of treatment. What must the rest of the world be like when one of the kindest of women forgets all her promises of befriending me in a moment, and tosses me aside like an old shoe? So it is every one for himself? It is true that her house is not a shop, and I have put myself in the wrong by needing her help. You should cut your way through the world like a cannon ball, as Vautrin said."

°°°°But the student's bitter thoughts were soon dissipated by the pleasure which he promised himself in this dinner with the Vicomtesse. Fate seemed to determine that the smallest accidents in his life should combine to urge him into a career, which the terrible sphinx of the Maison Vauquer had described as a field of battle where you must either slay or be slain, and cheat to avoid being cheated. You leave your conscience and your heart at the barriers, and wear a mask on entering into this game of grim earnest, where, as in ancient Sparta, you must snatch your prize without being detected if you would deserve the crown.

°°°°On his return he found the Vicomtesse gracious and kindly, as she had always been to him. They went together to the dining-room, where the Vicomte was waiting for his wife. In the time of the Restoration the luxury of the table was carried, as is well known, to the highest degree, and M. de Beauseant, like many jaded men of the world, had few pleasures left but those of good cheer; in this matter, in fact, he was a gourmand of the schools of Louis XVIII. and of the Duc d'Escars, and luxury was supplemented by splendor. Eugene, dining for the first time in a house where the traditions of grandeur had descended through many generations, had never seen any spectacle like this that now met his eyes. In the time of the Empire, balls had always ended with a supper, because the officers who took part in them must be fortified for immediate service, and even in Paris might be called upon to leave the ballroom for the battlefield. This arrangement had gone out of fashion under the Monarchy, and Eugene had so far only been asked to dances. The self-possession which pre-eminently distinguished him in later life already stood him in good stead, and he did not betray his amazement. Yet as he saw for the first time the finely wrought silver plate, the completeness of every detail, the sumptuous dinner, noiselessly served, it was difficult for such an ardent imagination not to prefer this life of studied and refined luxury to the hardships of the life which he had chosen only that morning.

°°°°His thoughts went back for a moment to the lodging-house, and with a feeling of profound loathing, he vowed to himself that at New Year he would go; prompted at least as much by a desire to live among cleaner surroundings as by a wish to shake off Vautrin, whose huge hand he seemed to feel on his shoulder at that moment. When you consider the numberless forms, clamorous or mute, that corruption takes in Paris, common-sense begins to wonder what mental aberration prompted the State to establish great colleges and schools there, and assemble young men in the capital; how it is that pretty women are respected, or that the gold coin displayed in the money-changer's wooden saucers does not take to itself wings in the twinkling of an eye; and when you come to think further, how comparatively few cases of crime there are, and to count up the misdemeanors committed by youth, is there not a certain amount of respect due to these patient Tantaluses who wrestle with themselves and nearly always come off victorious? The struggles of the poor student in Paris, if skilfully drawn, would furnish a most dramatic picture of modern civilization.

°°°°In vain Mme. de Beauseant looked at Eugene as if asking him to speak; the student was tongue-tied in the Vicomte's presence.

°°°°"Are you going to take me to the Italiens this evening?" the Vicomtesse asked her husband.

°°°°"You cannot doubt that I should obey you with pleasure," he answered, and there was a sarcastic tinge in his politeness which Eugene did not detect, "but I ought to go to meet some one at the Varietes."

°°°°"His mistress," said she to herself.

°°°°"Then, is not Ajuda coming for you this evening?" inquired the Vicomte.

°°°°"No," she answered, petulantly.

°°°°"Very well, then, if you really must have an arm, take that of M. de Rastignac."

°°°°The Vicomtess turned to Eugene with a smile.

°°°°"That would be a very compromising step for you," she said.

°°°°" 'A Frenchman loves danger, because in danger there is glory,' to quote M. de Chateaubriand," said Rastignac, with a bow.

°°°°A few moments later he was sitting beside Mme. de Beauseant in a brougham, that whirled them through the streets of Paris to a fashionable theatre. It seemed to him that some fairy magic had suddenly transported him into a box facing the stage. All the lorgnettes of the house were pointed at him as he entered, and at the Vicomtesse in her charming toilette. He went from enchantment to enchantment.

°°°°"You must talk to me, you know," said Mme. de Beauseant. "Ah! look! There is Mme. de Nucingen in the third box from ours. Her sister and M. de Trailles are on the other side."

°°°°The Vicomtesse glanced as she spoke at the box where Mlle. de Rochefide should have been; M. d'Ajuda was not there, and Mme. de Beauseant's face lighted up in a marvelous way.

°°°°"She is charming," said Eugene, after looking at Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"She has white eyelashes."

°°°°"Yes, but she has such a pretty slender figure!"

°°°°"Her hands are large."

°°°°"Such beautiful eyes!"

°°°°"Her face is long."

°°°°"Yes, but length gives distinction."

°°°°"It is lucky for her that she has some distinction in her face. Just see how she fidgets with her opera-glass! The Goriot blood shows itself in every movement," said the Vicomtesse, much to Eugene's astonishment.

°°°°Indeed, Mme. de Beauseant seemed to be engaged in making a survey of the house, and to be unconscious of Mme. Nucingen's existence; but no movement made by the latter was lost upon the Vicomtesse. The house was full of the loveliest women in Paris, so that Delphine de Nucingen was not a little flattered to receive the undivided attention of Mme. de Beauseant's young, handsome, and well-dressed cousin, who seemed to have no eyes for any one else.

°°°°"If you look at her so persistently, you will make people talk, M. de Rastignac. You will never succeed if you fling yourself at any one's head like that."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Eugene, "you have protected me indeed so far, and now if you would complete your work, I only ask of you a favor which will cost you but little, and be of very great service to me. I have lost my heart."

°°°°"Already!"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"And to that woman!"

°°°°"How could I aspire to find any one else to listen to me?" he asked, with a keen glance at his cousin. "Her Grace the Duchesse de Carigliano is a friend of the Duchesse de Berri," he went on, after a pause; "you are sure to see her, will you be so kind as to present me to her, and to take me to her ball on Monday? I shall meet Mme. de Nucingen there, and enter into my first skirmish."

°°°°"Willingly," she said. "If you have a liking for her already, your affairs of the heart are like to prosper. That is de Marsay over there in the Princesse Galathionne's box. Mme. de Nucingen is racked with jealousy. There is no better time for approaching a woman, especially if she happens to be a banker's wife. All those ladies of the Chaussee-d'Antin love revenge."

°°°°"Then, what would you do yourself in such a case?"

°°°°"I should suffer in silence."

°°°°At this point the Marquis d'Ajuda appeared in Mme. de Beauseant's box.

°°°°"I have made a muddle of my affairs to come to you," he said, "and I am telling you about it, so that it may not be a sacrifice."

°°°°Eugene saw the glow of joy on the Vicomtesse's face, and knew that this was love, and learned the difference between love and the affectations of Parisian coquetry. He admired his cousin, grew mute, and yielded his place to M. d'Ajuda with a sigh.

°°°°"How noble, how sublime a woman is when she loves like that!" he said to himself. "And HE could forsake her for a doll! Oh! how could any one forsake her?"

°°°°There was a boy's passionate indignation in his heart. He could have flung himself at Mme. de Beauseant's feet; he longed for the power of the devil if he could snatch her away and hide her in his heart, as an eagle snatches up some white yeanling from the plains and bears it to its eyrie. It was humiliating to him to think that in all this gallery of fair pictures he had not one picture of his own. "To have a mistress and an almost royal position is a sign of power," he said to himself. And he looked at Mme. de Nucingen as a man measures another who has insulted him.

°°°°The Vicomtesse turned to him, and the expression of her eyes thanked him a thousand times for his discretion. The first act came to an end just then.

°°°°"Do you know Mme. de Nucingen well enough to present M. de Rastignac to her?" she asked of the Marquis d'Ajuda.

°°°°"She will be delighted," said the Marquis. The handsome Portuguese rose as he spoke and took the student's arm, and in another moment Eugene found himself in Mme. de Nucingen's box.

°°°°"Madame," said the Marquis, "I have the honor of presenting to you the Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac; he is a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's. You have made so deep an impression upon him, that I thought I would fill up the measure of his happiness by bringing him nearer to his divinity."

°°°°Words spoken half jestingly to cover their somewhat disrespectful import; but such an implication, if carefully disguised, never gives offence to a woman. Mme. de Nucingen smiled, and offered Eugene the place which her husband had just left.

°°°°"I do not venture to suggest that you should stay with me, monsieur," she said. "Those who are so fortunate as to be in Mme. de Beauseant's company do not desire to leave it."

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, lowering his voice, "I think that to please my cousin I should remain with you. Before my lord Marquis came we were speaking of you and of your exceedingly distinguished appearance," he added aloud.

°°°°M. d'Ajuda turned and left them.

°°°°"Are you really going to stay with me, monsieur?" asked the Baroness. "Then we shall make each other's acquaintance. Mme. de Restaud told me about you, and has made me anxious to meet you."

°°°°"She must be very insincere, then, for she has shut her door on me."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Madame, I will tell you honestly the reason why; but I must crave your indulgence before confiding such a secret to you. I am your father's neighbor; I had no idea that Mme. de Restaud was his daughter. I was rash enough to mention his name; I meant no harm, but I annoyed your sister and her husband very much. You cannot think how severely the Duchesse de Langeais and my cousin blamed this apostasy on a daughter's part, as a piece of bad taste. I told them all about it, and they both burst out laughing. Then Mme. de Beauseant made some comparison between you and your sister, speaking in high terms of you, and saying how very fond you were of my neighbor, M. Goriot. And, indeed, how could you help loving him? He adores you so passionately that I am jealous already. We talked about you this morning for two hours. So this evening I was quite full of all that your father had told me, and while I was dining with my cousin I said that you could not be as beautiful as affectionate. Mme. de Beauseant meant to gratify such warm admiration, I think, when she brought me here, telling me, in her gracious way, that I should see you."

°°°°"Then, even now, I owe you a debt of gratitude, monsieur," said the banker's wife. "We shall be quite old friends in a little while."

°°°°"Although a friendship with you could not be like an ordinary friendship," said Rastignac; "I should never wish to be your friend."

°°°°Such stereotyped phrases as these, in the mouths of beginners, possess an unfailing charm for women, and are insipid only when read coldly; for a young man's tone, glance and attitude give a surpassing eloquence to the banal phrases. Mme. de Nucingen thought that Rastignac was adorable. Then, woman-like, being at a loss how to reply to the student's outspoken admiration, she answered a previous remark.

°°°°"Yes, it is very wrong of my sister to treat our poor father as she does," she said; "he has been a Providence to us. It was not until M. de Nucingen positively ordered me only to receive him in the mornings that I yielded the point. But I have been unhappy about it for a long while; I have shed many tears over it. This violence to my feelings, with my husband's brutal treatment, have been two causes of my unhappy married life. There is certainly no woman in Paris whose lot seems more enviable than mine, and yet, in reality, there is not one so much to be pitied. You will think I must be out of my senses to talk to you like this; but you know my father, and I cannot regard you as a stranger."

°°°°"You will find no one," said Eugene, "who longs as eagerly as I do to be yours. What do all women seek? Happiness." (He answered his own question in low, vibrating tones.) "And if happiness for a woman means that she is to be loved and adored, to have a friend to whom she can pour out her wishes, her fancies, her sorrows and joys; to whom she can lay bare her heart and soul, and all her fair defects and her gracious virtues, without fear of a betrayal; believe me, the devotion and the warmth that never fails can only be found in the heart of a young man who, at a bare sign from you, would go to his death, who neither knows nor cares to know anything as yet of the world, because you will be all the world to him. I myself, you see (you will laugh at my simplicity), have just come from a remote country district; I am quite new to this world of Paris; I have only known true and loving hearts; and I made up my mind that here I should find no love. Then I chanced to meet my cousin, and to see my cousin's heart from very near; I have divined the inexhaustible treasures of passion, and, like Cherubino, I am the lover of all women, until the day comes when I find THE woman to whom I may devote myself. As soon as I saw you, as soon as I came into the theatre this evening, I felt myself borne towards you as if by the current of a stream. I had so often thought of you already, but I had never dreamed that you would be so beautiful! Mme. de Beauseant told me that I must not look so much at you. She does not know the charm of your red lips, your fair face, nor see how soft your eyes are. . . . I also am beginning to talk nonsense; but let me talk."

°°°°Nothing pleases a woman better than to listen to such whispered words as these; the most puritanical among them listens even when she ought not to reply to them; and Rastignac, having once begun, continued to pour out his story, dropping his voice, that she might lean and listen; and Mme. de Nucingen, smiling, glanced from time to time at de Marsay, who still sat in the Princesse Galathionne's box.

°°°°Rastignac did not leave Mme. de Nucingen till her husband came to take her home.

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, "I shall have the pleasure of calling upon you before the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball."

°°°°"If Matame infites you to come," said the Baron, a thickset Alsatian, with indications of a sinister cunning in his full-moon countenance, "you are quide sure of being well receifed."

°°°°"My affairs seem to be in a promising way," said Eugene to himself.--" 'Can you love me?' I asked her, and she did not resent it. The bit is in the horse's mouth, and I have only to mount and ride;" and with that he went to pay his respects to Mme. de Beauseant, who was leaving the theatre on d'Ajuda's arm.

°°°°The student did not know that the Baroness' thoughts had been wandering; that she was even then expecting a letter from de Marsay, one of those letters that bring about a rupture that rends the soul; so, happy in his delusion, Eugene went with the Vicomtesse to the peristyle, where people were waiting till their carriages were announced.

°°°°"That cousin of yours is hardly recognizable for the same man," said the Portuguese laughingly to the Vicomtesse, when Eugene had taken leave of them. "He will break the bank. He is as supple as an eel; he will go a long way, of that I am sure. Who else could have picked out a woman for him, as you did, just when she needed consolation?"

°°°°"But it is not certain that she does not still love the faithless lover," said Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°The student meanwhile walked back from the Theatre-Italien to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, making the most delightful plans as he went. He had noticed how closely Mme. de Restaud had scrutinized him when he sat beside Mme. de Nucingen, and inferred that the Countess' doors would not be closed in the future. Four important houses were now open to him--for he meant to stand well with the Marechale; he had four supporters in the inmost circle of society in Paris. Even now it was clear to him that, once involved in this intricate social machinery, he must attach himself to a spoke of the wheel that was to turn and raise his fortunes; he would not examine himself too curiously as to the methods, but he was certain of the end, and conscious of the power to gain and keep his hold.

°°°°"If Mme. de Nucingen takes an interest in me, I will teach her how to manage her husband. That husband of hers is a great speculator; he might put me in the way of making a fortune by a single stroke."

°°°°He did not say this bluntly in so many words; as yet, indeed, he was not sufficient of a diplomatist to sum up a situation, to see its possibilities at a glance, and calculate the chances in his favor. These were nothing but hazy ideas that floated over his mental horizon; they were less cynical than Vautrin's notions; but if they had been tried in the crucible of conscience, no very pure result would have issued from the test. It is by a succession of such like transactions that men sink at last to the level of the relaxed morality of this epoch, when there have never been so few of those who square their courses with their theories, so few of those noble characters who do not yield to temptation, for whom the slightest deviation from the line of rectitude is a crime. To these magnificent types of uncompromising Right we owe two masterpieces--the Alceste of Moliere, and, in our own day, the characters of Jeanie Deans and her father in Sir Walter Scott's novel. Perhaps a work which should chronicle the opposite course, which should trace out all the devious courses through which a man of the world, a man of ambitions, drags his conscience, just steering clear of crime that he may gain his end and yet save appearances, such a chronicle would be no less edifying and no less dramatic.

°°°°Rastignac went home. He was fascinated by Mme. de Nucingen; he seemed to see her before him, slender and graceful as a swallow. He recalled the intoxicating sweetness of her eyes, her fair hair, the delicate silken tissue of the skin, beneath which it almost seemed to him that he could see the blood coursing; the tones of her voice still exerted a spell over him; he had forgotten nothing; his walk perhaps heated his imagination by sending a glow of warmth through his veins. He knocked unceremoniously at Goriot's door.

°°°°"I have seen Mme. Delphine, neighbor," said he.

°°°°"Where?"

°°°°"At the Italiens."

°°°°"Did she enjoy it?. . . . Just come inside," and the old man left his bed, unlocked the door, and promptly returned again.

°°°°It was the first time that Eugene had been in Father Goriot's room, and he could not control his feeling of amazement at the contrast between the den in which the father lived and the costume of the daughter whom he had just beheld. The window was curtainless, the walls were damp, in places the varnished wall- paper had come away and gave glimpses of the grimy yellow plaster beneath. The wretched bed on which the old man lay boasted but one thin blanket, and a wadded quilt made out of large pieces of Mme. Vauquer's old dresses. The floor was damp and gritty. Opposite the window stood a chest of drawers made of rosewood, one of the old-fashioned kind with a curving front and brass handles, shaped like rings of twisted vine stems covered with flowers and leaves. On a venerable piece of furniture with a wooden shelf stood a ewer and basin and shaving apparatus. A pair of shoes stood in one corner; a night-table by the bed had neither a door nor marble slab. There was not a trace of a fire in the empty grate; the square walnut table with the crossbar against which Father Goriot had crushed and twisted his posset- dish stood near the hearth. The old man's hat was lying on a broken-down bureau. An armchair stuffed with straw and a couple of chairs completed the list of ramshackle furniture. From the tester of the bed, tied to the ceiling by a piece of rag, hung a strip of some cheap material in large red and black checks. No poor drudge in a garret could be worse lodged than Father Goriot in Mme. Vauquer's lodging-house. The mere sight of the room sent a chill through you and a sense of oppression; it was like the worst cell in a prison. Luckily, Goriot could not see the effect that his surroundings produced on Eugene as the latter deposited his candle on the night-table. The old man turned round, keeping the bedclothes huddled up to his chin.

°°°°"Well," he said, "and which do you like the best, Mme. de Restaud or Mme. de Nucingen?"

°°°°"I like Mme. Delphine the best," said the law student, "because she loves you the best."

°°°°At the words so heartily spoken the old man's hand slipped out from under the bedclothes and grasped Eugene's.

°°°°"Thank you, thank you," he said, gratefully. "Then what did she say about me?"

°°°°The student repeated the Baroness' remarks with some embellishments of his own, the old man listening the while as though he heard a voice from Heaven.

°°°°"Dear child!" he said. "Yes, yes, she is very fond of me. But you must not believe all that she tells you about Anastasie. The two sisters are jealous of each other, you see, another proof of their affection. Mme. de Restaud is very fond of me too. I know she is. A father sees his children as God sees all of us; he looks into the very depths of their hearts; he knows their intentions; and both of them are so loving. Oh! if I only had good sons-in-law, I should be too happy, and I dare say there is no perfect happiness here below. If I might live with them-- simply hear their voices, know that they are there, see them go and come as I used to do at home when they were still with me; why, my heart bounds at the thought. . . . Were they nicely dressed?"

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene. "But, M. Goriot, how is it that your daughters have such fine houses, while you live in such a den as this?"

°°°°"Dear me, why should I want anything better?" he replied, with seeming carelessness. "I can't quite explain to you how it is; I am not used to stringing words together properly, but it all lies there----" he said, tapping his heart. "My real life is in my two girls, you see; and so long as they are happy, and smartly dressed, and have soft carpets under their feet, what does it matter what clothes I wear or where I lie down of a night? I shall never feel cold so long as they are warm; I shall never feel dull if they are laughing. I have no troubles but theirs. When you, too, are a father, and you hear your children's little voices, you will say to yourself, 'That has all come from me.' You will feel that those little ones are akin to every drop in your veins, that they are the very flower of your life (and what else are they?); you will cleave so closely to them that you seem to feel every movement that they make. Everywhere I hear their voices sounding in my ears. If they are sad, the look in their eyes freezes my blood. Some day you will find out that there is far more happiness in another's happiness than in your own. It is something that I cannot explain, something within that sends a glow of warmth all through you. In short, I live my life three times over. Shall I tell you something funny? Well, then, since I have been a father, I have come to understand God. He is everywhere in the world, because the whole world comes from Him. And it is just the same with my children, monsieur. Only, I love my daughters better than God loves the world, for the world is not so beautiful as God Himself is, but my children are more beautiful than I am. Their lives are so bound up with mine that I felt somehow that you would see them this evening. Great Heaven! If any man would make my little Delphine as happy as a wife is when she is loved, I would black his boots and run on his errands. That miserable M. de Marsay is a cur; I know all about him from her maid. A longing to wring his neck comes over me now and then. He does not love her! does not love a pearl of a woman, with a voice like a nightingale and shaped like a model. Where can her eyes have been when she married that great lump of an Alsatian? They ought both of them to have married young men, good-looking and good-tempered--but, after all, they had their own way."

°°°°Father Goriot was sublime. Eugene had never yet seen his face light up as it did now with the passionate fervor of a father's love. It is worthy of remark that strong feeling has a very subtle and pervasive power; the roughest nature, in the endeavor to express a deep and sincere affection, communicates to others the influence that has put resonance into the voice, and eloquence into every gesture, wrought a change in the very features of the speaker; for under the inspiration of passion the stupidest human being attains to the highest eloquence of ideas, if not of language, and seems to move in some sphere of light. In the old man's tones and gesture there was something just then of the same spell that a great actor exerts over his audience. But does not the poet in us find expression in our affections?

°°°°"Well," said Eugene, "perhaps you will not be sorry to hear that she is pretty sure to break with de Marsay before long. That sprig of fashion has left her for the Princesse Galathionne. For my part, I fell in love with Mme. Delphine this evening."

°°°°"Stuff!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"I did indeed, and she did not regard me with aversion. For a whole hour we talked of love, and I am to go to call on her on Saturday, the day after to-morrow."

°°°°"Oh! how I should love you, if she should like you. You are kind- hearted; you would never make her miserable. If you were to forsake her, I would cut your throat at once. A woman does not love twice, you see! Good heavens! what nonsense I am talking, M. Eugene! It is cold; you ought not to stay here. MON DIEU! so you have heard her speak? What message did she give you for me?"

°°°°"None at all," said Eugene to himself; aloud he answered, "She told me to tell you that your daughter sends you a good kiss."

°°°°"Good-night, neighbor! Sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you! I have mine already made for me by that message from her. May God grant you all your desires! You have come in like a good angel on me to-night, and brought with you the air that my daughter breathes."

°°°°"Poor old fellow!" said Eugene as he lay down. "It is enough to melt a heart of stone. His daughter no more thought of him than of the Grand Turk."

°°°°Ever after this conference Goriot looked upon his neighbor as a friend, a confidant such as he had never hoped to find; and there was established between the two the only relationship that could attach this old man to another man. The passions never miscalculate. Father Goriot felt that this friendship brought him closer to his daughter Delphine; he thought that he should find a warmer welcome for himself if the Baroness should care for Eugene. Moreover, he had confided one of his troubles to the younger man. Mme. de Nucingen, for whose happiness he prayed a thousand times daily, had never known the joys of love. Eugene was certainly (to make use of his own expression) one of the nicest young men that he had ever seen, and some prophetic instinct seemed to tell him that Eugene was to give her the happiness which had not been hers. These were the beginnings of a friendship that grew up between the old man and his neighbor; but for this friendship the catastrophe of the drama must have remained a mystery.

°°°°The affection with which Father Goriot regarded Eugene, by whom he seated himself at breakfast, the change in Goriot's face, which as a rule, looked as expressionless as a plaster cast, and a few words that passed between the two, surprised the other lodgers. Vautrin, who saw Eugene for the first time since their interview, seemed as if he would fain read the student's very soul. During the night Eugene had had some time in which to scan the vast field which lay before him; and now, as he remembered yesterday's proposal, the thought of Mlle. Taillefer's dowry came, of course, to his mind, and he could not help thinking of Victorine as the most exemplary youth may think of an heiress. It chanced that their eyes met. The poor girl did not fail to see that Eugene looked very handsome in his new clothes. So much was said in the glance, thus exchanged, that Eugene could not doubt but that he was associated in her mind with the vague hopes that lie dormant in a girl's heart and gather round the first attractive newcomer. "Eight hundred thousand francs!" a voice cried in his ears, but suddenly he took refuge in the memories of yesterday evening, thinking that his extemporized passion for Mme. de Nucingen was a talisman that would preserve him from this temptation.

°°°°"They gave Rossini's Barber of Seville at the Italiens yesterday evening," he remarked. "I never heard such delicious music. Good gracious! how lucky people are to have a box at the Italiens!"

°°°°Father Goriot drank in every word that Eugene let fall, and watched him as a dog watches his master's slightest movement.

°°°°"You men are like fighting cocks," said Mme. Vauquer; "you do what you like."

°°°°"How did you get back?" inquired Vautrin.

°°°°"I walked," answered Eugene.

°°°°"For my own part," remarked the tempter, "I do not care about doing things by halves. If I want to enjoy myself that way, I should prefer to go in my carriage, sit in my own box, and do the thing comfortably. Everything or nothing; that is my motto."

°°°°"And a good one, too," commented Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Perhaps you will see Mme. de Nucingen to-day," said Eugene, addressing Goriot in an undertone. "She will welcome you with open arms, I am sure; she would want to ask you for all sorts of little details about me. I have found out that she will do anything in the world to be known by my cousin Mme. de Beauseant; don't forget to tell her that I love her too well not to think of trying to arrange this."

°°°°Rastignac went at once to the Ecole de Droit. He had no mind to stay a moment longer than was necessary in that odious house. He wasted his time that day; he had fallen a victim to that fever of the brain that accompanies the too vivid hopes of youth. Vautrin's arguments had set him meditating on social life, and he was deep in these reflections when he happened on his friend Bianchon in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

°°°°"What makes you look so solemn?" said the medical student, putting an arm through Eugene's as they went towards the Palais.

°°°°"I am tormented by temptations."

°°°°"What kind? There is a cure for temptation."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Yielding to it."

°°°°"You laugh, but you don't know what it is all about. Have you read Rousseau?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Do you remember that he asks the reader somewhere what he would do if he could make a fortune by killing an old mandarin somewhere in China by mere force of wishing it, and without stirring from Paris?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Well, then?"

°°°°"Pshaw! I am at my thirty-third mandarin."

°°°°"Seriously, though. Look here, suppose you were sure that you could do it, and had only to give a nod. Would you do it?"

°°°°"Is he well stricken in years, this mandarin of yours? Pshaw! after all, young or old, paralytic, or well and sound, my word for it. . . . Well, then. Hang it, no!"

°°°°"You are a good fellow, Bianchon. But suppose you loved a woman well enough to lose your soul in hell for her, and that she wanted money for dresses and a carriage, and all her whims, in fact?"

°°°°"Why, here you are taking away my reason, and want me to reason!"

°°°°"Well, then, Bianchon, I am mad; bring me to my senses. I have two sisters as beautiful and innocent as angels, and I want them to be happy. How am I to find two hundred thousand francs apiece for them in the next five years? Now and then in life, you see, you must play for heavy stakes, and it is no use wasting your luck on low play."

°°°°"But you are only stating the problem that lies before every one at the outset of his life, and you want to cut the Gordian knot with a sword. If that is the way of it, dear boy, you must be an Alexander, or to the hulks you go. For my own part, I am quite contented with the little lot I mean to make for myself somewhere in the country, when I mean to step into my father's shoes and plod along. A man's affections are just as fully satisfied by the smallest circle as they can be by a vast circumference. Napoleon himself could only dine once, and he could not have more mistresses than a house student at the Capuchins. Happiness, old man, depends on what lies between the sole of your foot and the crown of your head; and whether it costs a million or a hundred louis, the actual amount of pleasure that you receive rests entirely with you, and is just exactly the same in any case. I am for letting that Chinaman live."

°°°°"Thank you, Bianchon; you have done me good. We will always be friends."

°°°°"I say," remarked the medical student, as they came to the end of a broad walk in the Jardin des Plantes, "I saw the Michonneau and Poiret a few minutes ago on a bench chatting with a gentleman whom I used to see in last year's troubles hanging about the Chamber of Deputies; he seems to me, in fact, to be a detective dressed up like a decent retired tradesman. Let us keep an eye on that couple; I will tell you why some time. Good-bye; it is nearly four o'clock, and I must be in to answer to my name."

°°°°When Eugene reached the lodging-house, he found Father Goriot waiting for him.

°°°°"Here," cried the old man, "here is a letter from her. Pretty handwriting, eh?"

°°°°Eugene broke the seal and read:--

°°°°"Sir,--I have heard from my father that you are fond of Italian music. I shall be delighted if you will do me the pleasure of accepting a seat in my box. La Fodor and Pellegrini will sing on Saturday, so I am sure that you will not refuse me. M. de Nucingen and I shall be pleased if you will dine with us; we shall be quite by ourselves. If you will come and be my escort, my husband will be glad to be relieved from his conjugal duties. Do not answer, but simply come.--Yours sincerely, D. DE N."

°°°°"Let me see it," said Father Goriot, when Eugene had read the letter. "You are going, aren't you?" he added, when he had smelled the writing-paper. "How nice it smells! Her fingers have touched it, that is certain."

°°°°"A woman does not fling herself at a man's head in this way," the student was thinking. "She wants to use me to bring back de Marsay; nothing but pique makes a woman do a thing like this."

°°°°"Well," said Father Goriot, "what are you thinking about?"

°°°°Eugene did not know the fever or vanity that possessed some women in those days; how should he imagine that to open a door in the Faubourg Saint-Germain a banker's wife would go to almost any length. For the coterie of the Faubourg Saint-Germain was a charmed circle, and the women who moved in it were at that time the queens of society; and among the greatest of these Dames du Petit-Chateau, as they were called, were Mme. de Beauseant and her friends the Duchesse de Langeais and the Duchesse de Maufrigneause. Rastignac was alone in his ignorance of the frantic efforts made by women who lived in the Chausee-d'Antin to enter this seventh heaven and shine among the brightest constellations of their sex. But his cautious disposition stood him in good stead, and kept his judgment cool, and the not altogether enviable power of imposing instead of accepting conditions.

°°°°"Yes, I am going," he replied.

°°°°So it was curiosity that drew him to Mme. de Nucingen; while, if she had treated him disdainfully, passion perhaps might have brought him to her feet. Still he waited almost impatiently for to-morrow, and the hour when he could go to her. There is almost as much charm for a young man in a first flirtation as there is in first love. The certainty of success is a source of happiness to which men do not confess, and all the charm of certain women lies in this. The desire of conquest springs no less from the easiness than from the difficulty of triumph, and every passion is excited or sustained by one or the other of these two motives which divide the empire of love. Perhaps this division is one result of the great question of temperaments; which, after all, dominates social life. The melancholic temperament may stand in need of the tonic of coquetry, while those of nervous or sanguine complexion withdraw if they meet with a too stubborn resistance. In other words, the lymphatic temperament is essentially despondent, and the rhapsodic is bilious.

°°°°Eugene lingered over his toilette with an enjoyment of all its little details that is grateful to a young man's self-love, though he will not own to it for fear of being laughed at. He thought, as he arranged his hair, that a pretty woman's glances would wander through the dark curls. He indulged in childish tricks like any young girl dressing for a dance, and gazed complacently at his graceful figure while he smoothed out the creases of his coat.

°°°°"There are worse figures, that is certain," he said to himself.

°°°°Then he went downstairs, just as the rest of the household were sitting down to dinner, and took with good humor the boisterous applause excited by his elegant appearance. The amazement with which any attention to dress is regarded in a lodging-house is a very characteristic trait. No one can put on a new coat but every one else must say his say about it.

°°°°"Clk! clk! clk!" cried Bianchon, making the sound with his tongue against the roof of his mouth, like a driver urging on a horse.

°°°°"He holds himself like a duke and a peer of France," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Are you going a-courting?" inquired Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried the artist.

°°°°"My compliments to my lady your wife," from the employe at the Museum.

°°°°"Your wife; have you a wife?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, in compartments, water-tight and floats, guaranteed fast color, all prices from twenty-five to forty sous, neat check patterns in the latest fashion and best taste, will wash, half- linen, half-cotton, half-wool; a certain cure for toothache and other complaints under the patronage of the Royal College of Physicians! children like it! a remedy for headache, indigestion, and all other diseases affecting the throat, eyes, and ears!" cried Vautrin, with a comical imitation of the volubility of a quack at a fair. "And how much shall we say for this marvel, gentlemen? Twopence? No. Nothing of the sort. All that is left in stock after supplying the Great Mogul. All the crowned heads of Europe, including the Gr-r-rand Duke of Baden, have been anxious to get a sight of it. Walk up! walk up! gentlemen! Pay at the desk as you go in! Strike up the music there! Brooum, la, la, trinn! la, la, boum! boum! Mister Clarinette, there you are out of tune!" he added gruffly; "I will rap your knuckles for you!"

°°°°"Goodness! what an amusing man!" said Mme. Vauquer to Mme. Couture; "I should never feel dull with him in the house."

°°°°This burlesque of Vautrin's was the signal for an outburst of merriment, and under cover of jokes and laughter Eugene caught a glance from Mlle. Taillefer; she had leaned over to say a few words in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"The cab is at the door," announced Sylvie.

°°°°"But where is he going to dine?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"With Madame la Baronne de Nucingen."

°°°°"M. Goriot's daughter," said the law student.

°°°°At this, all eyes turned to the old vermicelli maker; he was gazing at Eugene with something like envy in his eyes.

°°°°Rastignac reached the house in the Rue Saint-Lazare, one of those many-windowed houses with a mean-looking portico and slender columns, which are considered the thing in Paris, a typical banker's house, decorated in the most ostentatious fashion; the walls lined with stucco, the landings of marble mosaic. Mme. de Nucingen was sitting in a little drawing-room; the room was painted in the Italian fashion, and decorated like a restaurant. The Baroness seemed depressed. The effort that she made to hide her feelings aroused Eugene's interest; it was plain that she was not playing a part. He had expected a little flutter of excitement at his coming, and he found her dispirited and sad. The disappointment piqued his vanity.

°°°°"My claim to your confidence is very small, madame," he said, after rallying her on her abstracted mood; "but if I am in the way, please tell me so frankly; I count on your good faith."

°°°°"No, stay with me," she said; "I shall be all alone if you go. Nucingen is dining in town, and I do not want to be alone; I want to be taken out of myself."

°°°°"But what is the matter?"

°°°°"You are the very last person whom I should tell," she exclaimed.

°°°°"Then I am connected in some way in this secret. I wonder what it is?"

°°°°"Perhaps. Yet, no," she went on; "it is a domestic quarrel, which ought to be buried in the depths of the heart. I am very unhappy; did I not tell you so the day before yesterday? Golden chains are the heaviest of all fetters."

°°°°When a woman tells a young man that she is very unhappy, and when the young man is clever, and well dressed, and has fifteen hundred francs lying idle in his pocket, he is sure to think as Eugene said, and he becomes a coxcomb.

°°°°"What can you have left to wish for?" he answered. "You are young, beautiful, beloved, and rich."

°°°°"Do not let us talk of my affairs," she said shaking her head mournfully. "We will dine together tete-a-tete, and afterwards we will go to hear the most exquisite music. Am I to your taste?" she went on, rising and displaying her gown of white cashmere, covered with Persian designs in the most superb taste.

°°°°"I wish that you were altogether mine," said Eugene; "you are charming."

°°°°"You would have a forlorn piece of property," she said, smiling bitterly. "There is nothing about me that betrays my wretchedness; and yet, in spite of appearances, I am in despair. I cannot sleep; my troubles have broken my night's rest; I shall grow ugly."

°°°°"Oh! that is impossible," cried the law student; "but I am curious to know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface."

°°°°"Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me," she said. "Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else, for pity's sake," she added. "Let me show you my rooms."

°°°°"No; let us stay here," answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen's hand in his. She surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

°°°°"Listen," said Rastignac; "if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end to them, even if I have to kill half-a- dozen men; or I shall go, never to return."

°°°°"Very well," she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of despair, "I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes," she said to herself, "I have no other resource left."

°°°°She rang the bell.

°°°°"Are the horses put in for the master?" she asked of the servant.

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve dinner at seven o'clock."

°°°°"Now, come with me," she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in the banker's carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be dreaming.

°°°°"To the Palais-Royal," she said to the coachman; "stop near the Theatre-Francais."

°°°°She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

°°°°"Another moment and she will escape me," he said to himself.

°°°°When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

°°°°"Is it true that you love me?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes," he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the uneasiness that he felt.

°°°°"You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"Are you ready to do my bidding?"

°°°°"Blindly."

°°°°"Have you ever been to a gaming-house?" she asked in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Never."

°°°°"Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse," she said. "Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my troubles when you come back."

°°°°"Devil take me, I'm sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am about, but I will obey you," he added, with inward exultation, as he thought, "She has gone too far to draw back-- she can refuse me nothing now!"

°°°°Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand clothes-dealer, and hurried to number 9, which happened to be the nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his stakes.

°°°°"If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it turns up, you will win thirty-six louis," said a respectable- looking, white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

°°°°Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number 21 (his own age). There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had won.

°°°°"Take your money off, sir," said the old gentleman; "you don't often win twice running by that system."

°°°°Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once more.

°°°°"You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own," the old gentleman said in his ear. "Take my advice and go away with your winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable, you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck."

°°°°Rastignac's head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the white-haired man's possession, and went down-stairs with his seven thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his luck.

°°°°"So, that is over; and now where will you take me?" he asked, as soon as the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild embrace.

°°°°"You have saved me!" she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

°°°°"I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then," she went on, "I wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over disgracefully. If, at a woman's utmost need, SOMEBODY heaps gold upon her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever! But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept money in such a way? MON DIEU! is it not natural to share everything with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how, then, can our interests be separate?

°°°°"You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I longed to escape, to run away . . . where, I did not know. Half the women in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture. Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think of me as a woman whom he has paid." She tried to conceal her tears from him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

°°°°"It is hideous, is it not," she cried, "to speak in a breath of money and affection. You cannot love me after this," she added.

°°°°The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great, and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution of society, had thrown Eugene's thoughts into confusion; he uttered soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

°°°°"You will not remember this against me?" she asked; "promise me that you will not."

°°°°"Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so," he said. She took his hand and held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep gratitude.

°°°°"I am free and happy once more, thanks to you," she said. "Oh! I have felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this," she went on, as she took only six of the banknotes. "In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns, for I really ought to go halves with you."

°°°°Eugene's maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, "I am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy," he took the money.

°°°°"It shall be a last stake in reserve," he said, "in case of misfortune."

°°°°"That was what I was dreading to hear," she cried, turning pale. "Oh, if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you! I should die of sorrow!"

°°°°They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin's cynical words began to ring in his ears.

°°°°"Seat yourself there," said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside the fire. "I have a difficult letter to write," she added. "Tell me what to say."

°°°°"Say nothing," Eugene answered her. "Put the bills in an envelope, direct it, and send it by your maid."

°°°°"Why, you are a love of a man," she said. "Ah! see what it is to have been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through," she went on, smiling at him.

°°°°"She is charming," thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

°°°°"Do you like it?" she asked, as she rang for the maid.

°°°°"Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me."

°°°°Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

°°°°Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of the table which he had admired in his cousin's house.

°°°°"Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens afterwards," she said.

°°°°"I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am a poor student, and I have my way to make."

°°°°"Oh! you will succeed," she said laughing. "You will see. All that you wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy."

°°°°It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris, believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

°°°°Eugene took the Baroness' hand in his, and by some light pressure of the fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

°°°°"That was gratitude," she said, "for devotion that I did not dare to hope for, but now it would be a promise."

°°°°"And will you give me no promise, ingrate?"

°°°°He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a discontented air that delighted her.

°°°°"I shall see you at the ball on Monday," she said.

°°°°As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections. He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible excuses for appropriating it.

°°°°He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the stairhead he saw a light in Goriot's room; the old man had lighted a candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and go to his room without "telling him all about his daughter," to use his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without reserve.

°°°°"Then they think that I am ruined!" cried Father Goriot, in an agony of jealousy and desperation. "Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a year! MON DIEU! Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why did not YOU come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I had hold of them, I would wring their necks. MON DIEU! CRYING! Did you say she was crying?"

°°°°"With her head on my waistcoat," said Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! give it to me," said Father Goriot. "What! my daughter's tears have fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me have it. By the terms of her marriage- contract, she ought to have the use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth."

°°°°"Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the waistcoat."

°°°°Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student's hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

°°°°"You will succeed," the old man said. "God is just, you see. I know an honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to save one tear to either of them."

°°°°"An honest man!" said Eugene to himself as he lay down. "Upon my word, I think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey the voice of conscience." Perhaps none but believers in God do good in secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

°°°°The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant, who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball. The Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there. Delphine's dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene's eyes; she was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who can guess all that passes in a woman's mind. Who has not refrained from giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure; he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room; all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

°°°°Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

°°°°The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in a diabolical fashion.

°°°°"And do you suppose," cried that cold-blooded logician, "that a young man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, in the Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way, I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but, after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be out of place here, where we only aim at the purely patriarchalorama. If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend," Vautrin continued, with half-paternal jocularity, "you must have three horses, a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further. Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good- bye to your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe going to carry your billets-doux for you? Do you mean to employ the stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom of your elders!" he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each syllable. "Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously, and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way."

°°°°Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by which he had sought to corrupt the student's mind.

°°°°Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve in the small hours. He rose at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew. He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money, and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

°°°°One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in their youth and in the almost frantic eagerness with which youth grasps at pleasure. They are reckless with anything obtained on credit, while everything for which they must pay in ready money is made to last as long as possible; if they cannot have all that they want, they make up for it, it would seem, by squandering what they have. To state the matter simply--a student is far more careful of his hat than of his coat, because the latter being a comparatively costly article of dress, it is in the nature of things that a tailor should be a creditor; but it is otherwise with the hatter; the sums of money spent with him are so modest, that he is the most independent and unmanageable of his tribe, and it is almost impossible to bring him to terms. The young man in the balcony of a theatre who displays a gorgeous waistcoat for the benefit of the fair owners of opera glasses, has very probably no socks in his wardrobe, for the hosier is another of the genus of weevils that nibble at the purse. This was Rastignac's condition. His purse was always empty for Mme. Vauquer, always full at the demand of vanity; there was a periodical ebb and flow in his fortunes, which was seldom favorable to the payment of just debts. If he was to leave that unsavory and mean abode, where from time to time his pretensions met with humiliation, the first step was to pay his hostess for a month's board and lodging, and the second to purchase furniture worthy of the new lodgings he must take in his quality of dandy, a course that remained impossible. Rastignac, out of his winnings at cards, would pay his jeweler exorbitant prices for gold watches and chains, and then, to meet the exigencies of play, would carry them to the pawnbroker, that discreet and forbidding- looking friend of youth; but when it was a question of paying for board or lodging, or for the necessary implements for the cultivation of his Elysian fields, his imagination and pluck alike deserted him. There was no inspiration to be found in vulgar necessity, in debts contracted for past requirements. Like most of those who trust to their luck, he put off till the last moment the payment of debts that among the bourgeoisie are regarded as sacred engagements, acting on the plan of Mirabeau, who never settled his baker's bill until it underwent a formidable transformation into a bill of exchange.

°°°°It was about this time when Rastignac was down on his luck and fell into debt, that it became clear to the law student's mind that he must have some more certain source of income if he meant to live as he had been doing. But while he groaned over the thorny problems of his precarious situation, he felt that he could not bring himself to renounce the pleasures of this extravagant life, and decided that he must continue it at all costs. His dreams of obtaining a fortune appeared more and more chimerical, and the real obstacles grew more formidable. His initiation into the secrets of the Nucingen household had revealed to him that if he were to attempt to use this love affair as a means of mending his fortunes, he must swallow down all sense of decency, and renounce all the generous ideas which redeem the sins of youth. He had chosen this life of apparent splendor, but secretly gnawed by the canker worm of remorse, a life of fleeting pleasure dearly paid for by persistent pain; like Le Distrait of La Bruyere, he had descended so far as to make his bed in a ditch; but (also like Le Distrait) he himself was uncontaminated as yet by the mire that stained his garments.

°°°°"So we have killed our mandarin, have we?" said Bianchon one day as they left the dinner table.

°°°°"Not yet," he answered, "but he is at his last gasp."

°°°°The medical student took this for a joke, but it was not a jest. Eugene had dined in the house that night for the first time for a long while, and had looked thoughtful during the meal. He had taken his place beside Mlle. Taillefer, and stayed through the dessert, giving his neighbor an expressive glance from time to time. A few of the boarders discussed the walnuts at the table, and others walked about the room, still taking part in the conversation which had begun among them. People usually went when they chose; the amount of time that they lingered being determined by the amount of interest that the conversation possessed for them, or by the difficulty of the process of digestion. In winter-time the room was seldom empty before eight o'clock, when the four women had it all to themselves, and made up for the silence previously imposed upon them by the preponderating masculine element. This evening Vautrin had noticed Eugene's abstractedness, and stayed in the room, though he had seemed to be in a hurry to finish his dinner and go. All through the talk afterwards he had kept out of the sight of the law student, who quite believed that Vautrin had left the room. He now took up his position cunningly in the sitting-room instead of going when the last boarders went. He had fathomed the young man's thoughts, and felt that a crisis was at hand. Rastignac was, in fact, in a dilemma, which many another young man must have known.

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen might love him, or might merely be playing with him, but in either case Rastignac had been made to experience all the alternations of hope and despair of genuine passion, and all the diplomatic arts of a Parisienne had been employed on him. After compromising herself by continually appearing in public with Mme. de Beauseant's cousin she still hesitated, and would not give him the lover's privileges which he appeared to enjoy. For a whole month she had so wrought on his senses, that at last she had made an impression on his heart. If in the earliest days the student had fancied himself to be master, Mme. de Nucingen had since become the stronger of the two, for she had skilfully roused and played upon every instinct, good or bad, in the two or three men comprised in a young student in Paris. This was not the result of deep design on her part, nor was she playing a part, for women are in a manner true to themselves even through their grossest deceit, because their actions are prompted by a natural impulse. It may have been that Delphine, who had allowed this young man to gain such an ascendency over her, conscious that she had been too demonstrative, was obeying a sentiment of dignity, and either repented of her concessions, or it pleased her to suspend them. It is so natural to a Parisienne, even when passion has almost mastered her, to hesitate and pause before taking the plunge; to probe the heart of him to whom she intrusts her future. And once already Mme. de Nucingen's hopes had been betrayed, and her loyalty to a selfish young lover had been despised. She had good reason to be suspicious. Or it may have been that something in Eugene's manner (for his rapid success was making a coxcomb of him) had warned her that the grotesque nature of their position had lowered her somewhat in his eyes. She doubtless wished to assert her dignity; he was young, and she would be great in his eyes; for the lover who had forsaken her had held her so cheap that she was determined that Eugene should not think her an easy conquest, and for this very reason--he knew that de Marsay had been his predecessor. Finally, after the degradation of submission to the pleasure of a heartless young rake, it was so sweet to her to wander in the flower-strewn realms of love, that it was not wonderful that she should wish to dwell a while on the prospect, to tremble with the vibrations of love, to feel the freshness of the breath of its dawn. The true lover was suffering for the sins of the false. This inconsistency is unfortunately only to be expected so long as men do not know how many flowers are mown down in a young woman's soul by the first stroke of treachery.

°°°°Whatever her reasons may have been, Delphine was playing with Rastignac, and took pleasure in playing with him, doubtless because she felt sure of his love, and confident that she could put an end to the torture as soon as it was her royal pleasure to do so. Eugene's self-love was engaged; he could not suffer his first passage of love to end in a defeat, and persisted in his suit like a sportsman determined to bring down at least one partridge to celebrate his first Feast of Saint-Hubert. The pressure of anxiety, his wounded self-love, his despair, real or feigned, drew him nearer and nearer to this woman. All Paris credited him with this conquest, and yet he was conscious that he had made no progress since the day when he saw Mme. de Nucingen for the first time. He did not know as yet that a woman's coquetry is sometimes more delightful than the pleasure of secure possession of her love, and was possessed with helpless rage. If, at this time, while she denied herself to love, Eugene gathered the springtide spoils of his life, the fruit, somewhat sharp and green, and dearly bought, was no less delicious to the taste. There were moments when he had not a sou in his pockets, and at such times he thought in spite of his conscience of Vautrin's offer and the possibility of fortune by a marriage with Mlle. Taillefer. Poverty would clamor so loudly that more than once he was on the point of yielding to the cunning temptations of the terrible sphinx, whose glance had so often exerted a strange spell over him.

°°°°Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau went up to their rooms; and Rastignac, thinking that he was alone with the women in the dining-room, sat between Mme. Vauquer and Mme. Couture, who was nodding over the woolen cuffs that she was knitting by the stove, and looked at Mlle. Taillefer so tenderly that she lowered her eyes.

°°°°"Can you be in trouble, M. Eugene?" Victorine said after a pause.

°°°°"Who has not his troubles?" answered Rastignac. "If we men were sure of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should have no troubles."

°°°°For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible to mistake its meaning.

°°°°"You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to- day, but are you sure that it will never change?"

°°°°A smile flitted over the poor girl's lips; it seemed as if a ray of light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

°°°°"Ah! but suppose," he said, "that you should be rich and happy to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of poverty?"

°°°°A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

°°°°"Even if he were very poor?"

°°°°Again the same mute answer.

°°°°"What nonsense are you talking, you two?" exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Never mind," answered Eugene; "we understand each other."

°°°°"So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?" The words were uttered in Vautrin's deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door as he spoke.

°°°°"Oh! how you startled me!" Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed together.

°°°°"I might make a worse choice," said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin's voice had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

°°°°"No bad jokes, gentlemen!" said Mme. Couture. "My dear, let us go upstairs."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene and Vautrin were left alone.

°°°°"I felt sure you would come round to it," said the elder man with the coolness that nothing seemed to shake. "But stay a moment! I have as much delicacy as anybody else. Don't make up your mind on the spur of the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like."

°°°°The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes, which he fluttered before the student's eyes. Eugene was in a most painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis to the Marquis d'Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud's house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

°°°°"You must see," said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor, "that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself under any obligation to you."

°°°°"Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise," answered the tempter. "You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion, and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women. Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you? Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account," Vautrin went on, and a smile stole over his lips. "Take these bits of paper and write across this," he added, producing a piece of stamped paper, "Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day twelvemonth, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful. In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of strength, my boy."

°°°°"What manner of man are you?" cried Eugene. "Were you created to torment me?"

°°°°"Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes, and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your first fright will go off like a conscript's terror on the battlefield. You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, 'Here are a hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,' and you could sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won't compromise you in any way, and you hesitate. 'Tis an effeminate age."

°°°°Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for it.

°°°°"Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally," Vautrin continued. "I mean to leave this country in a few months' time for America, and set about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do; I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look at. What is a man's life to me? Not THAT," he said, and he snapped his thumb-nail against his teeth. "A man, in short, is everything to me, or just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret; you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin, but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A sentiment-- what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part, I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is my passion. I knew Venice Preserved by heart. Have you met many men plucky enough when a comrade says, 'Let us bury a dead body!' to go and do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!"

°°°°Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student's repudiation, he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying their blameworthy actions to themselves.

°°°°"He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is certain," said Eugene to himself.

°°°°He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of Vautrin's ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for his own ends, raised him in the student's eyes; but the thought of a compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de Restaud's.

°°°°For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid Messieurs de Trailles and d'Ajuda, played at whist for part of the evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to consider that his luck was heaven's reward for his perseverance in the right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin whether the bill he had given was still in the other's possession; and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand francs with a not unnatural relief.

°°°°"Everything is going on well," said Vautrin.

°°°°"But I am not your accomplice," said Eugene.

°°°°"I know, I know," Vautrin broke in. "You are still acting like a child. You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset."

°°°°Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not without good reason, his own suspicions.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," this M. Gondureau was saying, "I do not see any cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of Police----"

°°°°"Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter," said Gondureau.

°°°°Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by that word "police," and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers, confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where the BONUS flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature (an illegible scrawl) and by his title--"His Excellency Monseigneur le Ministre," five words which produce as much effect as the il Bondo Cani of the Calife de Bagdad, five words which in the eyes of this low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a moment? Pronounce the words "His Excellency," and these poor folk will forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests. Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences, annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the deus ex machina, the magical words "His Excellency," so as to dazzle Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

°°°°"If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister . . . Ah! that is quite another thing," said Poiret.

°°°°"You seem to be guided by this gentleman's opinion, and you hear what he says," said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau. "Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the nickname Trompe-la-Mort."

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort?" said Pioret. "Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves that nickname."

°°°°"Well, yes," said the detective. "They call him so because he has been so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----"

°°°°"Then is he a man of honor?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man's crime upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler, who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been unexceptionable."

°°°°"But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, why should he want me?" asked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Oh yes," said Poiret, "if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as to tell us, really knows for a certainty----"

°°°°"Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed Trompe-la- Mort, is in the confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing their affairs, which want a MAN OF MARK to see about them."

°°°°"Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?" asked Poiret. "This gentleman calls himself a MAN OF MARK because he is a MARKED MAN-- branded, you know."

°°°°"This so-called Vautrin," said the detective, "receives the money belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for their benefit."

°°°°"Their mistresses! You mean their wives," remarked Poiret.

°°°°"No, sir. A convict's wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We call them concubines."

°°°°"Then they all live in a state of concubinage?"

°°°°"Naturally."

°°°°"Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow. Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society."

°°°°"But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues, my dear sir----"

°°°°"Of course not, sir; but still----"

°°°°"Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie," said Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"You see how it is, mademoiselle," Gondureau continued. "The Government may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the Society of the Ten Thousand----"

°°°°"Ten Thousand Thieves!" cried Pioret in alarm.

°°°°"No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they won't touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society. If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds, we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again; they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, "What is there to hinder Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?"

°°°°"Oh!" said the detective, "a man is told off to follow him everywhere he goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions."

°°°°"You are quite right, sir," said Poiret, "utterly disgraced he would be."

°°°°"But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without more ado," remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but," he added in her ear, "keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.-- Trompe-la-Mort, when he came back here," he went on aloud "slipped into the skin of an honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning, that he is! You don't catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of consequence, who transacts a good deal of business."

°°°°"Naturally," said Poiret to himself.

°°°°"And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of the real Vautrin, he would put every one's back up among the business men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about."

°°°°"Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman," said Mlle. Michonneau briskly.

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him," said the detective. "I will tell you a secret--he does not like them."

°°°°"Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to identify him for two thousand francs."

°°°°"Nothing simpler," said the stranger. "I will send you a little bottle containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder, and PRESTO! the letters will appear."

°°°°"Why, that is just nothing at all," said Poiret.

°°°°"Well, do you agree?" said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

°°°°"But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all," said Mlle. Michonneau; "am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"What will you give me then?"

°°°°"Five hundred francs."

°°°°"It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir."

°°°°"I assure you," said Poiret, "that mademoiselle has a great deal of conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very intelligent."

°°°°"Well, now," Mlle. Michonneau went on, "make it three thousand francs if he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man."

°°°°"Done!" said Gondureau, "but on the condition that the thing is settled to-morrow."

°°°°"Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first."

°°°°"You are a sly one," said the detective as he rose to his feet. "Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M. Gondureau."

°°°°Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier's lecture, overheard the sufficiently striking nickname of Trompe-la-Mort, and caught the celebrated chief detective's "Done!"

°°°°"Why didn't you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a year," said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Why didn't I?" she asked. "Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without paying, and that would be an abominable sell."

°°°°"And suppose you did warn him," Poiret went on, "didn't that gentleman say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything."

°°°°"Anyhow," thought Mlle. Michonneau, "I can't abide him. He says nothing but disagreeable things to me."

°°°°"But you can do better than that," Poiret resumed. "As that gentleman said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief. Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into the bargain!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau's musings did not permit her to listen very closely to the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret's lips like water dripping from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

°°°°By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau versus Dame Morin, when he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

°°°°As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"I knew how it would end," remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. "They have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week past."

°°°°"Yes," he answered. "So she was found guilty."

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. Morin."

°°°°"I am talking about Mlle. Victorine," said Mlle, Michonneau, as she entered Poiret's room with an absent air, "and you answer, 'Mme. Morin.' Who may Mme. Morin be?"

°°°°"What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?" demanded Poiret.

°°°°"Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!"

°°°°That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel's voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac's face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately; he had said to himself that a woman's happiness should atone for this venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face; the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice broke in upon their bliss.

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity,"

°°°°he sang mockingly.

°°°°Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand, the light touch of Rastignac's hair against her cheek, a word whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student's warm breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love's sake in the most famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

°°°°"The thing is arranged," Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. "Our two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half- past eight in the morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father's fortune and affections. A funny way of putting it, isn't it? Taillefer's youngster is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know."

°°°°Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders likewise appeared.

°°°°"That is just as I intended." Vautrin said. "You know quite well what you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you."

°°°°He made as though he would take Eugene's hand, but Rastignac hastily withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

°°°°"Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes of virtue about us!" murmured Vautrin. "But Papa Doliban has three millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride's white dress, even in your own eyes."

°°°°Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, "You look melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me."

°°°°The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

°°°°"Let us go up to your room," the worthy soul remarked, when he had asked Sylvie for the law student's key. "This morning," he resumed, "you thought that SHE did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting ME! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move into it in three days' time. Don't split upon me. She wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn't bear to keep the secret from you. You will be in the Rue d'Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that won't run away."

°°°°Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student's back was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney- piece and set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac's arms stamped in gold on the leather.

°°°°"My dear boy," said the kind soul, "I have been up to the eyes in this business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?"

°°°°"What is it?"

°°°°"There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn't that so? I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say to myself, 'He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.' If I were ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs- Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my little girl again, so light- hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, 'I am very happy, papa!' When they say 'father' stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me 'papa,' it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else."

°°°°The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

°°°°"It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!" he said, raising his head after a pause. "All the time we were going about together she chatted away about you. 'He is so nice-looking, papa; isn't he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?' Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no sign, and he was dying of impatience.

°°°°Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were written:

°°°°"I want you to think of me every hour, BECAUSE . . .   "DELPHINE."

°°°°That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as well as for his daughter's sake.

°°°°"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera- dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me with you, will you not?"

°°°°"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

°°°°"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you! Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

°°°°"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to her this evening, will you not?"

°°°°"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

°°°°"Can I be of any use?"

°°°°"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening; it is a matter of life and death."

°°°°"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance; "are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were saying down below? . . . TONNERRE DE DIEU! you have no notion what a tap A LA GORIOT is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh! the thing is impossible!"

°°°°"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

°°°°"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

°°°°"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to- morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

°°°°"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

°°°°"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting in an appearance----"

°°°°Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing at the threshold of his door and singing:

°°°°"Oh! Richard, oh my king!   All the world abandons thee!   Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

°°°°The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a . . . tra la la."

°°°°"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is waiting for you."

°°°°"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my Bordeaux."

°°°°"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste, hasn't she? Eh?"

°°°°Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and, all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

°°°°Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with consternation.

°°°°"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as merry as a skylark."

°°°°"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

°°°°"Bargain?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on, seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.

°°°°"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules," said the young painter.

°°°°"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

°°°°"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

°°°°"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

°°°°"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and the cheese."

°°°°"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach besides."

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme. Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

°°°°"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

°°°°Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

°°°°"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this, Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right- hand side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

°°°°"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a hundred chestnuts."

°°°°"Oh! oh!"

°°°°"Booououh!"

°°°°"Prrr!"

°°°°These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a set firework.

°°°°"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called Vautrin.

°°°°"Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for it, I have some currant cordial."

°°°°"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered the medical student.

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for it," he added.

°°°°"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little cakes."

°°°°"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out the biscuits."

°°°°The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously struck up with the following variations:

°°°°"Scissors to grind!"

°°°°"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

°°°°"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

°°°°"China to mend!"

°°°°"Boat ahoy!"

°°°°"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

°°°°"Old clo'!"

°°°°"Cherries all ripe!"

°°°°But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

°°°°A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

°°°°"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs. When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer, telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the bread is ready for the oven; to- morrow we will eat it up and whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? . . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

°°°°Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

°°°°"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the widow.

°°°°These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

°°°°"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

°°°°"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two ladies----"

°°°°"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your young lady."

°°°°"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

°°°°"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

°°°°He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead, and began to sing:

°°°°"Sleep, little darlings;   I watch while you slumber."

°°°°"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

°°°°"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. " 'Tis your duty as a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "the young fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife-- there's your fortune for you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I go out and call a cab--all my own self."

°°°°And he started out, singing as he went:

°°°°"Oh! sun! divine sun!   Ripening the pumpkins every one."

°°°°"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over. HE never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't lose what he hadn't got-- Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

°°°°Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just as he was, like a package, across the bed.

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know what dissipation is."

°°°°"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

°°°°"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such things----"

°°°°"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

°°°°"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer. It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

°°°°"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

°°°°"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

°°°°"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

°°°°"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress as she spoke.

°°°°Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.

°°°°"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

°°°°The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face, so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet, austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught something of the golden glory of heaven.

°°°°"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing her fingers through Eugene's hair.

°°°°"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

°°°°There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

°°°°"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though you had nothing on."

°°°°"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

°°°°"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint- Pierre (good soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme. Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now, don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will idolize you."

°°°°The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady; "we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments with all the care of an antiquary."

°°°°"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine. "Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them."

°°°°"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M. Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

°°°°"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

°°°°"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two women were alone together.

°°°°"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady; "just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

°°°°"Oh! mamma."

°°°°"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in for."

°°°°"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life," said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

°°°°"MON DIEU! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

°°°°With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room, Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned, and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

°°°°That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

°°°°But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the scent.

°°°°"A delusion," he said. "Collin's sorbonne is the most dangerous that has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the Place de Greve."

°°°°As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible expressions borrowed from thieves' Latin, thieves, of all people, being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking-- his council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth after the axe has done its work.

°°°°"Collin is playing us off," he continued. "When we come across a man like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la- Mort's paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent crime than to punish it."

°°°°"And you do a service to our country," said Poiret.

°°°°"Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you are," said the head of the department. "Yes, of course, we are serving our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle. I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get it back for you."

°°°°"Well, now," Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, "there are idiots who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as saying 'Good-day.' "

°°°°The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like apparition of the sham Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her boarders so long as she lived.

°°°°In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till close upon eleven o'clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin's first bottle of wine), was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme. Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o'clock, and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested, therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup belonging to Vautrin--it was standing with the others in the bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business. The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen. It ran thus:--

°°°°"I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my friend. Till two o'clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity's sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line will be enough. Say, 'I will hasten to you,' or else, 'I am ill.' But if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have happened? . . ."

°°°°"Yes, indeed, what has happened?" exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any more. "What time is it?"

°°°°"Half-past eleven," said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his coffee.

°°°°The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M. Taillefer's servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," he cried, "your father is asking for you-- something terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious."

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" exclaimed Vautrin. "How can people brawl when they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people have bad manners, and that is a fact."

°°°°"Sir!" cried Eugene.

°°°°"Well, what then, you big baby!" said Vautrin, swallowing down his coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. "Are there not duels every morning in Paris?" added Vautrin.

°°°°"I will go with you, Victorine," said Mme. Couture, and the two women hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance that said--"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me tears!"

°°°°"Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"I am all sorts of things," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Queer, isn't it?" said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession of commonplaces suited to the occasion. "Death takes us off without asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have other complaints that men don't suffer from. We bear children, and it takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her father will have to acknowledge her now!"

°°°°"There!" said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, "yesterday she had not a penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune."

°°°°"I say, M. Eugene!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "you have landed on your feet!"

°°°°At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the crumpled letter still in his hand.

°°°°"You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to be like the rest of them?" he asked.

°°°°"Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine," said Eugene, turning to Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised the onlookers at this scene.

°°°°Father Goriot caught the student's hand and grasped it warmly. He could have kissed it.

°°°°"Oh, ho!" said Vautrin, "the Italians have a good proverb--Col tempo."

°°°°"Is there any answer?" said Mme. de Nucingen's messenger, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Say that I will come directly."

°°°°The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he could not be prudent.

°°°°"What is to be done?" he exclaimed aloud. "There are no proofs!"

°°°°Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, "Luck comes to us while we sleep, young man," and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck dead.

°°°°"So there is a Divine Justice!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?"

°°°°"A stroke!" cried Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor," called the widow. "Oh, M. Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel."

°°°°Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.

°°°°"Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist's and ask for something that's good for the apoplexy."

°°°°Christophe likewise went.

°°°°"Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs."

°°°°Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow staircase, and laid upon his bed.

°°°°"I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter," said M. Goriot.

°°°°"Selfish old thing!" cried Mme. Vauquer. "Yes, go; I wish you may die like a dog."

°°°°"Just go and see if you can find some ether," said Mlle. Michonneau to Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the sick man's clothes.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress of the situation.

°°°°"Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be of some use in sparing my modesty," she said to Poiret, "instead of standing there like a stock."

°°°°Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

°°°°"There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily," exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on the shirt again.--"Ouf! How heavy he is," he added, as he laid the convict down.

°°°°"Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!" said the old maid briskly; her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of the furniture with greedy eyes. "Could we find some excuse for opening that desk?"

°°°°"It mightn't be quite right," responded Poiret to this.

°°°°"Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it doesn't belong to any one now. But we haven't time, there is the Vauquer."

°°°°"Here is the ether," said that lady. "I must say that this is an eventful day. Lord! that man can't have had a stroke; he is as white as curds."

°°°°"White as curds?" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"And his pulse is steady," said the widow, laying her hand on his breast.

°°°°"Steady?" said the astonished Poiret.

°°°°"He is all right."

°°°°"Do you think so?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look, mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears a wig. They say that red- haired people are either the worst or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?"

°°°°"Good to hang," said Poiret.

°°°°"Round a pretty woman's neck, you mean," said Mlle Michonneau, hastily. "Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman's duty to nurse you men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take yourself off," she added. "Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of dear M. Vautrin.

°°°°Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the room by his master.

°°°°Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself might be implicated. Vautrin's coolness still further dismayed him.

°°°°"Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?" Rastignac asked himself.

°°°°He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

°°°°"Well?" shouted Bianchon, "you have seen the Pilote?"

°°°°The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local journals.

°°°°"There is a wonderful history in it," said the house student of the Hopital Cochin. "Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?"

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----"

°°°°"You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master Taillefer's money!"

°°°°"Are all the devils of hell at my heels?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand," said Bianchon, "and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish."

°°°°"Just go to Mother Vauquer's," said Rastignac; "that scoundrel Vautrin has dropped down like one dead."

°°°°"Aha!" said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, "you confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself."

°°°°The law student's long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot's confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue d'Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.

°°°°"Such a love is my anchor of safety," he said to himself. "How the old man's heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!"

°°°°He took out his watch and admired it.

°°°°"I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?"

°°°°Rastignac's battle with himself went on for a long while; and though the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison Vauquer through the gathering dusk.

°°°°Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau's officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer's duel. They were anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the probable change in Victorine's prospects. Father Goriot alone was absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the same look that had read his thoughts before--the look that had such power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.

°°°°"Well, dear boy," said the escaped convict, "I am likely to cheat death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors."

°°°°"A bull you might say," cried the widow.

°°°°"You really might be sorry to see me still alive," said Vautrin in Rastignac's ear, thinking that he guessed the student's thoughts. "You must be mighty sure of yourself."

°°°°"Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort," said Bianchon; "and, upon my word, that name would do very well for you."

°°°°Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle. Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature had dropped from the convict's face; from the unmistakable ferocity of that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the sitting-room.

°°°°"In the name of the King and the Law!" said an officer, but the words were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.

°°°°Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men, who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden, and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin's face was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair, the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines, his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor. Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.

°°°°"You are not in the politest of humors to-day," he remarked to the chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his head.

°°°°"Gentlemen," he said, "put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call on those present to witness that I make no resistance."

°°°°A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally sudden cessation.

°°°°"There's a sell for you, master crusher," the convict added, looking at the famous director of police.

°°°°"Come, strip!" said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.

°°°°"Why?" asked Collin. "There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and surrender."

°°°°He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to overwhelm his audience.

°°°°"Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle," he went on, addressing a little, white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table; and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to draw up a document. "I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin, otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years' penal servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my nickname.--If I had as much as raised my hand," he went on, addressing the other lodgers, "those three sneaking wretches yonder would have drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer's domestic hearth. The rogues have laid their heads together to set a trap for me."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.

°°°°"Good Lord!" she cried, "this does give one a turn; and me at the Gaite with him only last night!" she said to Sylvie.

°°°°"Summon your philosophy, mamma," Collin resumed. "Is it a misfortune to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me." His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his eyes.--"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept any time you like! Do you understand?" And he sang:

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity."

°°°°"Don't you trouble yourself," he went on; "I can get in my money. They are too much afraid of me to swindle me."

°°°°The convicts' prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur, its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the speaker's discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno, wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own evil thoughts.

°°°°"Who betrayed me?" said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"It was you, old cat!" he said. "That sham stroke of apoplexy was your doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs," he shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession of his effects. "The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here," he said tapping his forehead. "Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?" he said, turning to the chief. "It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?" he asked of the police officers. "A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money," he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. "These folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?" he asked proudly. "There is some good there," he said tapping his heart; "I have never betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut," he said to the old maid, "they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them sick. Rake in your gains."

°°°°He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers' faces.

°°°°"What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before? A convict of Collin's stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and I am a match for them all."

°°°°"Ye gods!" cried the painter, "what a magnificent sketch one might make of him!"

°°°°"Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master of ceremonies to the widow" (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given by prisoners to the guillotine), "be a good fellow, and tell me if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don't want him to suffer for some one else, that would not be fair."

°°°°But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Collin, addressing the lodgers, "they will take me away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me to send you figs from Provence."

°°°°He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at Rastignac.

°°°°"Good-bye, Eugene," he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange transition from his previous rough and stern manner. "If you should be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend," and, in spite of his shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, "One, two!" like a fencing-master, and lunged. "If anything goes wrong, apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service."

°°°°The strange speaker's manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the pantomime.

°°°°As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house, Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress' temples with vinegar, looked round at the bewildered lodgers.

°°°°"Well," said she, "he was a man, he was, for all that."

°°°°Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead- alive, mummy-like figure, crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, "If that creature is going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out."

°°°°In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save Poiret, was of the medical student's opinion, so that the latter, strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

°°°°"You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us," he said; "speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at once."

°°°°"At once!" echoed Poiret in amazement.

°°°°Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in her ear.

°°°°"I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here as any one else," she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

°°°°"Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Monsieur is taking Collin's part" she said, with a questioning, malignant glance at the law student; "it is not difficult to guess why."

°°°°Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

°°°°"Let her alone!" cried the boarders.

°°°°Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

°°°°"Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas," said the painter, turning to Mme. Vauquer. "If you don't show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are."

°°°°At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in them.

°°°°"Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness," she cried, interrupting herself, "I can't help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is moving----"

°°°°"Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux's in the Place Sorbonne," cried Bianchon.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Come, now," she said; "you would not be the ruin of my establishment, would you, eh? There's a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening."

°°°°"Never a bit of it!" cried the boarders. "She must go, and go this minute!"

°°°°"But the poor lady has had no dinner," said Poiret, with piteous entreaty.

°°°°"She can go and dine where she likes," shouted several voices.

°°°°"Turn her out, the spy!"

°°°°"Turn them both out! Spies!"

°°°°"Gentlemen," cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love gives to the ovine male, "respect the weaker sex."

°°°°"Spies are of no sex!" said the painter.

°°°°"A precious sexorama!"

°°°°"Turn her into the streetorama!"

°°°°"Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house, it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We have paid our money, and we are not going," said Poiret, putting on his cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer was remonstrating.

°°°°"Naughty boy!" said the painter, with a comical look; "run away, naughty little boy!"

°°°°"Look here," said Bianchon; "if you do not go, all the rest of us will," and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room- door.

°°°°"Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?" cried Mme. Vauquer. "I am a ruined woman. You can't stay here; they will go further, do something violent."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

°°°°"She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn't."

°°°°These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions, borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low voice in her hostess' ear, and then--"I shall go to Mme. Buneaud's," she said, with a threatening look.

°°°°"Go where you please, mademoiselle," said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. "Go and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the food is cheap and nasty."

°°°°The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out laughing at the sight of him.

°°°°"Hist!--st!--st! Poiret," shouted the painter. "Hallo! I say, Poiret, hallo!" The employe from the Museum began to sing:

°°°°"Partant pour la Syrie,   Le jeune et beau Dunois . . ."

°°°°"Get along with you; you must be dying to go, trahit sua quemque voluptas!" said Bianchon.

°°°°"Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil," said the tutor.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret's arm, with an appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together, the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause, followed by peals of laughter.

°°°°"Bravo, Poiret!"

°°°°"Who would have thought it of old Poiret!"

°°°°"Apollo Poiret!"

°°°°"Mars Poiret!"

°°°°"Intrepid Poiret!"

°°°°A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

°°°°"The house might as well be burned down at once," cried she, "if there are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three o'clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those ladies at that poor man's expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me to send their things, because they are going to live with her father. M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone! . . ."

°°°°She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

°°°°"Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think," she cried.

°°°°Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

°°°°"What! another windfall for somebody!" was Sylvie's comment.

°°°°But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

°°°°"Goriot in a cab!" cried the boarders; "the world is coming to an end."

°°°°The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man's arm.

°°°°"Come," he said, with gladness in his eyes.

°°°°"Then you haven't heard the news?" said Eugene. "Vautrin was an escaped convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead."

°°°°"Very well, but what business is it of ours?" replied Father Goriot. "I am going to dine with my daughter in YOUR HOUSE, do you understand? She is expecting you. Come!"

°°°°He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

°°°°"Now, let us have dinner," cried the painter, and every one drew his chair to the table.

°°°°"Well, I never," said the portly Sylvie. "Nothing goes right to- day! The haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it is, more's the pity!"

°°°°Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day's events; but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels, jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day. Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope was the portly Sylvie.

°°°°That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in the cab. The old man's voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears like words spoken in a dream.

°°°°"It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don't know what pretty ways she has; at table she will look after me, 'Here, papa, just try this, it is nice.' And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her."

°°°°"It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down."

°°°°"Upside down?" repeated Father Goriot. "Why, the world has never been so right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood would be as sweet as honey."

°°°°"I feel as if I were coming back to life again," said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, hurry up there!" cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in front. "Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the place I told you of in ten minutes time."

°°°°With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous celerity.

°°°°"How that fellow crawls!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"But where are you taking me?" Eugene asked him.

°°°°"To your own house," said Goriot.

°°°°The cab stopped in the Rue d'Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning to bachelor ways.

°°°°"Come along upstairs," he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard, and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen's maid. Eugene found himself in a charming set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description, the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

°°°°"So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to understand!"

°°°°Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just witnessed was too much for Rastignac's over- wrought nerves, after the day's strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was almost overcome by it.

°°°°"I felt sure myself that he loved you," murmured Father Goriot, while Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring about this final transformation scene.

°°°°"But you must see your rooms," said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed, down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of Delphine's apartment.

°°°°"There is no bed," said Rastignac.

°°°°"No, monsieur," she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene, looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

°°°°"You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for ever," he said in her ear. "Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret."

°°°°"Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose," growled the father.

°°°°"You know quite well that 'we' means you."

°°°°"Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a good idea of mine to say to you, 'There are some nice rooms to let in the Rue d'Artois; let us furnish them for him?' And she would not hear of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers else."

°°°°"Was that how it happened?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----"

°°°°Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low though the sound was.

°°°°The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was wanting there.

°°°°"Have we guessed your wishes rightly?" she asked, as they returned to the drawing-room for dinner.

°°°°"Yes," he said, "only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----"

°°°°"Ah! ah! you say me nay already," she said with arch imperiousness, and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman's way of laughing away scruples.

°°°°But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self- questioning, and Vautrin's arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into abandoning his high- minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled his mind.

°°°°"Do you really mean to refuse?" said Mme. de Nucingen. "And do you know what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying my affection? If you love me, if I-- love you, why should you shrink back from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment, you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this. . . . Ah!" she cried, as Eugene's passionate glance was turned on her, "and you are making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you. Speak!-- Father," she said after a pause, "make him listen to reason. Can he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?"

°°°°Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

°°°°"Child that you are!" she cried again, catching Eugene's hand. "You are just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man finds insurmountable; a woman's hand opens the way and you shrink back! Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to repay me my loan of today? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your garret must be if it is like papa's room! See, dinner is waiting all this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don't you answer?" she said, shaking his hand. "MON DIEU! papa, make up his mind for him, or I will go away and never see him any more."

°°°°"I will make up your mind," said Goriot, coming down from the clouds. "Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews, isn't it?"

°°°°"There is positively no help for it," said Eugene.

°°°°"All right, I will give you credit," said the other, drawing out a cheap leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. "I have turned Jew myself; I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you can return it some time or other."

°°°°Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot's warmly.

°°°°"Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?"

°°°°"Oh! my poor father," said Mme. de Nucingen, "how did you do it?"

°°°°"Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you, and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to myself, 'She will never be able to pay for them.' The attorney says that those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year, and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, 'How happy they are going to be!' and--well, now, are you not happy?"

°°°°"Oh papa! papa!" cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright and radiant.

°°°°"Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel for you now?"

°°°°"Why, children, why Delphinette!" cried Goriot, who had not felt his daughter's heart beat against his breast for ten years, "do you want me to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are quits already." And the old man strained her to his breast with such fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

°°°°"Oh! you are hurting me!" she said.

°°°°"I am hurting you!" He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men. Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his fingers had grasped too roughly.

°°°°"Oh! no, no," he cried. "I have not hurt you, have I?" and his smile seemed to repeat the question. "YOU have hurt me with that cry just now.--The things cost rather more than that," he said in her ear, with another gentle kiss, "but I had to deceive him about it, or he would have been angry."

°°°°Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration which shapes the beliefs of youth.

°°°°"I will be worthy of all this," he cried.

°°°°"Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said," and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law student on the forehead.

°°°°"He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you," said Father Goriot. "Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus."

°°°°"Oh! why did you tell her?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"Eugene," Delphine said in his ear, "I have one regret now this evening. Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!"

°°°°"This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!" cried Goriot. "God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer through you, and I can still say, 'In this short month of February I had more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.'--Look at me, Fifine!" he said to his daughter. "She is very beautiful, is she not? Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell instead. Come, let us have dinner," he added, scarcely knowing what he said, "everything is ours."

°°°°"Poor dear father!"

°°°°He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a kiss on the plaits of hair. "If you only knew, little one, how happy you can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me, say that you will!"

°°°°"Yes, dear father."

°°°°"Say it again."

°°°°"Yes, I will, my kind father."

°°°°"Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed my own wishes. Let us have dinner."

°°°°The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot's spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter's feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more tender.

°°°°"You see!" Delphine said with a look at Eugene, "so long as my father is with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes."

°°°°Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

°°°°"And when will the rooms be ready?" asked Eugene, looking round. "We must all leave them this evening, I suppose."

°°°°"Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me," she answered, with an eloquent glance. "It is our night at the Italiens."

°°°°"I shall go to the pit," said her father.

°°°°It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen's carriage was waiting for her, and Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing that the father's self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her father's adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future of love.

°°°°They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso's lamentations as recorded in Byron's poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force of truth they fall far short of the widow's cry from the depths.

°°°°"Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life, now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people! The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and Christophe will have to go!"

°°°°The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said, "Madame," questioningly.

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Sylvie, "he is like a dog."

°°°°"In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a little dog."

°°°°"Lord!" said Sylvie, flinging up her head, "those old maids are up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"There's that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict," the widow went on. "Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I can't bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny on the nail too."

°°°°"And open-handed he was!" said Christophe.

°°°°"There is some mistake," said Sylvie.

°°°°"Why, no there isn't! he said so himself!" said Mme. Vauquer. "And to think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it's like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap; we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again; there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred, will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that is just what it is!"

°°°°"And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear," cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Don't speak of her, she is a wicked woman!" said Mme. Vauquer. "She is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed and murdered people in her time. SHE ought to be put in jail for life instead of that poor dear----"

°°°°Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

°°°°"Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers," said the widow, sighing.

°°°°But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d'Antin.

°°°°"Sylvie!" cried the widow, "this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There's a weight on my chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow, Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen," and she went.

°°°°"What is the matter now?" Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

°°°°"Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a bit. It's the first time she has cried since I've been with her."

°°°°By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had "made up her mind to it." True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A lover's farewell glance at his lady-love's window is not more mournful than Mme. Vauquer's survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take his (Rastignac's) place; that the official from the Museum had often expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture's rooms; and that in a very few days her household would be on the old footing.

°°°°"God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here. There'll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you'll see," and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining- room. "Whose turn will it be, I wonder?"

°°°°"It is just as well that we are moving out," said Eugene to Father Goriot in a low voice.

°°°°"Madame," said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, "I have not seen Mistigris these three days."

°°°°"Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if HE has gone and left us, I----"

°°°°The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this dreadful portent.

°°°°By twelve o'clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse's great ball, which had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was slipped in with the card.

°°°°"I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to   interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the   card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make   the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud's sister. Pray introduce that   charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your   affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.   "VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT."

°°°°"Well," said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, "Mme. de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de Nucingen."

°°°°He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of Paris--will never have a rival.

°°°°Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country, it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love exist there without that wealth?

°°°°If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water, without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls, waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look with pity upon those of earth.

°°°°Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it. In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one man, but of a whole nation.

°°°°But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a brilliant future.

°°°°So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

°°°°"Madame is in her room," Therese came to tell him. The woman's voice made him start.

°°°°He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid the blossom.

°°°°"Well," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "here you are."

°°°°"Guess what I bring for you," said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He took possession of her arm to kiss her hand

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

°°°°"And I owe this happiness to you--to THEE" (she whispered the more intimate word in his ear); "but Therese is in my dressing- room, let us be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes to me through YOU--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint- Germain, it is because I shall meet you there."

°°°°"Mme. de Beauseant's note seems to say very plainly that she does not expect to see the BARON de Nucingen at her ball; don't you think so?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, yes," said the Baroness as she returned the letter. "Those women have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go. My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully dressed.--Eugene," she went on, lowering her voice, "she will go to dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a woman's character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband's mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant's ball in tissue of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I mean to be perfectly happy."

°°°°At one o'clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In the midst of their lovers' farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to come, she said in a troubled voice, "I am very fearful, superstitious. Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe."

°°°°"Child!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?" she asked, laughingly.

°°°°Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left its sweetness on the lips.

°°°°"Well?" cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene; "I will tell you everything to-morrow."

°°°°"Everything, will you not?" cried the old man. "Go to bed. To- morrow our happy life will begin."

°°°°Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging- house, and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it; but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran lightly upstairs.

°°°°It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d'Artois at four o'clock; but Rastignac's name had been called early on the list at the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this, Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin's signature lying in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot's room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him; but after the first few words, the conversation between the father and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his attention.

°°°°"Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe to talk?" she added.

°°°°"Yes, there is no one in the house," said her father faintly.

°°°°"What is the matter with you?" asked Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!" said the old man. "You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d'Artois."

°°°°"Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the subject with him. Wasn't that what you told me to tell him?"

°°°°"Yes, quite right," answered Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then," Delphine continued, "he told me all about his affairs. He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations; they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes, on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy (in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him."

°°°°"Do you really believe that silly rubbish?" . . . cried her father. "It was all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No, no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them, and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that's holiest in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked! and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers. If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don't give way, don't make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he can't do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once; I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know for certain that your fortune is secure."

°°°°"Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile, it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we drive him to despair, I am lost."

°°°°"Why, then, the man is a rogue?"

°°°°"Well, yes, father," she said, flinging herself into a chair, "I wanted to keep it from you to spare your feelings," and she burst into tears; "I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his stalking- horse."

°°°°"But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons- in-law of that sort," cried her father; "why, I would guillotine him myself if there was no headsman to do it."

°°°°"No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says, stripped of all his circumlocutions--'Take your choice, you and no one else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through myself.' Is that plain speaking? He MUST have my assistance. He is assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to be Eugene's wife in all but name. 'I connive at your errors, and you allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!' Is that sufficiently explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get possession of those bills?"

°°°°Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on his knees.

°°°°"Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child! forgive me!" cried the old man.

°°°°"Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame," said Delphine. "We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us! Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa," she said, kissing him.

°°°°"Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your husband's winding."

°°°°"No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me, well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters. No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant's ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene! . . . Come, let us see his room."

°°°°But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve, and the sound of Mme. de Restaud's voice came from the staircase. "Is my father in?" she asked of Sylvie.

°°°°This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

°°°°"Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?" said Delphine, when she heard her sister speak. "It looks as though some strange things had happened in that family."

°°°°"What sort of things?" asked Goriot. "This is like to be the death of me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune."

°°°°"Good-morning, father," said the Countess from the threshold. "Oh! Delphine, are you here?"

°°°°Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister's presence.

°°°°"Good-morning, Nasie," said the Baroness. "What is there so extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day."

°°°°"Since when?"

°°°°"If you came yourself you would know."

°°°°"Don't tease, Delphine," said the Countess fretfully. "I am very miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!"

°°°°"What is it, Nasie?" cried Goriot. "Tell us all about it, child! How white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will love you even better, if that were possible."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. "We are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see."

°°°°The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

°°°°"This will kill me!" said their father. "There," he went on, stirring the smouldering fire, "come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it, Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----"

°°°°"Well, then, my husband knows everything," said the Countess. "Just imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime's some time ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that. About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled. He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively. Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard; for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I had eaten up all that you had----"

°°°°"No," said Goriot; "I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet."

°°°°The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when the father's love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice, revealed the depths of his despair.

°°°°"I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell," and the Countess burst into tears.

°°°°Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister's shoulder, and cried too.

°°°°"Then it is all true," she said.

°°°°Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her, kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

°°°°"I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie," she said.

°°°°"My angels," murmured Goriot faintly. "Oh, why should it be trouble that draws you together?"

°°°°This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

°°°°"To save Maxime's life," she said, "to save all my own happiness, I went to the money-lender you know of, a man of iron forged in hell-fire; nothing can melt him; I took all the family diamonds that M. de Restaud is so proud of--his and mine too--and sold them to that M. Gobseck. SOLD THEM! Do you understand? I saved Maxime, but I am lost. Restaud found it all out."

°°°°"How? Who told him? I will kill him," cried Goriot.

°°°°"Yesterday he sent to tell me to come to his room. I went. . . . 'Anastasie,' he said in a voice--oh! such a voice; that was enough, it told me everything--'where are your diamonds?'--'In my room----'--'No,' he said, looking straight at me, 'there they are on that chest of drawers----' and he lifted his handkerchief and showed me the casket. 'Do you know where they came from?' he said. I fell at his feet. . . . I cried; I besought him to tell me the death he wished to see me die."

°°°°"You said that!" cried Goriot. "By God in heaven, whoever lays a hand on either of you so long as I am alive may reckon on being roasted by slow fires! Yes, I will cut him in pieces like . . ."

°°°°Goriot stopped; the words died away in his throat.

°°°°"And then, dear, he asked something worse than death of me. Oh! heaven preserve all other women from hearing such words as I heard then!"

°°°°"I will murder that man," said Goriot quietly. "But he has only one life, and he deserves to die twice.--And then, what next?" he added, looking at Anastasie.

°°°°"Then," the Countess resumed, "there was a pause, and he looked at me. 'Anastasie,' he said, 'I will bury this in silence; there shall be no separation; there are the children. I will not kill M. de Trailles. I might miss him if we fought, and as for other ways of getting rid of him, I should come into collision with the law. If I killed him in your arms, it would bring dishonor on THOSE children. But if you do not want to see your children perish, nor their father nor me, you must first of all submit to two conditions. Answer me. Have I a child of my own?' I answered, 'Yes,'--'Which?'--'Ernest, our eldest boy.'--'Very well,' he said, 'and now swear to obey me in this particular from this time forward.' I swore. 'You will make over your property to me when I require you to do so.' "

°°°°"Do nothing of the kind!" cried Goriot. "Aha! M. de Restaud, you could not make your wife happy; she has looked for happiness and found it elsewhere, and you make her suffer for your own ineptitude? He will have to reckon with me. Make yourself easy, Nasie. Aha! he cares about his heir! Good, very good. I will get hold of the boy; isn't he my grandson? What the blazes! I can surely go to see the brat! I will stow him away somewhere; I will take care of him, you may be quite easy. I will bring Restaud to terms, the monster! I shall say to him, 'A word or two with you! If you want your son back again, give my daughter her property, and leave her to do as she pleases.' "

°°°°"Father!"

°°°°"Yes. I am your father, Nasie, a father indeed! That rogue of a great lord had better not ill-treat my daughter. Tonnerre! What is it in my veins? There is the blood of a tiger in me; I could tear those two men to pieces! Oh! children, children! so this is what your lives are! Why, it is death! . . . What will become of you when I shall be here no longer? Fathers ought to live as long as their children. Ah! Lord God in heaven! how ill Thy world is ordered! Thou hast a Son, if what they tell us is true, and yet Thou leavest us to suffer so through our children. My darlings, my darlings! to think that trouble only should bring you to me, that I should only see you with tears on your faces! Ah! yes, yes, you love me, I see that you love me. Come to me and pour out your griefs to me; my heart is large enough to hold them all. Oh! you might rend my heart in pieces, and every fragment would make a father's heart. If only I could bear all your sorrows for you! . . . Ah! you were so happy when you were little and still with me. . . ."

°°°°"We have never been happy since," said Delphine. "Where are the old days when we slid down the sacks in the great granary?"

°°°°"That is not all, father," said Anastasie in Goriot's ear. The old man gave a startled shudder. "The diamonds only sold for a hundred thousand francs. Maxime is hard pressed. There are twelve thousand francs still to pay. He has given me his word that he will be steady and give up play in future. His love is all that I have left in the world. I have paid such a fearful price for it that I should die if I lose him now. I have sacrificed my fortune, my honor, my peace of mind, and my children for him. Oh! do something, so that at the least Maxime may be at large and live undisgraced in the world, where he will assuredly make a career for himself. Something more than my happiness is at stake; the children have nothing, and if he is sent to Sainte-Pelagie all his prospects will be ruined."

°°°°"I haven't the money, Nasie. I have NOTHING--nothing left. This is the end of everything. Yes, the world is crumbling into ruin, I am sure. Fly! Save yourselves! Ah!--I have still my silver buckles left, and half-a-dozen silver spoons and forks, the first I ever had in my life. But I have nothing else except my life annuity, twelve hundred francs . . ."

°°°°"Then what has become of your money in the funds?"

°°°°"I sold out, and only kept a trifle for my wants. I wanted twelve thousand francs to furnish some rooms for Delphine."

°°°°"In your own house?" asked Mme. de Restaud, looking at her sister.

°°°°"What does it matter where they were?" asked Goriot. "The money is spent now."

°°°°"I see how it is," said the Countess. "Rooms for M. de Rastignac. Poor Delphine, take warning by me!"

°°°°"M. de Rastignac is incapable of ruining the woman he loves, dear."

°°°°"Thanks! Delphine. I thought you would have been kinder to me in my troubles, but you never did love me."

°°°°"Yes, yes, she loves you, Nasie," cried Goriot; "she was saying so only just now. We were talking about you, and she insisted that you were beautiful, and that she herself was only pretty!"

°°°°"Pretty!" said the Countess. "She is as hard as a marble statue."

°°°°"And if I am?" cried Delphine, flushing up, "how have you treated me? You would not recognize me; you closed the doors of every house against me; you have never let an opportunity of mortifying me slip by. And when did I come, as you were always doing, to drain our poor father, a thousand francs at a time, till he is left as you see him now? That is all your doing, sister! I myself have seen my father as often as I could. I have not turned him out of the house, and then come and fawned upon him when I wanted money. I did not so much as know that he had spent those twelve thousand francs on me. I am economical, as you know; and when papa has made me presents, it has never been because I came and begged for them."

°°°°"You were better off than I. M. de Marsay was rich, as you have reason to know. You always were as slippery as gold. Good-bye; I have neither sister nor----"

°°°°"Oh! hush, hush, Nasie!" cried her father.

°°°°"Nobody else would repeat what everybody has ceased to believe. You are an unnatural sister!" cried Delphine.

°°°°"Oh, children, children! hush! hush! or I will kill myself before your eyes."

°°°°"There, Nasie, I forgive you," said Mme. de Nucingen; "you are very unhappy. But I am kinder than you are. How could you say THAT just when I was ready to do anything in the world to help you, even to be reconciled with my husband, which for my own sake I---- Oh! it is just like you; you have behaved cruelly to me all through these nine years."

°°°°"Children, children, kiss each other!" cried the father. "You are angels, both of you."

°°°°"No. Let me alone," cried the Countess shaking off the hand that her father had laid on her arm. "She is more merciless than my husband. Any one might think she was a model of all the virtues herself!"

°°°°"I would rather have people think that I owed money to M. de Marsay than own that M. de Trailles had cost me more than two hundred thousand francs," retorted Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"DELPHINE!" cried the Countess, stepping towards her sister.

°°°°"I shall tell you the truth about yourself if you begin to slander me," said the Baroness coldly.

°°°°"Delphine! you are a ----"

°°°°Father Goriot sprang between them, grasped the Countess' hand, and laid his own over her mouth.

°°°°"Good heavens, father! What have you been handling this morning?" said Anastasie.

°°°°"Ah! well, yes, I ought not to have touched you," said the poor father, wiping his hands on his trousers, "but I have been packing up my things; I did not know that you were coming to see me."

°°°°He was glad that he had drawn down her wrath upon himself.

°°°°"Ah!" he sighed, as he sat down, "you children have broken my heart between you. This is killing me. My head feels as if it were on fire. Be good to each other and love each other! This will be the death of me! Delphine! Nasie! come, be sensible; you are both in the wrong. Come, Dedel," he added, looking through his tears at the Baroness, "she must have twelve thousand francs, you see; let us see if we can find them for her. Oh, my girls, do not look at each other like that!" and he sank on his knees beside Delphine. "Ask her to forgive you--just to please me," he said in her ear. "She is more miserable than you are. Come now, Dedel."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Delphine, alarmed at the wild extravagant grief in her father's face, "I was in the wrong, kiss me----"

°°°°"Ah! that is like balm to my heart," cried Father Goriot. "But how are we to find twelve thousand francs? I might offer myself as a substitute in the army----"

°°°°"Oh! father dear!" they both cried, flinging their arms about him. "No, no!"

°°°°"God reward you for the thought. We are not worth it, are we, Nasie?" asked Delphine.

°°°°"And besides, father dear, it would only be a drop in the bucket," observed the Countess.

°°°°"But is flesh and blood worth nothing?" cried the old man in his despair. "I would give body and soul to save you, Nasie. I would do a murder for the man who would rescue you. I would do, as Vautrin did, go to the hulks, go----" he stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and put both hands to his head. "Nothing left!" he cried, tearing his hair. "If I only knew of a way to steal money, but it is so hard to do it, and then you can't set to work by yourself, and it takes time to rob a bank. Yes, it is time I was dead; there is nothing left me to do but to die. I am no good in the world; I am no longer a father! No. She has come to me in her extremity, and, wretch that I am, I have nothing to give her. Ah! you put your money into a life annuity, old scoundrel; and had you not daughters? You did not love them. Die, die in a ditch, like the dog that you are! Yes, I am worse than a dog; a beast would not have done as I have done! Oh! my head . . . it throbs as if it would burst."

°°°°"Papa!" cried both the young women at once, "do, pray, be reasonable!" and they clung to him to prevent him from dashing his head against the wall. There was a sound of sobbing.

°°°°Eugene, greatly alarmed, took the bill that bore Vautrin's signature, saw that the stamp would suffice for a larger sum, altered the figures, made it into a regular bill for twelve thousand francs, payable to Goriot's order, and went to his neighbor's room.

°°°°"Here is the money, madame," he said, handing the piece of paper to her. "I was asleep; your conversation awoke me, and by this means I learned all that I owed to M. Goriot. This bill can be discounted, and I shall meet it punctually at the due date."

°°°°The Countess stood motionless and speechless, but she held the bill in her fingers.

°°°°"Delphine," she said, with a white face, and her whole frame quivering with indignation, anger, and rage, "I forgave you everything; God is my witness that I forgave you, but I cannot forgive this! So this gentleman was there all the time, and you knew it! Your petty spite has let you to wreak your vengeance on me by betraying my secrets, my life, my children's lives, my shame, my honor! There, you are nothing to me any longer. I hate you. I will do all that I can to injure you. I will . . ."

°°°°Anger paralyzed her; the words died in her dry parched throat.

°°°°"Why, he is my son, my child; he is your brother, your preserver!" cried Goriot. "Kiss his hand, Nasie! Stay, I will embrace him myself," he said, straining Eugene to his breast in a frenzied clasp. "Oh my boy! I will be more than a father to you; if I had God's power, I would fling worlds at your feet. Why don't you kiss him, Nasie? He is not a man, but an angel, a angel out of heaven."

°°°°"Never mind her, father; she is mad just now."

°°°°"Mad! am I? And what are you?" cried Mme. de Restaud.

°°°°"Children, children, I shall die if you go on like this," cried the old man, and he staggered and fell on the bed as if a bullet had struck him.--"They are killing me between them," he said to himself.

°°°°The Countess fixed her eyes on Eugene, who stood stock still; all his faculties were numbed by this violent scene.

°°°°"Sir? . . ." she said, doubt and inquiry in her face, tone, and bearing; she took no notice now of her father nor of Delphine, who was hastily unfastening his waistcoat.

°°°°"Madame," said Eugene, answering the question before it was asked, "I will meet the bill, and keep silence about it."

°°°°"You have killed our father, Nasie!" said Delphine, pointing to Goriot, who lay unconscious on the bed. The Countess fled.

°°°°"I freely forgive her," said the old man, opening his eyes; "her position is horrible; it would turn an older head than hers. Comfort Nasie, and be nice to her, Delphine; promise it to your poor father before he dies," he asked, holding Delphine's hand in a convulsive clasp.

°°°°"Oh! what ails you, father?" she cried in real alarm.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing," said Goriot; "it will go off. There is something heavy pressing on my forehead, a little headache. . . . Ah! poor Nasie, what a life lies before her!"

°°°°Just as he spoke, the Countess came back again and flung herself on her knees before him. "Forgive me!" she cried.

°°°°"Come," said her father, "you are hurting me still more."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Countess said, turning to Rastignac, "misery made me unjust to you. You will be a brother to me, will you not?" and she held out her hand. Her eyes were full of tears as she spoke.

°°°°"Nasie," cried Delphine, flinging her arms round her sister, "my little Nasie, let us forget and forgive."

°°°°"No, no," cried Nasie; "I shall never forget!"

°°°°"Dear angels," cried Goriot, "it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won't it?"

°°°°"I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?"

°°°°"There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No, after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in future."

°°°°Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

°°°°"Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper," said Mme. de Nucingen, "but she has a good heart."

°°°°"She came back for the endorsement," said Eugene in Delphine's ear.

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her," he answered, raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did not venture to express.

°°°°"Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent."

°°°°"How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"I should like to go to sleep," he replied.

°°°°Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

°°°°"This evening at the Italiens," she said to Eugene, "and you can let me know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go into your room.--Oh! how frightful!" she cried on the threshold. "Why, you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps of gold."

°°°°A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot's bedside; to all appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, "They are not happy!" Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they were spoken went to his daughter's heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

°°°°"Ah! Delphine!" he said.

°°°°"How are you now?" she asked.

°°°°"Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently. Don't stay with me, children; go, go and be happy."

°°°°Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room, and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

°°°°"Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin," said Eugene.

°°°°Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him next to the old lodger.

°°°°"What is wrong with him?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning."

°°°°"Is there any cure for it?"

°°°°"None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on? There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way."

°°°°"Yes, there was," said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had struck blow on blow at their father's heart.

°°°°"But Delphine at any rate loves her father," he said to himself.

°°°°That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

°°°°"Do not be anxious about him," she said, however, as soon as Eugene began, "our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear. At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake. To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me; what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh! no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in life when everything turns to bitterness."

°°°°Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression on him.

°°°°Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love, they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme. de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

°°°°"What are you thinking about?" she asked.

°°°°"I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me."

°°°°She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more words, and she feared for her self- control.

°°°°"Eugene," she said, changing the conversation, "I wonder whether you know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant's to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d'Ajuda have agreed to keep the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be there. People are wondering what will happen?"

°°°°"The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill Mme. de Beauseant."

°°°°"Oh, no," said Delphine, smiling, "you do not know that kind of woman. Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for your sake."

°°°°"Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set in circulation here."

°°°°"We shall know the truth to-morrow."

°°°°Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d'Artois. Yesterday evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o'clock in the morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot's existence. The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four o'clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

°°°°"Aha!" said the painter as Eugene came in, "Father Goriot has broken down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of its brightest ornaments."

°°°°Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

°°°°"Hey! Monsieur Eugene!"

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you," shouted Sylvie.

°°°°"It is this, sir," said the widow. "You and M. Goriot should by rights have moved out on the 15th of February. That was three days ago; to-day is the 18th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied."

°°°°"Why can't you trust him?"

°°°°"Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died, those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won't fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and forks he has left, I don't know why. He had got himself up to look quite young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks; he looked quite young again."

°°°°"I will be responsible," said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he foresaw the end.

°°°°He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot's room. The old man was tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

°°°°"Good-evening, father," said Eugene.

°°°°The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

°°°°"How is SHE?"

°°°°"She is quite well. But how are you?"

°°°°"There is nothing much the matter."

°°°°"Don't tire him," said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the room.

°°°°"Well?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in; I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are acting."

°°°°"Is it possible to move him?"

°°°°"Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as quiet as possible----"

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," said Eugene, "we will nurse him between us."

°°°°"I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him."

°°°°"And what did he say?"

°°°°"He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went, and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his strength. One of his daughters has been here."

°°°°"Was it the Countess?" asked Eugene. "A tall, dark-haired woman, with large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Leave him to me for a bit," said Rastignac. "I will make him confess; he will tell me all about it."

°°°°"And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is still some hope left."

°°°°"All right."

°°°°"How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow," said Father Goriot when they were alone. "They are going to a grand ball."

°°°°"What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this evening that you have to stop in bed?"

°°°°"Nothing."

°°°°"Did not Anastasie come to see you?" demanded Rastignac.

°°°°"Yes," said Father Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then, don't keep anything from me. What more did she want of you?"

°°°°"Oh, she was very miserable," he answered, gathering up all his strength to speak. "It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds, Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie's waiting-woman advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie's maid saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair. She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that heartless scoundrel and say, 'I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker; pay her for me!' She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there too in a superb toilette, and Anastasie ought not to be outshone by her younger sister. And then--she was drowned in tears, poor girl! I felt so humbled yesterday when I had not the twelve thousand francs, that I would have given the rest of my miserable life to wipe out that wrong. You see, I could have borne anything once, but latterly this want of money has broken my heart. Oh! I did not do it by halves; I titivated myself up a bit, and went out and sold my spoons and forks and buckles for six hundred francs; then I went to old Daddy Gobseck, and sold a year's interest on my annuity for four hundred francs down. Pshaw! I can live on dry bread, as I did when I was a young man; if I have done it before, I can do it again. My Nasie shall have one happy evening, at any rate. She shall be smart. The banknote for a thousand francs is under my pillow; it warms me to have it lying there under my head, for it is going to make my poor Nasie happy. She can turn that bad girl Victoire out of the house. A servant that cannot trust her mistress, did any one ever hear the like! I shall be quite well to-morrow. Nasie is coming at ten o'clock. They must not think that I am ill, or they will not go to the ball; they will stop and take care of me. To-morrow Nasie will come and hold me in her arms as if I were one of her children; her kisses will make me well again. After all, I might have spent the thousand francs on physic; I would far rather give them to my little Nasie, who can charm all the pain away. At any rate, I am some comfort to her in her misery; and that makes up for my unkindness in buying an annuity. She is in the depths, and I cannot draw her out of them now. Oh! I will go into business again, I will buy wheat in Odessa; out there, wheat fetches a quarter of the price it sells for here. There is a law against the importation of grain, but the good folk who made the law forgot to prohibit the introduction of wheat products and food stuffs made from corn. Hey! hey! . . . That struck me this morning. There is a fine trade to be done in starch."

°°°°Eugene, watching the old man's face, thought that his friend was light-headed.

°°°°"Come," he said, "do not talk any more, you must rest----" Just then Bianchon came up, and Eugene went down to dinner.

°°°°The two students sat up with him that night, relieving each other in turn. Bianchon brought up his medical books and studied; Eugene wrote letters home to his mother and sisters. Next morning Bianchon thought the symptoms more hopeful, but the patient's condition demanded continual attention, which the two students alone were willing to give--a task impossible to describe in the squeamish phraseology of the epoch. Leeches must be applied to the wasted body, the poultices and hot foot-baths, and other details of the treatment required the physical strength and devotion of the two young men. Mme. de Restaud did not come; but she sent a messenger for the money.

°°°°"I expected she would come herself; but it would have been a pity for her to come, she would have been anxious about me," said the father, and to all appearances he was well content.

°°°°At seven o'clock that evening Therese came with a letter from Delphine.

°°°°"What are you doing, dear friend? I have been loved for a very   little while, and I am neglected already? In the confidences of   heart and heart, I have learned to know your soul--you are too   noble not to be faithful for ever, for you know that love with   all its infinite subtle changes of feeling is never the same.   Once you said, as we were listening to the Prayer in Mose in   Egitto, 'For some it is the monotony of a single note; for   others, it is the infinite of sound.' Remember that I am   expecting you this evening to take me to Mme. de Beauseant's   ball. Every one knows now that the King signed M. d'Ajuda's   marriage-contract this morning, and the poor Vicomtesse knew   nothing of it until two o'clock this afternoon. All Paris will   flock to her house, of course, just as a crowd fills the Place de   Greve to see an execution. It is horrible, is it not, to go out   of curiosity to see if she will hide her anguish, and whether she   will die courageously? I certainly should not go, my friend, if I   had been at her house before; but, of course, she will not   receive society any more after this, and all my efforts would be   in vain. My position is a very unusual one, and besides, I am   going there partly on your account. I am waiting for you. If you   are not beside me in less than two hours, I do not know whether I   could forgive such treason."

°°°°Rastignac took up a pen and wrote:

°°°°"I am waiting till the doctor comes to know if there is any hope   of your father's life. He is lying dangerously ill. I will come   and bring you the news, but I am afraid it may be a sentence of   death. When I come you can decide whether you can go to the   ball.--Yours a thousand times."

°°°°At half-past eight the doctor arrived. He did not take a very hopeful view of the case, but thought that there was no immediate danger. Improvements and relapses might be expected, and the good man's life and reason hung in the balance.

°°°°"It would be better for him to die at once," the doctor said as he took leave.

°°°°Eugene left Goriot to Bianchon's care, and went to carry the sad news to Mme. de Nucingen. Family feeling lingered in her, and this must put an end for the present to her plans of amusement.

°°°°"Tell her to enjoy her evening as if nothing had happened," cried Goriot. He had been lying in a sort of stupor, but he suddenly sat upright as Eugene went out.

°°°°Eugene, half heartbroken, entered Delphine's. Her hair had been dressed; she wore her dancing slippers; she had only to put on her ball-dress; but when the artist is giving the finishing stroke to his creation, the last touches require more time than the whole groundwork of the picture.

°°°°"Why, you are not dressed!" she cried.

°°°°"Madame, your father----"

°°°°"My father again!" she exclaimed, breaking in upon him. "You need not teach me what is due to my father, I have known my father this long while. Not a word, Eugene. I will hear what you have to say when you are dressed. My carriage is waiting, take it, go round to your rooms and dress, Therese has put out everything in readiness for you. Come back as soon as you can; we will talk about my father on the way to Mme. de Beauseant's. We must go early; if we have to wait our turn in a row of carriages, we shall be lucky if we get there by eleven o'clock."

°°°°"Madame----"

°°°°"Quick! not a word!" she cried, darting into her dressing-room for a necklace.

°°°°"Do go, Monsieur Eugene, or you will vex madame," said Therese, hurrying him away; and Eugene was too horror-stricken by this elegant parricide to resist.

°°°°He went to his rooms and dressed, sad, thoughtful, and dispirited. The world of Paris was like an ocean of mud for him just then; and it seemed that whoever set foot in that black mire must needs sink into it up to the chin.

°°°°"Their crimes are paltry," said Eugene to himself. "Vautrin was greater."

°°°°He had seen society in its three great phases--Obedience, Struggle, and Revolt; the Family, the World, and Vautrin; and he hesitated in his choice. Obedience was dull, Revolt impossible, Struggle hazardous. His thoughts wandered back to the home circle. He thought of the quiet uneventful life, the pure happiness of the days spent among those who loved him there. Those loving and beloved beings passed their lives in obedience to the natural laws of the hearth, and in that obedience found a deep and constant serenity, unvexed by torments such as these. Yet, for all his good impulses, he could not bring himself to make profession of the religion of pure souls to Delphine, nor to prescribe the duties of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was capable of stepping over her father's corpse to go to the ball; and within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the courage to leave her to go alone.

°°°°"She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it," he said to himself. Then he turned the doctor's dictum over in his mind; he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of traitorous excuses for Delphine's conduct. She did not know how ill her father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations; and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family life that excuse the apparent offence.

°°°°Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his, and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, "how is my father?"

°°°°"Very dangerously ill," he answered; "if you will grant me a proof of your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way."

°°°°"Very well," she said. "Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice, and don't preach to me. Come."

°°°°They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

°°°°"What is it now?" she asked.

°°°°"I can hear the death-rattle in your father's throat," he said almost angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of Mme. de Restaud's vanity and cruelty, of her father's final act of self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie's golden embroideries. Delphine cried.

°°°°"I shall look frightful," she thought. She dried her tears.

°°°°"I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside," she said aloud.

°°°°"Ah! now you are as I would have you," exclaimed Rastignac.

°°°°The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the Vicomtesse.

°°°°The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

°°°°Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a last audience of one of its sovereigns.

°°°°"I was afraid that you would not come," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°"Madame," he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a reproach, "I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here."

°°°°"Good," she said, and she took his hand. "You are perhaps the only one I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a woman."

°°°°She took Rastignac's arm, and went towards a sofa in the card- room.

°°°°"I want you to go to the Marquis," she said. "Jacques, my footman, will go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one shall bring me word."

°°°°She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

°°°°Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d'Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide, feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave a casket to the student, saying as he did so, "They are all there."

°°°°He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes, and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

°°°°"Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene." He grasped Rastignac's hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him. Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the Vicomtesse's room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey. He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

°°°°"Ah! my friend! . . ." said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid her hand on Rastignac's shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin's uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it in the fire, and watched it burn.

°°°°"They are dancing," she said. "They all came very early; but death will be long in coming. Hush! my friend," and she laid a finger on Rastignac's lips, seeing that he was about to speak. "I shall never see Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o'clock this morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my arrangements; since three o'clock this afternoon I have been busy signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I could send to . . ."

°°°°She broke off.

°°°°"He was sure to be . . ."

°°°°Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are impossible to utter.

°°°°"And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service this evening," she said. "I should like to give you some pledge of friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay," she said, glancing about her, "there is this box that has held my gloves. Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer. Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to you in the Rue d'Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my tears. One last look round first."

°°°°She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and took the student's arm.

°°°°"Let us go!" she said.

°°°°This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene's arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her husband's eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten Rastignac's sad thougths; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

°°°°"Come," she said, "I must not deprive you of a pleasure."

°°°°Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover's feet the homage she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move henceforth.

°°°°"What do you think of Nasie?" she asked him.

°°°°"She has discounted everything, even her own father's death," said Rastignac.

°°°°Towards four o'clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M. de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, "It is a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among us."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an exclamation broke from her.

°°°°"I saw how it was, Clara," said Mme. de Langeais. "You are going from among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you have heard me, until we have understood each other."

°°°°She took her friend's arm, and they went together into the next room. There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

°°°°"I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself. You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words. One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night; do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night, Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail, I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?"

°°°°"Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!" called the Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was waiting there.

°°°°The student knelt to kiss his cousin's hand.

°°°°"Good-bye, Antoinette!" said Mme. de Beauseant. "May you be happy."--She turned to the student. "You are young," she said; "you have some beliefs still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of this world."

°°°°It was nearly five o'clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

°°°°"There is no hope for poor Father Goriot," said Bianchon, as Rastignac came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then he turned to his friend. "Dear fellow, you are content with the modest career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world, nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden away under the covering of gems and gold."

°°°°At two o'clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

°°°°"Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours," he said; "but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result, nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he had not a farthing of his own. What have you?"

°°°°"I have twenty francs left," said Rastignac; "but I will take them to the roulette table, I shall be sure to win."

°°°°"And if you lose?"

°°°°"Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for money."

°°°°"And suppose they refuse?" Bianchon retorted. "The most pressing thing just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides, Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him till I come back."

°°°°The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying. Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot's face, so livid, distorted, and feeble.

°°°°"How are you, papa?" he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came into his eyes.

°°°°"Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?"

°°°°"No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the smell was something horrible.

°°°°"MON DIEU!" said Rastignac. "To think of those daughters of his."

°°°°"One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this," said the house student, pointing to a large white jar. "If he begins to groan, and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon, a pupil of Gall's came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised; whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here," said Bianchon, touching the back of the head, "very strange things have been known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives."

°°°°"Did they enjoy themselves?" It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had recognized Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters," said Bianchon. "Scores of times last night he said to me, 'They are dancing now! She has her dress.' He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take it, calling with that tone in his voice, for 'Delphine! my little Delphine! and Nasie!' Upon my word," said the medical student, "it was enough to make any one burst out crying."

°°°°"Delphine," said the old man, "she is there, isn't she? I knew she was there," and his eyes sought the door.

°°°°"I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready," said Bianchon. "They ought to go on at once."

°°°°Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was shocking to see.

°°°°"Noble natures cannot dwell in this world," he said; "Mme de Beauseant has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and feelings?"

°°°°Pictures of yesterday's ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

°°°°"I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to the base of the spine, and send round for us."

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," exclaimed Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view," said the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

°°°°"So!" said Eugene. "Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old man for his own sake?"

°°°°"You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning," returned Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. "Doctors who have seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my dear fellow, I can see the patient still."

°°°°He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

°°°°"Ah! dear boy, is that you?" said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

°°°°"Do you feel better?" asked the law student, taking his hand.

°°°°"Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man here, who has burned up all my bark fuel."

°°°°"I can hear Christophe coming upstairs," Eugene answered. "He is bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you."

°°°°"Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!) Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left now."

°°°°Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man's ear, "I will pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble."

°°°°"My daughters told you that they were coming, didn't they, Christophe? Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once again before I die. Tell them that, but don't alarm them more than you can help."

°°°°Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

°°°°"They will come before long," the old man went on. "I know them so well. My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die; and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning. 'Good-morning, papa!' they used to say, and I would take them on my knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they loved me with all their hearts. MON DIEU! why could they not always be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah! forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for you have used me to endure pain. MON DIEU! if only I held their hands in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. HE will see them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked. They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this is! what pain this is! . . . ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they MUST have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make millions. (Oh! this is agony!)"

°°°°Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength to endure the pain.

°°°°"If they were here, I should not complain," he said. "So why should I complain now?"

°°°°He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

°°°°"First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse," he said; "but she and her husband were so busy that I couldn't get to speak to her. When I insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and went on like this: 'M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important business, when it is all finished she can go.' The gentleman looked angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said, 'Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.' As for Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, 'Ah yes, but madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It will be time enough then to tell her bad news!' I begged and I prayed, but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was out."

°°°°"To think that neither of his daughters should come!" exclaimed Rastignac. "I will write to them both."

°°°°"Neither of them!" cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. "They are busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not. Not until you are dying do you know your children. . . . Oh! my friend, do not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it. No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it."

°°°°The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

°°°°"Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and THEY would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money? If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God! who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh! this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was 'My kind father' here, 'My dear father' there. There was always a place for me at their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought. How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening parties. In fact, they acknowleged me their father; publicly they owned that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see, and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence, but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law's ear, 'Who may that gentleman be?'--'The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very rich.'--'The devil, e is!' they would say, and look again at me with the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one thing I did learn thoroughly --I knew that I was not wanted here on earth.

°°°°"The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that was how they both turned me out of the house.

°°°°"Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured; Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to- day? Have I not more than expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

°°°°"Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see, my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! MON DIEU! These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie! Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to ruin if a father's rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see. The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them, my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know what it means to trample on a father's corpse? There is a God in heaven who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

°°°°"Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss; one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault. I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so. It is no one's affair but mine; man's justice and God's justice have nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly; I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch, I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through love.

°°°°"My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should be present at their father's deathbed; the law is on my side. It would only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit, as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine, mine!" and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak spoke of menace.

°°°°"There, there, dear father," said Eugene, "lie down again; I will write to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them myself, if they do not come before."

°°°°"If they do not come?" repeated the old man, sobbing. "Why, I shall be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life; they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one. . . . Go to them; just tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud as I do now, 'Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who has been so kind to you is lying ill!'--Not a sound; no one comes! Then am I do die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them. I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all, my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh? . . . What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister. . . . Eugene, you are my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me nothing but my heart."

°°°°"Christophe!" shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man moaned, and by his cries, "go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to you."

°°°°"Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military, anything and everything, but make them come!" He looked at Eugene, and a last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. "Go to the authorities, to the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!"

°°°°"But you have cursed them."

°°°°"Who said that!" said the old man in dull amazement. "You know quite well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I can see them. . . . Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay their hands there, I think I should get better. . . . MON DIEU! who will recover their money for them when I am gone? . . . I will manufacture vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes."

°°°°"Here is something to drink," said Eugene, supporting the dying man on his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot's lips.

°°°°"How you must love your own father and mother!" said the old man, and grasped the student's hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling grasp. "I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that has been my life for the last ten years. . . . I have no daughters, my sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl's mind and contaminates her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid them! . . . Kill them! . . . Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They have murdered me between them! . . . Death or my daughters! . . . Ah! it is too late, I am dying, and they are not here! . . . Dying without them! . . . Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----"

°°°°"Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest; don't worry yourself, don't think."

°°°°"I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!"

°°°°"You SHALL see them."

°°°°"Really?" cried the old man, still wandering. "Oh! shall I see them; I shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my fingers . . . their hair . . ."

°°°°His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his daughters' hair.

°°°°"My blessing on them . . ." he said, making an effort, "my blessing . . ."

°°°°His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

°°°°"I met Christophe," he said; "he is gone for your cab."

°°°°Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath had grown.

°°°°"He will not get over this, I am sure," said Bianchon. He felt the old man's pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

°°°°"The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be better for him to die."

°°°°"Ah! my word, it would!"

°°°°"What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death."

°°°°"Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard. . . . There is a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

°°°°"We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come from?"

°°°°Rastignac took out his watch.

°°°°"There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall have to pay the cabman when I get home again."

°°°°Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder. The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de Restaud's house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could see no one.

°°°°"But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying," Rastignac told the man.

°°°°"The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----"

°°°°"If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at once."

°°°°The man went out.

°°°°Eugene waited for a long while. "Perhaps her father is dying at this moment," he thought.

°°°°Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte," said Rastignac, "M. Goriot, your father-in- law, is lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter. He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----"

°°°°"I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are aware," the Count answered coolly. "His character has been compromised in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much more important matters to think about than the things that fools and chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a few seconds; it lies entirely with her----"

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct; you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her, and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I ask."

°°°°"You can tell her yourself," the Count answered, impressed by the thrill of indignation in Eugene's voice.

°°°°The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her. Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to speak.

°°°°"I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all he would forgive me. . . . I did not think there was such torture in the world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not give way as long as I live," she said, turning to her husband. "I am a mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of appearances!" she cried aloud in her despair.

°°°°Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess' life. M. de Restaud's manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in bed.

°°°°"Poor dear Eugene, I am ill," she said. "I caught cold after the ball, and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come."

°°°°"If you were at death's door," Eugene broke in, "you must be carried somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer."

°°°°"Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just as you wish. As for HIM, he would die of grief I know if I went out to see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as I have seen the doctor.--Ah!" she cried out, "you are not wearing your watch, how is that?"

°°°°Eugene reddened.

°°°°"Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it. . . . Oh! it would be very wrong of you!"

°°°°The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, "Do you want to know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch has been pawned, for I had nothing either."

°°°°Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

°°°°"I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why, I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before you.--Therese," she called to the waiting-woman, "ask M. de Nucingen to come upstairs at once and speak to me."

°°°°Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve; he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine's purse for money, so as to dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse. He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient's back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of science, and it was tried in vain.

°°°°"Can you feel them?" asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of Rastignac, and answered, "They are coming, are they not?"

°°°°"There is hope yet," said the surgeon; "he can speak."

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene, "Delphine is coming."

°°°°"Oh! that is nothing!" said Bianchon; "he has been talking about his daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for water, they say----"

°°°°"We may as well give up," said the physician, addressing the surgeon. "Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless."

°°°°Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his loathsome bed.

°°°°"But the sheets ought to be changed," added the physician. "Even if there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come back again, Bianchon," he said, turning to the medical student. "If he complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm."

°°°°He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

°°°°"Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy," said Bianchon, as soon as they were alone; "we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help us to make the bed."

°°°°Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a customer.

°°°°"My dear Monsieur Eugene," she said, when he had spoken, "you know quite as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes, you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you; altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make."

°°°°Eugene hurried up to Goriot's room.

°°°°"Bianchon," he cried, "the money or the watch?"

°°°°"There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money."

°°°°Rastignac hurried downstairs.

°°°°"Here, madame" he said in disgust, "let us square accounts. M. Goriot will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----"

°°°°"Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman," she said, counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

°°°°"Let us get this over," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen."

°°°°"You won't forget Sylvie," said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene's ear; "she has been sitting up these two nights."

°°°°As soon as Eugene's back was turned, the old woman hurried after her handmaid.

°°°°"Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number 7. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse," she said in Sylvie's ear.

°°°°Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear the elderly economist.

°°°°"Quick," said Bianchon, "let us change his shirt. Hold him upright."

°°°°Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

°°°°"Ah! yes!" cried Bianchon. "It is the little locket and the chain made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on the chimney-piece."

°°°°Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded golden hair--Mme. Goriot's hair, no doubt. He read the name on the little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other. It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes, the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students, that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a shrill cry of delight.

°°°°"Nasie! Fifine!"

°°°°"There is life in him yet," said Bianchon.

°°°°"What does he go on living for?" said Sylvie.

°°°°"To suffer," answered Rastignac.

°°°°Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the students' heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair, they heard a faint whisper:

°°°°"Ah! my angels!"

°°°°Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which fled forth with them as they left his lips.

°°°°"Poor dear!" cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most ghastly and involuntary of lies.

°°°°The father's last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

°°°°"He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last, that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the throat. The brain must be completely suffused."

°°°°As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman hastened up, panting for breath.

°°°°"She has come too late," said Rastignac.

°°°°But it was not Delphine; it was Therese, her waiting-woman, who stood in the doorway.

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene," she said, "monsieur and madame have had a terrible scene about some money that Madame (poor thing!) wanted for her father. She fainted, and the doctor came, and she had to be bled, calling out all the while, 'My father is dying; I want to see papa!' It was heartbreaking to hear her----"

°°°°"That will do, Therese. If she came now, it would be trouble thrown away. M. Goriot cannot recognize any one now."

°°°°"Poor, dear gentleman, is he as bad at that?" said Therese.

°°°°"You don't want me now, I must go and look after my dinner; it is half-past four," remarked Sylvie. The next instant she all but collided with Mme. de Restaud on the landing outside.

°°°°There was something awful and appalling in the sudden apparition of the Countess. She saw the bed of death by the dim light of the single candle, and her tears flowed at the sight of her father's passive features, from which the life had almost ebbed. Bianchon with thoughtful tact left the room.

°°°°"I could not escape soon enough," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°The student bowed sadly in reply. Mme. de Restaud took her father's hand and kissed it.

°°°°"Forgive me, father! You used to say that my voice would call you back from the grave; ah! come back for one moment to bless your penitent daughter. Do you hear me? Oh! this is fearful! No one on earth will ever bless me henceforth; every one hates me; no one loves me but you in all the world. My own children will hate me. Take me with you, father; I will love you, I will take care of you. He does not hear me . . . I am mad . . ."

°°°°She fell on her knees, and gazed wildly at the human wreck before her.

°°°°"My cup of misery is full," she said, turning her eyes upon Eugene. "M. de Trailles has fled, leaving enormous debts behind him, and I have found out that he was deceiving me. My husband will never forgive me, and I have left my fortune in his hands. I have lost all my illusions. Alas! I have forsaken the one heart that loved me (she pointed to her father as she spoke), and for whom? I have held his kindness cheap, and slighted his affection; many and many a time I have given him pain, ungrateful wretch that I am!"

°°°°"He knew it," said Rastignac.

°°°°Just then Goriot's eyelids unclosed; it was only a muscular contraction, but the Countess' sudden start of reviving hope was no less dreadful than the dying eyes.

°°°°"Is it possible that he can hear me?" cried the Countess. "No," she answered herself, and sat down beside the bed. As Mme. de Restaud seemed to wish to sit by her father, Eugene went down to take a little food. The boarders were already assembled.

°°°°"Well," remarked the painter, as he joined them, "it seems that there is to be a death-orama upstairs."

°°°°"Charles, I think you might find something less painful to joke about," said Eugene.

°°°°"So we may not laugh here?" returned the painter. "What harm does it do? Bianchon said that the old man was quite insensible."

°°°°"Well, then," said the employe from the Museum, "he will die as he has lived."

°°°°"My father is dead!" shrieked the Countess.

°°°°The terrible cry brought Sylvie, Rastignac, and Bianchon; Mme. de Restaud had fainted away. When she recovered they carried her downstairs, and put her into the cab that stood waiting at the door. Eugene sent Therese with her, and bade the maid take the Countess to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Bianchon came down to them.

°°°°"Yes, he is dead," he said.

°°°°"Come, sit down to dinner, gentlemen," said Mme. Vauquer, "or the soup will be cold."

°°°°The two students sat down together.

°°°°"What is the next thing to be done?" Eugene asked of Bianchon.

°°°°"I have closed his eyes and composed his limbs," said Bianchon. "When the certificate has been officially registered at the Mayor's office, we will sew him in his winding sheet and bury him somewhere. What do you think we ought to do?"

°°°°"He will not smell at his bread like this any more," said the painter, mimicking the old man's little trick.

°°°°"Oh, hang it all!" cried the tutor, "let Father Goriot drop, and let us have something else for a change. He is a standing dish, and we have had him with every sauce this hour or more. It is one of the privileges of the good city of Paris that anybody may be born, or live, or die there without attracting any attention whatsoever. Let us profit by the advantages of civilization. There are fifty or sixty deaths every day; if you have a mind to do it, you can sit down at any time and wail over whole hecatombs of dead in Paris. Father Goriot has gone off the hooks, has he? So much the better for him. If you venerate his memory, keep it to yourselves, and let the rest of us feed in peace."

°°°°"Oh, to be sure," said the widow, "it is all the better for him that he is dead. It looks as though he had had trouble enough, poor soul, while he was alive."

°°°°And this was all the funeral oration delivered over him who had been for Eugene the type and embodiment of Fatherhood.

°°°°The fifteen lodgers began to talk as usual. When Bianchon and Eugene had satisfied their hunger, the rattle of spoons and forks, the boisterous conversation, the expressions on the faces that bespoke various degrees of want of feeling, gluttony, or indifference, everything about them made them shiver with loathing. They went out to find a priest to watch that night with the dead. It was necessary to measure their last pious cares by the scanty sum of money that remained. Before nine o'clock that evening the body was laid out on the bare sacking of the bedstead in the desolate room; a lighted candle stood on either side, and the priest watched at the foot. Rastignac made inquiries of this latter as to the expenses of the funeral, and wrote to the Baron de Nucingen and the Comte de Restaud, entreating both gentlemen to authorize their man of business to defray the charges of laying their father-in-law in the grave. He sent Christophe with the letters; then he went to bed, tired out, and slept.

°°°°Next day Bianchon and Rastignac were obliged to take the certificate to the registrar themselves, and by twelve o'clock the formalities were completed. Two hours went by, no word came from the Count nor from the Baron; nobody appeared to act for them, and Rastignac had already been obliged to pay the priest. Sylvie asked ten francs for sewing the old man in his winding- sheet and making him ready for the grave, and Eugene and Bianchon calculated that they had scarcely sufficient to pay for the funeral, if nothing was forthcoming from the dead man's family. So it was the medical student who laid him in a pauper's coffin, despatched from Bianchon's hospital, whence he obtained it at a cheaper rate.

°°°°"Let us play those wretches a trick," said he. "Go to the cemetery, buy a grave for five years at Pere-Lachaise, and arrange with the Church and the undertaker to have a third-class funeral. If the daughters and their husbands decline to repay you, you can carve this on the headstone--'HERE LIES M. GORIOT, FATHER OF THE COMTESSE DE RESTAUD AND THE BARONNE DE NUCINGEN, INTERRED AT THE EXPENSE OF TWO STUDENTS.' "

°°°°Eugene took part of his friend's advice, but only after he had gone in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

°°°°"Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their father, and are in deep grief over their loss."

°°°°Eugene's Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was impossible to reach Delphine.

°°°°"Sell some of your ornaments," he wrote hastily in the porter's room, "so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place."

°°°°He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the lodging-house about three o'clock. In spite of himself, the tears came into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth, was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs. A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

°°°°Bianchon's duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he had made for the burial service. The house student's note told Rastignac that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading Bianchon's scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot's two daughters in Mme. Vauquer's hands.

°°°°"How dared you take it?" he asked.

°°°°"Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?" retorted Sylvie. "It is gold."

°°°°"Of course it shall!" Eugene answered indignantly; "he shall at any rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with him."

°°°°When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man's breast the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were innocent little maidens, before they began "to think for themselves," as he had moaned out in his agony.

°°°°Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker's men were the only followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. When the coffin had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked round in vain for Goriot's two daughters or their husbands. Christophe was his only fellow- mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe's hand. He could not utter a word just then.

°°°°"Yes, Monsieur Eugene," said Christophe, "he was a good and worthy man, who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any harm, and gave nobody any trouble."

°°°°The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

°°°°The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the Libera nos and the De profundis. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with Eugene and Christophe.

°°°°"There is no one else to follow us," remarked the priest, "so we may as well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five."

°°°°But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen, arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o'clock Goriot's coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters' servants standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that fell on Father Goriot's grave, Eugene Rastignac's youth ended. He folded his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

°°°°He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste of its honey, and said magniloquently:

°°°°"Henceforth there is war between us."

°°°°And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine with Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°ADDENDUM

°°°°The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

°°°°Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d'   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Secrets of a Princess   Beatrix

°°°°Beauseant, Marquis   An Episode under the Terror

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomte de   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomtesse de   The Deserted Woman   Albert Savarus

°°°°Bianchon, Horace   The Atheist's Mass   Cesar Birotteau   The Commission in Lunacy   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   A Bachelor's Establishment   The Secrets of a Princess   The Government Clerks   Pierrette   A Study of Woman   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Honorine   The Seamy Side of History   The Magic Skin   A Second Home   A Prince of Bohemia   Letters of Two Brides   The Muse of the Department   The Imaginary Mistress   The Middle Classes   Cousin Betty   The Country Parson In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:   Another Study of Woman   La Grande Breteche

°°°°Bibi-Lupin (chief of secret police, called himself Gondureau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de   Sarrasine

°°°°Collin, Jacques   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Derville   Gobseck   A Start in Life   The Gondreville Mystery   Colonel Chabert   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Franchessini, Colonel   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Galathionne, Princess   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van   Gobseck   Cesar Birotteau   The Government Clerks   The Unconscious Humoriists

°°°°Jacques (M. de Beauseant's butler)   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Langeais, Duchesse Antoinette de   The Thirteen

°°°°Marsay, Henri de   The Thirteen   The Unconscious Humorists   Another Study of Woman   The Lily of the Valley   Jealousies of a Country Town   Ursule Mirouet   A Marriage Settlement   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Letters of Two Brides   The Ball at Sceaux   Modest Mignon   The Secrets of a Princess   The Gondreville Mystery   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Maurice (de Restaud's valet)   Gobseck

°°°°Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de   The Thirteen   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Another Study of Woman   Pierrette   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Nucingen, Baron Frederic de   The Firm of Nucingen   Pierrette   Cesar Birotteau   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Another Study of Woman   The Secrets of a Princess   A Man of Business   Cousin Betty   The Muse of the Department   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de   The Thirteen   Eugenie Grandet   Cesar Birotteau   Melmoth Reconciled   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   The Commission in Lunacy   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Modeste Mignon   The Firm of Nucingen   Another Study of Woman   A Daughter of Eve   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Poiret   The Government Clerks   A Start in Life   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Poiret, Madame (nee Christine-Michelle Michonneau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de (Eugene's parents)   Lost Illusions

°°°°Rastignac, Eugene de   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Ball at Sceaux   The Interdiction   A Study of Woman   Another Study of Woman   The Magic Skin   The Secrets of a Princess   A Daughter of Eve   The Gondreville Mystery   The Firm of Nucingen   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Rastignac, Laure-Rose and Agathe de   Lost Illusions   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Rastignac, Monseigneur Gabriel de   The Country Parson   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Restaud, Comte de   Gobseck

°°°°Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de   Gobseck

°°°°Selerier   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Taillefer, Jean-Frederic   The Firm of Nucingen   The Magic Skin   The Red Inn

°°°°Taillefer, Victorine   The Red Inn

°°°°Therese   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Tissot, Pierre-Francois   A Prince of Bohemia

°°°°Trailles, Comte Maxime de   Cesar Birotteau   Gobseck   Ursule Mirouet   A Man of Business   The Member for Arcis   The Secrets of a Princess   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   Beatrix   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°End

°°°°Eugenie Grandet

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Maria.

°°°°May your name, that of one whose portrait is the noblest ornament

°°°°of this work, lie on its opening pages like a branch of sacred

°°°°box, taken from an unknown tree, but sanctified by religion, and

°°°°kept ever fresh and green by pious hands to bless the house.De Balzac.

°°°°EUGENIE GRANDET

°°°°I

°°°°There are houses in certain provincial towns whose aspect inspiresmelancholy, akin to that called forth by sombre cloisters, drearymoorlands, or the desolation of ruins. Within these houses there is,perhaps, the silence of the cloister, the barrenness of moors, theskeleton of ruins; life and movement are so stagnant there that astranger might think them uninhabited, were it not that he encounterssuddenly the pale, cold glance of a motionless person, whose half-monastic face peers beyond the window-casing at the sound of anunaccustomed step.

°°°°Such elements of sadness formed the physiognomy, as it were, of adwelling-house in Saumur which stands at the end of the steep streetleading to the chateau in the upper part of the town. This street--nowlittle frequented, hot in summer, cold in winter, dark in certainsections--is remarkable for the resonance of its little pebblypavement, always clean and dry, for the narrowness of its tortuousroad-way, for the peaceful stillness of its houses, which belong tothe Old town and are over-topped by the ramparts. Houses threecenturies old are still solid, though built of wood, and their diversaspects add to the originality which commends this portion of Saumurto the attention of artists and antiquaries.

°°°°It is difficult to pass these houses without admiring the enormousoaken beams, their ends carved into fantastic figures, which crownwith a black bas-relief the lower floor of most of them. In one placethese transverse timbers are covered with slate and mark a bluish linealong the frail wall of a dwelling covered by a roof /en colombage/which bends beneath the weight of years, and whose rotting shinglesare twisted by the alternate action of sun and rain. In another placeblackened, worn-out window-sills, with delicate sculptures nowscarcely discernible, seem too weak to bear the brown clay pots fromwhich springs the heart's-ease or the rose-bush of some poor working-woman. Farther on are doors studded with enormous nails, where thegenius of our forefathers has traced domestic hieroglyphics, of whichthe meaning is now lost forever. Here a Protestant attested hisbelief; there a Leaguer cursed Henry IV.; elsewhere some bourgeois hascarved the insignia of his /noblesse de cloches/, symbols of his long-forgotten magisterial glory. The whole history of France is there.Next to a tottering house with roughly plastered walls, where anartisan enshrines his tools, rises the mansion of a country gentleman,on the stone arch of which above the door vestiges of armorialbearings may still be seen, battered by the many revolutions that haveshaken France since 1789. In this hilly street the ground-floors ofthe merchants are neither shops nor warehouses; lovers of the MiddleAges will here find the /ouvrouere/ of our forefathers in all itsnaive simplicity. These low rooms, which have no shop-frontage, noshow-windows, in fact no glass at all, are deep and dark and withoutinterior or exterior decoration. Their doors open in two parts, eachroughly iron-bound; the upper half is fastened back within the room,the lower half, fitted with a spring-bell, swings continually to andfro. Air and light reach the damp den within, either through the upperhalf of the door, or through an open space between the ceiling and alow front wall, breast-high, which is closed by solid shutters thatare taken down every morning, put up every evening, and held in placeby heavy iron bars.

°°°°This wall serves as a counter for the merchandise. No delusive displayis there; only samples of the business, whatever it may chance to be,--such, for instance, as three or four tubs full of codfish and salt,a few bundles of sail-cloth, cordage, copper wire hanging from thejoists above, iron hoops for casks ranged along the wall, or a fewpieces of cloth upon the shelves. Enter. A neat girl, glowing withyouth, wearing a white kerchief, her arms red and bare, drops herknitting and calls her father or her mother, one of whom comes forwardand sells you what you want, phlegmatically, civilly, or arrogantly,according to his or her individual character, whether it be a matterof two sous' or twenty thousand francs' worth of merchandise. You maysee a cooper, for instance, sitting in his doorway and twirling histhumbs as he talks with a neighbor. To all appearance he owns nothingmore than a few miserable boat-ribs and two or three bundles of laths;but below in the port his teeming wood-yard supplies all the cooperagetrade of Anjou. He knows to a plank how many casks are needed if thevintage is good. A hot season makes him rich, a rainy season ruinshim; in a single morning puncheons worth eleven francs have been knownto drop to six. In this country, as in Touraine, atmosphericvicissitudes control commercial life. Wine-growers, proprietors, wood-merchants, coopers, inn-keepers, mariners, all keep watch of the sun.They tremble when they go to bed lest they should hear in the morningof a frost in the night; they dread rain, wind, drought, and wantwater, heat, and clouds to suit their fancy. A perpetual duel goes onbetween the heavens and their terrestrial interests. The barometersmooths, saddens, or makes merry their countenances, turn and turnabout. From end to end of this street, formerly the Grand'Rue deSaumur, the words: "Here's golden weather," are passed from door todoor; or each man calls to his neighbor: "It rains louis," knowingwell what a sunbeam or the opportune rainfall is bringing him.On Saturdays after midday, in the fine season, not one sou's worth ofmerchandise can be bought from these worthy traders. Each has hisvineyard, his enclosure of fields, and all spend two days in thecountry. This being foreseen, and purchases, sales, and profitsprovided for, the merchants have ten or twelve hours to spend inparties of pleasure, in making observations, in criticisms, and incontinual spying. A housewife cannot buy a partridge without theneighbors asking the husband if it were cooked to a turn. A young girlnever puts her head near a window that she is not seen by idlinggroups in the street. Consciences are held in the light; and thehouses, dark, silent, impenetrable as they seem, hide no mysteries.Life is almost wholly in the open air; every household sits at its ownthreshold, breakfasts, dines, and quarrels there. No one can passalong the street without being examined; in fact formerly, when astranger entered a provincial town he was bantered and made game offrom door to door. From this came many good stories, and the nickname/copieux/, which was applied to the inhabitants of Angers, whoexcelled in such urban sarcasms.

°°°°The ancient mansions of the old town of Saumur are at the top of thishilly street, and were formerly occupied by the nobility of theneighborhood. The melancholy dwelling where the events of thefollowing history took place is one of these mansions,--venerablerelics of a century in which men and things bore the characteristicsof simplicity which French manners and customs are losing day by day.Follow the windings of the picturesque thoroughfare, whoseirregularities awaken recollections that plunge the mind mechanicallyinto reverie, and you will see a somewhat dark recess, in the centreof which is hidden the door of the house of Monsieur Grandet. It isimpossible to understand the force of this provincial expression--thehouse of Monsieur Grandet--without giving the biography of MonsieurGrandet himself.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet enjoyed a reputation in Saumur whose causes andeffects can never be fully understood by those who have not, at onetime or another, lived in the provinces. In 1789 Monsieur Grandet--still called by certain persons le Pere Grandet, though the number ofsuch old persons has perceptibly diminished--was a master-cooper, ableto read, write, and cipher. At the period when the French Republicoffered for sale the church property in the arrondissement of Saumur,the cooper, then forty years of age, had just married the daughter ofa rich wood-merchant. Supplied with the ready money of his own fortuneand his wife's /dot/, in all about two thousand louis-d'or, Grandetwent to the newly established "district," where, with the help of twohundred double louis given by his father-in-law to the surlyrepublican who presided over the sales of the national domain, heobtained for a song, legally if not legitimately, one of the finestvineyards in the arrondissement, an old abbey, and several farms. Theinhabitants of Saumur were so little revolutionary that they thoughtPere Grandet a bold man, a republican, and a patriot with a mind opento all the new ideas; though in point of fact it was open only tovineyards. He was appointed a member of the administration of Saumur,and his pacific influence made itself felt politically andcommercially. Politically, he protected the ci-devant nobles, andprevented, to the extent of his power, the sale of the lands andproperty of the /emigres/; commercially, he furnished the Republicanarmies with two or three thousand puncheons of white wine, and tookhis pay in splendid fields belonging to a community of women whoselands had been reserved for the last lot.

°°°°Under the Consulate Grandet became mayor, governed wisely, andharvested still better pickings. Under the Empire he was calledMonsieur Grandet. Napoleon, however, did not like republicans, andsuperseded Monsieur Grandet (who was supposed to have worn thePhrygian cap) by a man of his own surroundings, a future baron of theEmpire. Monsieur Grandet quitted office without regret. He hadconstructed in the interests of the town certain fine roads which ledto his own property; his house and lands, very advantageouslyassessed, paid moderate taxes; and since the registration of hisvarious estates, the vineyards, thanks to his constant care, hadbecome the "head of the country,"--a local term used to denote thosethat produced the finest quality of wine. He might have asked for thecross of the Legion of honor.

°°°°This event occurred in 1806. Monsieur Grandet was then fifty-sevenyears of age, his wife thirty-six, and an only daughter, the fruit oftheir legitimate love, was ten years old. Monsieur Grandet, whomProvidence no doubt desired to compensate for the loss of hismunicipal honors, inherited three fortunes in the course of this year,--that of Madame de la Gaudiniere, born de la Bertelliere, the motherof Madame Grandet; that of old Monsieur de la Bertelliere, hergrandfather; and, lastly, that of Madame Gentillet, her grandmother onthe mother's side: three inheritances, whose amount was not known toany one. The avarice of the deceased persons was so keen that for along time they had hoarded their money for the pleasure of secretlylooking at it. Old Monsieur de la Bertelliere called an investment anextravagance, and thought he got better interest from the sight of hisgold than from the profits of usury. The inhabitants of Saumurconsequently estimated his savings according to "the revenues of thesun's wealth," as they said.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet thus obtained that modern title of nobility which ourmania for equality can never rub out. He became the most imposingpersonage in the arrondissement. He worked a hundred acres ofvineyard, which in fruitful years yielded seven or eight hundredhogsheads of wine. He owned thirteen farms, an old abbey, whosewindows and arches he had walled up for the sake of economy,--ameasure which preserved them,--also a hundred and twenty-seven acresof meadow-land, where three thousand poplars, planted in 1793, grewand flourished; and finally, the house in which he lived. Such was hisvisible estate; as to his other property, only two persons could giveeven a vague guess at its value: one was Monsieur Cruchot, a notaryemployed in the usurious investments of Monsieur Grandet; the otherwas Monsieur des Grassins, the richest banker in Saumur, in whoseprofits Grandet had a certain covenanted and secret share.Although old Cruchot and Monsieur des Grassins were both gifted withthe deep discretion which wealth and trust beget in the provinces,they publicly testified so much respect to Monsieur Grandet thatobservers estimated the amount of his property by the obsequiousattention which they bestowed upon him. In all Saumur there was no onenot persuaded that Monsieur Grandet had a private treasure, somehiding-place full of louis, where he nightly took ineffable delight ingazing upon great masses of gold. Avaricious people gathered proof ofthis when they looked at the eyes of the good man, to which the yellowmetal seemed to have conveyed its tints. The glance of a manaccustomed to draw enormous interest from his capital acquires, likethat of the libertine, the gambler, or the sycophant, certainindefinable habits,--furtive, eager, mysterious movements, which neverescape the notice of his co-religionists. This secret language is in acertain way the freemasonry of the passions. Monsieur Grandet inspiredthe respectful esteem due to one who owed no man anything, who,skilful cooper and experienced wine-grower that he was, guessed withthe precision of an astronomer whether he ought to manufacture athousand puncheons for his vintage, or only five hundred, who neverfailed in any speculation, and always had casks for sale when caskswere worth more than the commodity that filled them, who could storehis whole vintage in his cellars and bide his time to put thepuncheons on the market at two hundred francs, when the littleproprietors had been forced to sell theirs for five louis. His famousvintage of 1811, judiciously stored and slowly disposed of, broughthim in more than two hundred and forty thousand francs.

°°°°Financially speaking, Monsieur Grandet was something between a tigerand a boa-constrictor. He could crouch and lie low, watch his prey along while, spring upon it, open his jaws, swallow a mass of louis,and then rest tranquilly like a snake in process of digestion,impassible, methodical, and cold. No one saw him pass without afeeling of admiration mingled with respect and fear; had not every manin Saumur felt the rending of those polished steel claws? For thisone, Maitre Cruchot had procured the money required for the purchaseof a domain, but at eleven per cent. For that one, Monsieur desGrassins discounted bills of exchange, but at a frightful deduction ofinterest. Few days ever passed that Monsieur Grandet's name was notmentioned either in the markets or in social conversations at theevening gatherings. To some the fortune of the old wine-grower was anobject of patriotic pride. More than one merchant, more than oneinnkeeper, said to strangers with a certain complacency: "Monsieur, wehave two or three millionaire establishments; but as for MonsieurGrandet, he does not himself know how much he is worth."

°°°°In 1816 the best reckoners in Saumur estimated the landed property ofthe worthy man at nearly four millions; but as, on an average, he hadmade yearly, from 1793 to 1817, a hundred thousand francs out of thatproperty, it was fair to presume that he possessed in actual money asum nearly equal to the value of his estate. So that when, after agame of boston or an evening discussion on the matter of vines, thetalk fell upon Monsieur Grandet, knowing people said: "Le PereGrandet? le Pere Grandet must have at least five or six millions.""You are cleverer than I am; I have never been able to find out theamount," answered Monsieur Cruchot or Monsieur des Grassins, wheneither chanced to overhear the remark.

°°°°If some Parisian mentioned Rothschild or Monsieur Lafitte, the peopleof Saumur asked if he were as rich as Monsieur Grandet. When theParisian, with a smile, tossed them a disdainful affirmative, theylooked at each other and shook their heads with an incredulous air. Solarge a fortune covered with a golden mantle all the actions of thisman. If in early days some peculiarities of his life gave occasion forlaughter or ridicule, laughter and ridicule had long since died away.His least important actions had the authority of results repeatedlyshown. His speech, his clothing, his gestures, the blinking of hiseyes, were law to the country-side, where every one, after studyinghim as a naturalist studies the result of instinct in the loweranimals, had come to understand the deep mute wisdom of his slightestactions.

°°°°"It will be a hard winter," said one; "Pere Grandet has put on his furgloves."

°°°°"Pere Grandet is buying quantities of staves; there will be plenty ofwine this year."

°°°°Monsieur Grandet never bought either bread or meat. His farmerssupplied him weekly with a sufficiency of capons, chickens, eggs,butter, and his tithe of wheat. He owned a mill; and the tenant wasbound, over and above his rent, to take a certain quantity of grainand return him the flour and bran. La Grande Nanon, his only servant,though she was no longer young, baked the bread of the householdherself every Saturday. Monsieur Grandet arranged with kitchen-gardeners who were his tenants to supply him with vegetables. As tofruits, he gathered such quantities that he sold the greater part inthe market. His fire-wood was cut from his own hedgerows or taken fromthe half-rotten old sheds which he built at the corners of his fields,and whose planks the farmers carted into town for him, all cut up, andobligingly stacked in his wood-house, receiving in return his thanks.His only known expenditures were for the consecrated bread, theclothing of his wife and daughter, the hire of their chairs in church,the wages of la Grand Nanon, the tinning of the saucepans, lights,taxes, repairs on his buildings, and the costs of his variousindustries. He had six hundred acres of woodland, lately purchased,which he induced a neighbor's keeper to watch, under the promise of anindemnity. After the acquisition of this property he ate game for thefirst time.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet's manners were very simple. He spoke little. Heusually expressed his meaning by short sententious phrases uttered ina soft voice. After the Revolution, the epoch at which he first cameinto notice, the good man stuttered in a wearisome way as soon as hewas required to speak at length or to maintain an argument. Thisstammering, the incoherence of his language, the flux of words inwhich he drowned his thought, his apparent lack of logic, attributedto defects of education, were in reality assumed, and will besufficiently explained by certain events in the following history.Four sentences, precise as algebraic formulas, sufficed him usually tograsp and solve all difficulties of life and commerce: "I don't know;I cannot; I will not; I will see about it." He never said yes, or no,and never committed himself to writing. If people talked to him helistened coldly, holding his chin in his right hand and resting hisright elbow in the back of his left hand, forming in his own mindopinions on all matters, from which he never receded. He reflectedlong before making any business agreement. When his opponent, aftercareful conversation, avowed the secret of his own purposes, confidentthat he had secured his listener's assent, Grandet answered: "I candecide nothing without consulting my wife." His wife, whom he hadreduced to a state of helpless slavery, was a useful screen to him inbusiness. He went nowhere among friends; he neither gave nor accepteddinners; he made no stir or noise, seeming to economize in everything,even movement. He never disturbed or disarranged the things of otherpeople, out of respect for the rights of property. Nevertheless, inspite of his soft voice, in spite of his circumspect bearing, thelanguage and habits of a coarse nature came to the surface, especiallyin his own home, where he controlled himself less than elsewhere.Physically, Grandet was a man five feet high, thick-set, square-built,with calves twelve inches in circumference, knotted knee-joints, andbroad shoulders; his face was round, tanned, and pitted by the small-pox; his chin was straight, his lips had no curves, his teeth werewhite; his eyes had that calm, devouring expression which peopleattribute to the basilisk; his forehead, full of transverse wrinkles,was not without certain significant protuberances; his yellow-grayishhair was said to be silver and gold by certain young people who didnot realize the impropriety of making a jest about Monsieur Grandet.His nose, thick at the end, bore a veined wen, which the common peoplesaid, not without reason, was full of malice. The whole countenanceshowed a dangerous cunning, an integrity without warmth, the egotismof a man long used to concentrate every feeling upon the enjoyments ofavarice and upon the only human being who was anything whatever tohim,--his daughter and sole heiress, Eugenie. Attitude, manners,bearing, everything about him, in short, testified to that belief inhimself which the habit of succeeding in all enterprises never failsto give to a man.

°°°°Thus, though his manners were unctuous and soft outwardly, MonsieurGrandet's nature was of iron. His dress never varied; and those whosaw him to-day saw him such as he had been since 1791. His stout shoeswere tied with leathern thongs; he wore, in all weathers, thickwoollen stockings, short breeches of coarse maroon cloth with silverbuckles, a velvet waistcoat, in alternate stripes of yellow and puce,buttoned squarely, a large maroon coat with wide flaps, a blackcravat, and a quaker's hat. His gloves, thick as those of a gendarme,lasted him twenty months; to preserve them, he always laid themmethodically on the brim of his hat in one particular spot. Saumurknew nothing further about this personage.

°°°°Only six individuals had a right of entrance to Monsieur Grandet'shouse. The most important of the first three was a nephew of MonsieurCruchot. Since his appointment as president of the Civil courts ofSaumur this young man had added the name of Bonfons to that ofCruchot. He now signed himself C. de Bonfons. Any litigant so ill-advised as to call him Monsieur Cruchot would soon be made to feel hisfolly in court. The magistrate protected those who called him Monsieurle president, but he favored with gracious smiles those who addressedhim as Monsieur de Bonfons. Monsieur le president was thirty-threeyears old, and possessed the estate of Bonfons (Boni Fontis), worthseven thousand francs a year; he expected to inherit the property ofhis uncle the notary and that of another uncle, the Abbe Cruchot, adignitary of the chapter of Saint-Martin de Tours, both of whom werethought to be very rich. These three Cruchots, backed by a goodlynumber of cousins, and allied to twenty families in the town, formed aparty, like the Medici in Florence; like the Medici, the Cruchots hadtheir Pazzi.

°°°°Madame des Grassins, mother of a son twenty-three years of age, cameassiduously to play cards with Madame Grandet, hoping to marry herdear Adolphe to Mademoiselle Eugenie. Monsieur des Grassins, thebanker, vigorously promoted the schemes of his wife by means of secretservices constantly rendered to the old miser, and always arrived intime upon the field of battle. The three des Grassins likewise hadtheir adherents, their cousins, their faithful allies. On the Cruchotside the abbe, the Talleyrand of the family, well backed-up by hisbrother the notary, sharply contested every inch of ground with hisfemale adversary, and tried to obtain the rich heiress for his nephewthe president.

°°°°This secret warfare between the Cruchots and des Grassins, the prizethereof being the hand in marriage of Eugenie Grandet, kept thevarious social circles of Saumur in violent agitation. WouldMademoiselle Grandet marry Monsieur le president or Monsieur Adolphedes Grassins? To this problem some replied that Monsieur Grandet wouldnever give his daughter to the one or to the other. The old cooper,eaten up with ambition, was looking, they said, for a peer of France,to whom an income of three hundred thousand francs would make all thepast, present, and future casks of the Grandets acceptable. Othersreplied that Monsieur and Madame des Grassins were nobles, andexceedingly rich; that Adolphe was a personable young fellow; and thatunless the old man had a nephew of the pope at his beck and call, sucha suitable alliance ought to satisfy a man who came from nothing,--aman whom Saumur remembered with an adze in his hand, and who had,moreover, worn the /bonnet rouge/. Certain wise heads called attentionto the fact that Monsieur Cruchot de Bonfons had the right of entry tothe house at all times, whereas his rival was received only onSundays. Others, however, maintained that Madame des Grassins was moreintimate with the women of the house of Grandet than the Cruchotswere, and could put into their minds certain ideas which would lead,sooner or later, to success. To this the former retorted that the AbbeCruchot was the most insinuating man in the world: pit a woman againsta monk, and the struggle was even. "It is diamond cut diamond," said aSaumur wit.

°°°°The oldest inhabitants, wiser than their fellows, declared that theGrandets knew better than to let the property go out of the family,and that Mademoiselle Eugenie Grandet of Saumur would be married tothe son of Monsieur Grandet of Paris, a wealthy wholesale wine-merchant. To this the Cruchotines and the Grassinists replied: "In thefirst place, the two brothers have seen each other only twice inthirty years; and next, Monsieur Grandet of Paris has ambitiousdesigns for his son. He is mayor of an arrondissement, a deputy,colonel of the National Guard, judge in the commercial courts; hedisowns the Grandets of Saumur, and means to ally himself with someducal family,--ducal under favor of Napoleon." In short, was thereanything not said of an heiress who was talked of through acircumference of fifty miles, and even in the public conveyances fromAngers to Blois, inclusively!

°°°°At the beginning of 1811, the Cruchotines won a signal advantage overthe Grassinists. The estate of Froidfond, remarkable for its park, itsmansion, its farms, streams, ponds, forests, and worth about threemillions, was put up for sale by the young Marquis de Froidfond, whowas obliged to liquidate his possessions. Maitre Cruchot, thepresident, and the abbe, aided by their adherents, were able toprevent the sale of the estate in little lots. The notary concluded abargain with the young man for the whole property, payable in gold,persuading him that suits without number would have to be broughtagainst the purchasers of small lots before he could get the money forthem; it was better, therefore, to sell the whole to Monsieur Grandet,who was solvent and able to pay for the estate in ready money. Thefine marquisate of Froidfond was accordingly conveyed down the gulletof Monsieur Grandet, who, to the great astonishment of Saumur, paidfor it, under proper discount, with the usual formalities.This affair echoed from Nantes to Orleans. Monsieur Grandet tookadvantage of a cart returning by way of Froidfond to go and see hischateau. Having cast a master's eye over the whole property, hereturned to Saumur, satisfied that he had invested his money at fiveper cent, and seized by the stupendous thought of extending andincreasing the marquisate of Froidfond by concentrating all hisproperty there. Then, to fill up his coffers, now nearly empty, heresolved to thin out his woods and his forests, and to sell off thepoplars in the meadows.

°°°°II

°°°°It is now easy to understand the full meaning of the term, "the houseof Monsieur Grandet,"--that cold, silent, pallid dwelling, standingabove the town and sheltered by the ruins of the ramparts. The twopillars and the arch, which made the porte-cochere on which the dooropened, were built, like the house itself, of tufa,--a white stonepeculiar to the shores of the Loire, and so soft that it lasts hardlymore than two centuries. Numberless irregular holes, capriciouslybored or eaten out by the inclemency of the weather, gave anappearance of the vermiculated stonework of French architecture to thearch and the side walls of this entrance, which bore some resemblanceto the gateway of a jail. Above the arch was a long bas-relief, inhard stone, representing the four seasons, the faces already crumblingaway and blackened. This bas-relief was surmounted by a projectingplinth, upon which a variety of chance growths had sprung up,--yellowpellitory, bindweed, convolvuli, nettles, plantain, and even a littlecherry-tree, already grown to some height.

°°°°The door of the archway was made of solid oak, brown, shrunken, andsplit in many places; though frail in appearance, it was firmly heldin place by a system of iron bolts arranged in symmetrical patterns. Asmall square grating, with close bars red with rust, filled up themiddle panel and made, as it were, a motive for the knocker, fastenedto it by a ring, which struck upon the grinning head of a huge nail.This knocker, of the oblong shape and kind which our ancestors called/jaquemart/, looked like a huge note of exclamation; an antiquary whoexamined it attentively might have found indications of the figure,essentially burlesque, which it once represented, and which long usagehad now effaced. Through this little grating--intended in olden timesfor the recognition of friends in times of civil war--inquisitivepersons could perceive, at the farther end of the dark and slimyvault, a few broken steps which led to a garden, picturesquely shut inby walls that were thick and damp, and through which oozed a moisturethat nourished tufts of sickly herbage. These walls were the ruins ofthe ramparts, under which ranged the gardens of several neighboringhouses.

°°°°The most important room on the ground-floor of the house was a largehall, entered directly from beneath the vault of the porte-cochere.Few people know the importance of a hall in the little towns of Anjou,Touraine, and Berry. The hall is at one and the same time antechamber,salon, office, boudoir, and dining-room; it is the theatre of domesticlife, the common living-room. There the barber of the neighborhoodcame, twice a year, to cut Monsieur Grandet's hair; there the farmers,the cure, the under-prefect, and the miller's boy came on business.This room, with two windows looking on the street, was entirely ofwood. Gray panels with ancient mouldings covered the walls from top tobottom; the ceiling showed all its beams, which were likewise paintedgray, while the space between them had been washed over in white, nowyellow with age. An old brass clock, inlaid with arabesques, adornedthe mantel of the ill-cut white stone chimney-piece, above which was agreenish mirror, whose edges, bevelled to show the thickness of theglass, reflected a thread of light the whole length of a gothic framein damascened steel-work. The two copper-gilt candelabra whichdecorated the corners of the chimney-piece served a double purpose: bytaking off the side-branches, each of which held a socket, the mainstem--which was fastened to a pedestal of bluish marble tipped withcopper--made a candlestick for one candle, which was sufficient forordinary occasions. The chairs, antique in shape, were covered withtapestry representing the fables of La Fontaine; it was necessary,however, to know that writer well to guess at the subjects, for thefaded colors and the figures, blurred by much darning, were difficultto distinguish.

°°°°At the four corners of the hall were closets, or rather buffets,surmounted by dirty shelves. An old card-table in marquetry, of whichthe upper part was a chess-board, stood in the space between the twowindows. Above this table was an oval barometer with a black borderenlivened with gilt bands, on which the flies had so licentiouslydisported themselves that the gilding had become problematical. On thepanel opposite to the chimney-piece were two portraits in pastel,supposed to represent the grandfather of Madame Grandet, old Monsieurde la Bertelliere, as a lieutenant in the French guard, and thedeceased Madame Gentillet in the guise of a shepherdess. The windowswere draped with curtains of red /gros de Tours/ held back by silkencords with ecclesiastical tassels. This luxurious decoration, littlein keeping with the habits of Monsieur Grandet, had been, togetherwith the steel pier-glass, the tapestries, and the buffets, which wereof rose-wood, included in the purchase of the house.

°°°°By the window nearest to the door stood a straw chair, whose legs wereraised on castors to lift its occupant, Madame Grandet, to a heightfrom which she could see the passers-by. A work-table of stainedcherry-wood filled up the embrasure, and the little armchair ofEugenie Grandet stood beside it. In this spot the lives had flowedpeacefully onward for fifteen years, in a round of constant work fromthe month of April to the month of November. On the first day of thelatter month they took their winter station by the chimney. Not untilthat day did Grandet permit a fire to be lighted; and on the thirty-first of March it was extinguished, without regard either to thechills of the early spring or to those of a wintry autumn. A foot-warmer, filled with embers from the kitchen fire, which la GrandeNanon contrived to save for them, enabled Madame and MademoiselleGrandet to bear the chilly mornings and evenings of April and October.Mother and daughter took charge of the family linen, and spent theirdays so conscientiously upon a labor properly that of working-women,that if Eugenie wished to embroider a collar for her mother she wasforced to take the time from sleep, and deceive her father to obtainthe necessary light. For a long time the miser had given out thetallow candle to his daughter and la Grande Nanon just as he gave outevery morning the bread and other necessaries for the dailyconsumption.

°°°°La Grande Nanon was perhaps the only human being capable of acceptingwillingly the despotism of her master. The whole town envied Monsieurand Madame Grandet the possession of her. La Grande Nanon, so calledon account of her height, which was five feet eight inches, had livedwith Monsieur Grandet for thirty-five years. Though she received onlysixty francs a year in wages, she was supposed to be one of therichest serving-women in Saumur. Those sixty francs, accumulatingthrough thirty-five years, had recently enabled her to invest fourthousand francs in an annuity with Maitre Cruchot. This result of herlong and persistent economy seemed gigantic. Every servant in thetown, seeing that the poor sexagenarian was sure of bread for her oldage, was jealous of her, and never thought of the hard slavery throughwhich it had been won.

°°°°At twenty-two years of age the poor girl had been unable to find asituation, so repulsive was her face to almost every one. Yet thefeeling was certainly unjust: the face would have been much admired onthe shoulders of a grenadier of the guard; but all things, so theysay, should be in keeping. Forced to leave a farm where she kept thecows, because the dwelling-house was burned down, she came to Saumurto find a place, full of the robust courage that shrinks from nolabor. Le Pere Grandet was at that time thinking of marriage and aboutto set up his household. He espied the girl, rejected as she was fromdoor to door. A good judge of corporeal strength in his trade as acooper, he guessed the work that might be got out of a female creatureshaped like a Hercules, as firm on her feet as an oak sixty years oldon its roots, strong in the hips, square in the back, with the handsof a cartman and an honesty as sound as her unblemished virtue.Neither the warts which adorned her martial visage, nor the red-bricktints of her skin, nor the sinewy arms, nor the ragged garments of laGrande Nanon, dismayed the cooper, who was at that time still of anage when the heart shudders. He fed, shod, and clothed the poor girl,gave her wages, and put her to work without treating her too roughly.Seeing herself thus welcomed, la Grande Nanon wept secretly tears ofjoy, and attached herself in all sincerity to her master, who fromthat day ruled her and worked her with feudal authority. Nanon dideverything. She cooked, she made the lye, she washed the linen in theLoire and brought it home on her shoulders; she got up early, she wentto bed late; she prepared the food of the vine-dressers during theharvest, kept watch upon the market-people, protected the property ofher master like a faithful dog, and even, full of blind confidence,obeyed without a murmur his most absurd exactions.

°°°°In the famous year of 1811, when the grapes were gathered withunheard-of difficulty, Grandet resolved to give Nanon his old watch,--the first present he had made her during twenty years of service.Though he turned over to her his old shoes (which fitted her), it isimpossible to consider that quarterly benefit as a gift, for the shoeswere always thoroughly worn-out. Necessity had made the poor girl soniggardly that Grandet had grown to love her as we love a dog, andNanon had let him fasten a spiked collar round her throat, whosespikes no longer pricked her. If Grandet cut the bread with rather toomuch parsimony, she made no complaint; she gaily shared the hygienicbenefits derived from the severe regime of the household, in which noone was ever ill. Nanon was, in fact, one of the family; she laughedwhen Grandet laughed, felt gloomy or chilly, warmed herself, andtoiled as he did. What pleasant compensations there were in suchequality! Never did the master have occasion to find fault with theservant for pilfering the grapes, nor for the plums and nectarineseaten under the trees. "Come, fall-to, Nanon!" he would say in yearswhen the branches bent under the fruit and the farmers were obliged togive it to the pigs.

°°°°To the poor peasant who in her youth had earned nothing but harshtreatment, to the pauper girl picked up by charity, Grandet'sambiguous laugh was like a sunbeam. Moreover, Nanon's simple heart andnarrow head could hold only one feeling and one idea. For thirty-fiveyears she had never ceased to see herself standing before the wood-yard of Monsieur Grandet, ragged and barefooted, and to hear him say:"What do you want, young one?" Her gratitude was ever new. SometimesGrandet, reflecting that the poor creature had never heard aflattering word, that she was ignorant of all the tender sentimentsinspired by women, that she might some day appear before the throne ofGod even more chaste than the Virgin Mary herself,--Grandet, struckwith pity, would say as he looked at her, "Poor Nanon!" Theexclamation was always followed by an undefinable look cast upon himin return by the old servant. The words, uttered from time to time,formed a chain of friendship that nothing ever parted, and to whicheach exclamation added a link. Such compassion arising in the heart ofthe miser, and accepted gratefully by the old spinster, had somethinginconceivably horrible about it. This cruel pity, recalling, as itdid, a thousand pleasures to the heart of the old cooper, was forNanon the sum total of happiness. Who does not likewise say, "PoorNanon!" God will recognize his angels by the inflexions of theirvoices and by their secret sighs.

°°°°There were very many households in Saumur where the servants werebetter treated, but where the masters received far less satisfactionin return. Thus it was often said: "What have the Grandets ever doneto make their Grande Nanon so attached to them? She would go throughfire and water for their sake!" Her kitchen, whose barred windowslooked into the court, was always clean, neat, cold,--a true miser'skitchen, where nothing went to waste. When Nanon had washed herdishes, locked up the remains of the dinner, and put out her fire, sheleft the kitchen, which was separated by a passage from the living-room, and went to spin hemp beside her masters. One tallow candlesufficed the family for the evening. The servant slept at the end ofthe passage in a species of closet lighted only by a fan-light. Herrobust health enabled her to live in this hole with impunity; thereshe could hear the slightest noise through the deep silence whichreigned night and day in that dreary house. Like a watch-dog, sheslept with one ear open, and took her rest with a mind alert.A description of the other parts of the dwelling will be foundconnected with the events of this history, though the foregoing sketchof the hall, where the whole luxury of the household appears, mayenable the reader to surmise the nakedness of the upper floors.In 1819, at the beginning of an evening in the middle of November, laGrande Nanon lighted the fire for the first time. The autumn had beenvery fine. This particular day was a fete-day well known to theCruchotines and the Grassinists. The six antagonists, armed at allpoints, were making ready to meet at the Grandets and surpass eachother in testimonials of friendship. That morning all Saumur had seenMadame and Mademoiselle Grandet, accompanied by Nanon, on their way tohear Mass at the parish church, and every one remembered that the daywas the anniversary of Mademoiselle Eugenie's birth. Calculating thehour at which the family dinner would be over, Maitre Cruchot, theAbbe Cruchot, and Monsieur C. de Bonfons hastened to arrive before thedes Grassins, and be the first to pay their compliments toMademoiselle Eugenie. All three brought enormous bouquets, gathered intheir little green-houses. The stalks of the flowers which thepresident intended to present were ingeniously wound round with awhite satin ribbon adorned with gold fringe. In the morning MonsieurGrandet, following his usual custom on the days that commemorated thebirth and the fete of Eugenie, went to her bedside and solemnlypresented her with his paternal gift,--which for the last thirteenyears had consisted regularly of a curious gold-piece. Madame Grandetgave her daughter a winter dress or a summer dress, as the case mightbe. These two dresses and the gold-pieces, of which she received twoothers on New Year's day and on her father's fete-day, gave Eugenie alittle revenue of a hundred crowns or thereabouts, which Grandet lovedto see her amass. Was it not putting his money from one strong-box toanother, and, as it were, training the parsimony of his heiress? fromwhom he sometimes demanded an account of her treasure (formerlyincreased by the gifts of the Bertellieres), saying: "It is to be yourmarriage dozen."

°°°°The "marriage dozen" is an old custom sacredly preserved and still inforce in many parts of central France. In Berry and in Anjou, when ayoung girl marries, her family, or that of the husband, must give hera purse, in which they place, according to their means, twelve pieces,or twelve dozen pieces, or twelve hundred pieces of gold. The poorestshepherd-girl never marries without her dozen, be it only a dozencoppers. They still tell in Issoudun of a certain "dozen" presented toa rich heiress, which contained a hundred and forty-four /portugaisesd'or/. Pope Clement VII., uncle of Catherine de' Medici, gave her whenhe married her to Henri II. a dozen antique gold medals of pricelessvalue.

°°°°During dinner the father, delighted to see his Eugenie looking well ina new gown, exclaimed: "As it is Eugenie's birthday let us have afire; it will be a good omen."

°°°°"Mademoiselle will be married this year, that's certain," said laGrande Nanon, carrying away the remains of the goose,--the pheasant oftradesmen.

°°°°"I don't see any one suitable for her in Saumur," said Madame Grandet,glancing at her husband with a timid look which, considering heryears, revealed the conjugal slavery under which the poor womanlanguished.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter and exclaimed gaily,--

°°°°"She is twenty-three years old to-day, the child; we must soon beginto think of it."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother silently exchanged a glance of intelligence.Madame Grandet was a dry, thin woman, as yellow as a quince, awkward,slow, one of those women who are born to be down-trodden. She had bigbones, a big nose, a big forehead, big eyes, and presented at firstsight a vague resemblance to those mealy fruits that have neithersavor nor succulence. Her teeth were black and few in number, hermouth was wrinkled, her chin long and pointed. She was an excellentwoman, a true la Bertelliere. L'abbe Cruchot found occasionalopportunity to tell her that she had not done ill; and she believedhim. Angelic sweetness, the resignation of an insect tortured bychildren, a rare piety, a good heart, an unalterable equanimity ofsoul, made her universally pitied and respected. Her husband nevergave her more than six francs at a time for her personal expenses.Ridiculous as it may seem, this woman, who by her own fortune and hervarious inheritances brought Pere Grandet more than three hundredthousand francs, had always felt so profoundly humiliated by herdependence and the slavery in which she lived, against which thegentleness of her spirit prevented her from revolting, that she hadnever asked for one penny or made a single remark on the deeds whichMaitre Cruchot brought for her signature. This foolish secret pride,this nobility of soul perpetually misunderstood and wounded byGrandet, ruled the whole conduct of the wife.

°°°°Madame Grandet was attired habitually in a gown of greenish levantinesilk, endeavoring to make it last nearly a year; with it she wore alarge kerchief of white cotton cloth, a bonnet made of plaited strawssewn together, and almost always a black-silk apron. As she seldomleft the house she wore out very few shoes. She never asked anythingfor herself. Grandet, seized with occasional remorse when heremembered how long a time had elapsed since he gave her the last sixfrancs, always stipulated for the "wife's pin-money" when he sold hisyearly vintage. The four or five louis presented by the Belgian or theDutchman who purchased the wine were the chief visible signs of MadameGrandet's annual revenues. But after she had received the five louis,her husband would often say to her, as though their purse were held incommon: "Can you lend me a few sous?" and the poor woman, glad to beable to do something for a man whom her confessor held up to her asher lord and master, returned him in the course of the winter severalcrowns out of the "pin-money." When Grandet drew from his pocket thefive-franc piece which he allowed monthly for the minor expenses,--thread, needles, and toilet,--of his daughter, he never failed to sayas he buttoned his breeches' pocket: "And you, mother, do you wantanything?"

°°°°"My friend," Madame Grandet would answer, moved by a sense of maternaldignity, "we will see about that later."

°°°°Wasted dignity! Grandet thought himself very generous to his wife.Philosophers who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, ofEugenie, have surely a right to say that irony is at the bottom of theways of Providence.

°°°°After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made toEugenie's marriage, Nanon went to fetch a bottle of black-currantratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly fell as shecame down the stairs.

°°°°"You great stupid!" said her master; "are you going to tumble aboutlike other people, hey?"

°°°°"Monsieur, it was that step on your staircase which has given way.""She is right," said Madame Grandet; "it ought to have been mendedlong ago. Yesterday Eugenie nearly twisted her ankle."

°°°°"Here," said Grandet to Nanon, seeing that she looked quite pale, "asit is Eugenie's birthday, and you came near falling, take a littleglass of ratafia to set you right."

°°°°"Faith! I've earned it," said Nanon; "most people would have brokenthe bottle; but I'd sooner have broken my elbow holding it up high.""Poor Nanon!" said Grandet, filling a glass.

°°°°"Did you hurt yourself?" asked Eugenie, looking kindly at her."No, I didn't fall; I threw myself back on my haunches."

°°°°"Well! as it is Eugenie's birthday," said Grandet, "I'll have the stepmended. You people don't know how to set your foot in the corner wherethe wood is still firm."

°°°°Grandet took the candle, leaving his wife, daughter, and servantwithout any other light than that from the hearth, where the flameswere lively, and went into the bakehouse to fetch planks, nails, andtools.

°°°°"Can I help you?" cried Nanon, hearing him hammer on the stairs."No, no! I'm an old hand at it," answered the former cooper.At the moment when Grandet was mending his worm-eaten staircase andwhistling with all his might, in remembrance of the days of his youth,the three Cruchots knocked at the door.

°°°°"Is it you, Monsieur Cruchot?" asked Nanon, peeping through the littlegrating.

°°°°"Yes," answered the president.

°°°°Nanon opened the door, and the light from the hearth, reflected on theceiling, enabled the three Cruchots to find their way into the room."Ha! you've come a-greeting," said Nanon, smelling the flowers."Excuse me, messieurs," cried Grandet, recognizing their voices; "I'llbe with you in a moment. I'm not proud; I am patching up a step on mystaircase."

°°°°"Go on, go on, Monsieur Grandet; a man's house is his castle," saidthe president sententiously.

°°°°Madame and Mademoiselle Grandet rose. The president, profiting by thedarkness, said to Eugenie:

°°°°"Will you permit me, mademoiselle, to wish you, on this the day ofyour birth, a series of happy years and the continuance of the healthwhich you now enjoy?"

°°°°He offered her a huge bouquet of choice flowers which were rare inSaumur; then, taking the heiress by the elbows, he kissed her on eachside of her neck with a complacency that made her blush. Thepresident, who looked like a rusty iron nail, felt that his courtshipwas progressing.

°°°°"Don't stand on ceremony," said Grandet, entering. "How well you dothings on fete-days, Monsieur le president!"

°°°°"When it concerns mademoiselle," said the abbe, armed with his ownbouquet, "every day is a fete-day for my nephew."

°°°°The abbe kissed Eugenie's hand. As for Maitre Cruchot, he boldlykissed her on both cheeks, remarking: "How we sprout up, to be sure!Every year is twelve months."

°°°°As he replaced the candlestick beside the clock, Grandet, who neverforgot his own jokes, and repeated them to satiety when he thoughtthem funny, said,--

°°°°"As this is Eugenie's birthday let us illuminate."

°°°°He carefully took off the branches of the candelabra, put a socket oneach pedestal, took from Nanon a new tallow candle with paper twistedround the end of it, put it into the hollow, made it firm, lit it, andthen sat down beside his wife, looking alternately at his friends, hisdaughter, and the two candles. The Abbe Cruchot, a plump, puffy littleman, with a red wig plastered down and a face like an old femalegambler, said as he stretched out his feet, well shod in stout shoeswith silver buckles: "The des Grassins have not come?"

°°°°"Not yet," said Grandet.

°°°°"But are they coming?" asked the old notary, twisting his face, whichhad as many holes as a collander, into a queer grimace.

°°°°"I think so," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Are your vintages all finished?" said Monsieur de Bonfons to Grandet."Yes, all of them," said the old man, rising to walk up and down theroom, his chest swelling with pride as he said the words, "all ofthem." Through the door of the passage which led to the kitchen he sawla Grande Nanon sitting beside her fire with a candle and preparing tospin there, so as not to intrude among the guests.

°°°°"Nanon," he said, going into the passage, "put out that fire and thatcandle, and come and sit with us. Pardieu! the hall is big enough forall."

°°°°"But monsieur, you are to have the great people."

°°°°"Are not you as good as they? They are descended from Adam, and so areyou."

°°°°Grandet came back to the president and said,--

°°°°"Have you sold your vintage?"

°°°°"No, not I; I shall keep it. If the wine is good this year, it will bebetter two years hence. The proprietors, you know, have made anagreement to keep up the price; and this year the Belgians won't getthe better of us. Suppose they are sent off empty-handed for once,faith! they'll come back."

°°°°"Yes, but let us mind what we are about," said Grandet in a tone whichmade the president tremble.

°°°°"Is he driving some bargain?" thought Cruchot.

°°°°At this moment the knocker announced the des Grassins family, andtheir arrival interrupted a conversation which had begun betweenMadame Grandet and the abbe.

°°°°Madame des Grassins was one of those lively, plump little women, withpink-and-white skins, who, thanks to the claustral calm of theprovinces and the habits of a virtuous life, keep their youth untilthey are past forty. She was like the last rose of autumn,--pleasantto the eye, though the petals have a certain frostiness, and theirperfume is slight. She dressed well, got her fashions from Paris, setthe tone to Saumur, and gave parties. Her husband, formerly aquartermaster in the Imperial guard, who had been desperately woundedat Austerlitz, and had since retired, still retained, in spite of hisrespect for Grandet, the seeming frankness of an old soldier."Good evening, Grandet," he said, holding out his hand and affecting asort of superiority, with which he always crushed the Cruchots."Mademoiselle," he added, turning to Eugenie, after bowing to MadameGrandet, "you are always beautiful and good, and truly I do not knowwhat to wish you." So saying, he offered her a little box which hisservant had brought and which contained a Cape heather,--a flowerlately imported into Europe and very rare.

°°°°Madame des Grassins kissed Eugenie very affectionately, pressed herhand, and said: "Adolphe wishes to make you my little offering."A tall, blond young man, pale and slight, with tolerable manners andseemingly rather shy, although he had just spent eight or ten thousandfrancs over his allowance in Paris, where he had been sent to studylaw, now came forward and kissed Eugenie on both cheeks, offering hera workbox with utensils in silver-gilt,--mere show-case trumpery, inspite of the monogram E.G. in gothic letters rather well engraved,which belonged properly to something in better taste. As she openedit, Eugenie experienced one of those unexpected and perfect delightswhich make a young girl blush and quiver and tremble with pleasure.She turned her eyes to her father as if to ask permission to acceptit, and Monsieur Grandet replied: "Take it, my daughter," in a tonewhich would have made an actor illustrious.

°°°°The three Cruchots felt crushed as they saw the joyous, animated lookcast upon Adolphe des Grassins by the heiress, to whom such richeswere unheard-of. Monsieur des Grassins offered Grandet a pinch ofsnuff, took one himself, shook off the grains as they fell on theribbon of the Legion of honor which was attached to the button-hole ofhis blue surtout; then he looked at the Cruchots with an air thatseemed to say, "Parry that thrust if you can!" Madame des Grassinscast her eyes on the blue vases which held the Cruchot bouquets,looking at the enemy's gifts with the pretended interest of asatirical woman. At this delicate juncture the Abbe Cruchot left thecompany seated in a circle round the fire and joined Grandet at thelower end of the hall. As the two men reached the embrasure of thefarthest window the priest said in the miser's ear: "Those peoplethrow money out of the windows."

°°°°"What does that matter if it gets into my cellar?" retorted the oldwine-grower.

°°°°"If you want to give gilt scissors to your daughter, you have themeans," said the abbe.

°°°°"I give her something better than scissors," answered Grandet."My nephew is a blockhead," thought the abbe as he looked at thepresident, whose rumpled hair added to the ill grace of his browncountenance. "Couldn't he have found some little trifle which costmoney?"

°°°°"We will join you at cards, Madame Grandet," said Madame des Grassins."We might have two tables, as we are all here."

°°°°"As it is Eugenie's birthday you had better play loto all together,"said Pere Grandet: "the two young ones can join"; and the old cooper,who never played any game, motioned to his daughter and Adolphe."Come, Nanon, set the tables."

°°°°"We will help you, Mademoiselle Nanon," said Madame des Grassinsgaily, quite joyous at the joy she had given Eugenie.

°°°°"I have never in my life been so pleased," the heiress said to her; "Ihave never seen anything so pretty."

°°°°"Adolphe brought it from Paris, and he chose it," Madame des Grassinswhispered in her ear.

°°°°"Go on! go on! damned intriguing thing!" thought the president. "Ifyou ever have a suit in court, you or your husband, it shall go hardwith you."

°°°°The notary, sitting in his corner, looked calmly at the abbe, sayingto himself: "The des Grassins may do what they like; my property andmy brother's and that of my nephew amount in all to eleven hundredthousand francs. The des Grassins, at the most, have not half that;besides, they have a daughter. They may give what presents they like;heiress and presents too will be ours one of these days."At half-past eight in the evening the two card-tables were set out.Madame des Grassins succeeded in putting her son beside Eugenie. Theactors in this scene, so full of interest, commonplace as it seems,were provided with bits of pasteboard striped in many colors andnumbered, and with counters of blue glass, and they appeared to belistening to the jokes of the notary, who never drew a number withoutmaking a remark, while in fact they were all thinking of MonsieurGrandet's millions. The old cooper, with inward self-conceit, wascontemplating the pink feathers and the fresh toilet of Madame desGrassins, the martial head of the banker, the faces of Adolphe, thepresident, the abbe, and the notary, saying to himself:--"They are all after my money. Hey! neither the one nor the other shallhave my daughter; but they are useful--useful as harpoons to fishwith."

°°°°This family gaiety in the old gray room dimly lighted by two tallowcandles; this laughter, accompanied by the whirr of Nanon's spinning-wheel, sincere only upon the lips of Eugenie or her mother; thistriviality mingled with important interests; this young girl, who,like certain birds made victims of the price put upon them, was nowlured and trapped by proofs of friendship of which she was the dupe,--all these things contributed to make the scene a melancholy comedy. Isit not, moreover, a drama of all times and all places, though herebrought down to its simplest expression? The figure of Grandet,playing his own game with the false friendship of the two families andgetting enormous profits from it, dominates the scene and throws lightupon it. The modern god,--the only god in whom faith is preserved,--money, is here, in all its power, manifested in a single countenance.The tender sentiments of life hold here but a secondary place; onlythe three pure, simple hearts of Nanon, of Eugenie, and of her motherwere inspired by them. And how much of ignorance there was in thesimplicity of these poor women! Eugenie and her mother knew nothing ofGrandet's wealth; they could only estimate the things of life by theglimmer of their pale ideas, and they neither valued nor despisedmoney, because they were accustomed to do without it. Their feelings,bruised, though they did not know it, but ever-living, were the secretspring of their existence, and made them curious exceptions in themidst of these other people whose lives were purely material.Frightful condition of the human race! there is no one of its joysthat does not come from some species of ignorance.

°°°°At the moment when Madame Grandet had won a loto of sixteen sous,--thelargest ever pooled in that house,--and while la Grande Nanon waslaughing with delight as she watched madame pocketing her riches, theknocker resounded on the house-door with such a noise that the womenall jumped in their chairs.

°°°°"There is no man in Saumur who would knock like that," said thenotary.

°°°°"How can they bang in that way!" exclaimed Nanon; "do they want tobreak in the door?"

°°°°"Who the devil is it?" cried Grandet.

°°°°III

°°°°Nanon took one of the candles and went to open the door, followed byher master.

°°°°"Grandet! Grandet!" cried his wife, moved by a sudden impulse of fear,and running to the door of the room.

°°°°All the players looked at each other.

°°°°"Suppose we all go?" said Monsieur des Grassins; "that knock strikesme as evil-intentioned."

°°°°Hardly was Monsieur des Grassins allowed to see the figure of a youngman, accompanied by a porter from the coach-office carrying two largetrunks and dragging a carpet-bag after him, than Monsieur Grandetturned roughly on his wife and said,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, go back to your loto; leave me to speak withmonsieur."

°°°°Then he pulled the door quickly to, and the excited players returnedto their seats, but did not continue the game.

°°°°"Is it any one belonging to Saumur, Monsieur des Grassins?" asked hiswife.

°°°°"No, it is a traveller."

°°°°"He must have come from Paris."

°°°°"Just so," said the notary, pulling out his watch, which was twoinches thick and looked like a Dutch man-of-war; "it's nine o'clock;the diligence of the Grand Bureau is never late."

°°°°"Is the gentleman young?" inquired the Abbe Cruchot.

°°°°"Yes," answered Monsieur des Grassins, "and he has brought luggagewhich must weigh nearly three tons."

°°°°"Nanon does not come back," said Eugenie.

°°°°"It must be one of your relations," remarked the president."Let us go on with our game," said Madame Grandet gently. "I know fromMonsieur Grandet's tone of voice that he is annoyed; perhaps he wouldnot like to find us talking of his affairs."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said Adolphe to his neighbor, "it is no doubt yourcousin Grandet,--a very good-looking young man; I met him at the ballof Monsieur de Nucingen." Adolphe did not go on, for his mother trodon his toes; and then, asking him aloud for two sous to put on herstake, she whispered: "Will you hold your tongue, you great goose!"At this moment Grandet returned, without la Grande Nanon, whose steps,together with those of the porter, echoed up the staircase; and he wasfollowed by the traveller who had excited such curiosity and so filledthe lively imaginations of those present that his arrival at thisdwelling, and his sudden fall into the midst of this assembly, canonly be likened to that of a snail into a beehive, or the introductionof a peacock into some village poultry-yard.

°°°°"Sit down near the fire," said Grandet.

°°°°Before seating himself, the young stranger saluted the assembledcompany very gracefully. The men rose to answer by a courteousinclination, and the women made a ceremonious bow.

°°°°"You are cold, no doubt, monsieur," said Madame Grandet; "you have,perhaps, travelled from--"

°°°°"Just like all women!" said the old wine-grower, looking up from aletter he was reading. "Do let monsieur rest himself!"

°°°°"But, father, perhaps monsieur would like to take something," saidEugenie.

°°°°"He has got a tongue," said the old man sternly.

°°°°The stranger was the only person surprised by this scene; all theothers were well-used to the despotic ways of the master. However,after the two questions and the two replies had been exchanged, thenewcomer rose, turned his back towards the fire, lifted one foot so asto warm the sole of its boot, and said to Eugenie,--

°°°°"Thank you, my cousin, but I dined at Tours. And," he added, lookingat Grandet, "I need nothing; I am not even tired."

°°°°"Monsieur has come from the capital?" asked Madame des Grassins.Monsieur Charles,--such was the name of the son of Monsieur Grandet ofParis,--hearing himself addressed, took a little eye-glass, suspendedby a chain from his neck, applied it to his right eye to examine whatwas on the table, and also the persons sitting round it. He ogledMadame des Grassins with much impertinence, and said to her, after hehad observed all he wished,--

°°°°"Yes, madame. You are playing at loto, aunt," he added. "Do not let meinterrupt you, I beg; go on with your game: it is too amusing toleave."

°°°°"I was certain it was the cousin," thought Madame des Grassins,casting repeated glances at him.

°°°°"Forty-seven!" cried the old abbe. "Mark it down, Madame des Grassins.Isn't that your number?"

°°°°Monsieur des Grassins put a counter on his wife's card, who satwatching first the cousin from Paris and then Eugenie, withoutthinking of her loto, a prey to mournful presentiments. From time totime the young the heiress glanced furtively at her cousin, and thebanker's wife easily detected a /crescendo/ of surprise and curiosityin her mind.

°°°°Monsieur Charles Grandet, a handsome young man of twenty-two,presented at this moment a singular contrast to the worthyprovincials, who, considerably disgusted by his aristocratic manners,were all studying him with sarcastic intent. This needs anexplanation. At twenty-two, young people are still so near childhoodthat they often conduct themselves childishly. In all probability, outof every hundred of them fully ninety-nine would have behavedprecisely as Monsieur Charles Grandet was now behaving.

°°°°Some days earlier than this his father had told him to go and spendseveral months with his uncle at Saumur. Perhaps Monsieur Grandet wasthinking of Eugenie. Charles, sent for the first time in his life intothe provinces, took a fancy to make his appearance with thesuperiority of a man of fashion, to reduce the whole arrondissement todespair by his luxury, and to make his visit an epoch, importing intothose country regions all the refinements of Parisian life. In short,to explain it in one word, he mean to pass more time at Saumur inbrushing his nails than he ever thought of doing in Paris, and toassume the extra nicety and elegance of dress which a young man offashion often lays aside for a certain negligence which in itself isnot devoid of grace. Charles therefore brought with him a completehunting-costume, the finest gun, the best hunting-knife in theprettiest sheath to be found in all Paris. He brought his wholecollection of waistcoats. They were of all kinds,--gray, black, white,scarabaeus-colored: some were shot with gold, some spangled, some/chined/; some were double-breasted and crossed like a shawl, otherswere straight in the collar; some had turned-over collars, somebuttoned up to the top with gilt buttons. He brought every variety ofcollar and cravat in fashion at that epoch. He brought two ofBuisson's coats and all his finest linen He brought his pretty goldtoilet-set,--a present from his mother. He brought all his dandyknick-knacks, not forgetting a ravishing little desk presented to himby the most amiable of women,--amiable for him, at least,--a fine ladywhom he called Annette and who at this moment was travelling,matrimonially and wearily, in Scotland, a victim to certain suspicionswhich required a passing sacrifice of happiness; in the desk was muchpretty note-paper on which to write to her once a fortnight.In short, it was as complete a cargo of Parisian frivolities as it waspossible for him to get together,--a collection of all the implementsof husbandry with which the youth of leisure tills his life, from thelittle whip which helps to begin a duel, to the handsomely chasedpistols which end it. His father having told him to travel alone andmodestly, he had taken the coupe of the diligence all to himself,rather pleased at not having to damage a delightful travelling-carriage ordered for a journey on which he was to meet his Annette,the great lady who, etc.,--whom he intended to rejoin at Baden in thefollowing June. Charles expected to meet scores of people at hisuncle's house, to hunt in his uncle's forests,--to live, in short, theusual chateau life; he did not know that his uncle was in Saumur, andhad only inquired about him incidentally when asking the way toFroidfond. Hearing that he was in town, he supposed that he shouldfind him in a suitable mansion.

°°°°In order that he might make a becoming first appearance before hisuncle either at Saumur or at Froidfond, he had put on his most eleganttravelling attire, simple yet exquisite,--"adorable," to use the wordwhich in those days summed up the special perfections of a man or athing. At Tours a hairdresser had re-curled his beautiful chestnutlocks; there he changed his linen and put on a black satin cravat,which, combined with a round shirt-collar, framed his fair and smilingcountenance agreeably. A travelling great-coat, only half buttoned up,nipped in his waist and disclosed a cashmere waistcoat crossed infront, beneath which was another waistcoat of white material. Hiswatch, negligently slipped into a pocket, was fastened by a short goldchain to a buttonhole. His gray trousers, buttoned up at the sides,were set off at the seams with patterns of black silk embroidery. Hegracefully twirled a cane, whose chased gold knob did not mar thefreshness of his gray gloves. And to complete all, his cap was inexcellent taste. None but a Parisian, and a Parisian of the upperspheres, could thus array himself without appearing ridiculous; noneother could give the harmony of self-conceit to all these fopperies,which were carried off, however, with a dashing air,--the air of ayoung man who has fine pistols, a sure aim, and Annette.

°°°°Now if you wish to understand the mutual amazement of the provincialparty and the young Parisian; if you would clearly see the brilliancewhich the traveller's elegance cast among the gray shadows of the roomand upon the faces of this family group,--endeavor to picture to yourminds the Cruchots. All three took snuff, and had long ceased torepress the habit of snivelling or to remove the brown blotches whichstrewed the frills of their dingy shirts and the yellowing creases oftheir crumpled collars. Their flabby cravats were twisted into ropesas soon as they wound them about their throats. The enormous quantityof linen which allowed these people to have their clothing washed onlyonce in six months, and to keep it during that time in the depths oftheir closets, also enabled time to lay its grimy and decaying stainsupon it. There was perfect unison of ill-grace and senility aboutthem; their faces, as faded as their threadbare coats, as creased astheir trousers, were worn-out, shrivelled-up, and puckered. As for theothers, the general negligence of their dress, which was incompleteand wanting in freshness,--like the toilet of all country places,where insensibly people cease to dress for others and come to thinkseriously of the price of a pair of gloves,--was in keeping with thenegligence of the Cruchots. A horror of fashion was the only point onwhich the Grassinists and the Cruchotines agreed.

°°°°When the Parisian took up his eye-glass to examine the strangeaccessories of this dwelling,--the joists of the ceiling, the color ofthe woodwork, and the specks which the flies had left there insufficient number to punctuate the "Moniteur" and the "Encyclopaediaof Sciences,"--the loto-players lifted their noses and looked at himwith as much curiosity as they might have felt about a giraffe.Monsieur des Grassins and his son, to whom the appearance of a man offashion was not wholly unknown, were nevertheless as much astonishedas their neighbors, whether it was that they fell under theindefinable influence of the general feeling, or that they reallyshared it as with satirical glances they seemed to say to theircompatriots,--

°°°°"That is what you see in Paris!"

°°°°They were able to examine Charles at their leisure without fearing todisplease the master of the house. Grandet was absorbed in the longletter which he held in his hand; and to read it he had taken the onlycandle upon the card-table, paying no heed to his guests or theirpleasure. Eugenie, to whom such a type of perfection, whether of dressor of person, was absolutely unknown, thought she beheld in her cousina being descended from seraphic spheres. She inhaled with delight thefragrance wafted from the graceful curls of that brilliant head. Shewould have liked to touch the soft kid of the delicate gloves. Sheenvied Charles his small hands, his complexion, the freshness andrefinement of his features. In short,--if it is possible to sum up theeffect this elegant being produced upon an ignorant young girlperpetually employed in darning stockings or in mending her father'sclothes, and whose life flowed on beneath these unclean rafters,seeing none but occasional passers along the silent street,--thisvision of her cousin roused in her soul an emotion of delicate desirelike that inspired in a young man by the fanciful pictures of womendrawn by Westall for the English "Keepsakes," and that engraved by theFindens with so clever a tool that we fear, as we breathe upon thepaper, that the celestial apparitions may be wafted away. Charles drewfrom his pocket a handkerchief embroidered by the great lady nowtravelling in Scotland. As Eugenie saw this pretty piece of work, donein the vacant hours which were lost to love, she looked at her cousinto see if it were possible that he meant to make use of it. Themanners of the young man, his gestures, the way in which he took uphis eye-glass, his affected superciliousness, his contemptuous glanceat the coffer which had just given so much pleasure to the richheiress, and which he evidently regarded as without value, or even asridiculous,--all these things, which shocked the Cruchots and the desGrassins, pleased Eugenie so deeply that before she slept she dreamedlong dreams of her phoenix cousin.

°°°°The loto-numbers were drawn very slowly, and presently the game camesuddenly to an end. La Grand Nanon entered and said aloud: "Madame, Iwant the sheets for monsieur's bed."

°°°°Madame Grandet followed her out. Madame des Grassins said in a lowvoice: "Let us keep our sous and stop playing." Each took his or hertwo sous from the chipped saucer in which they had been put; then theparty moved in a body toward the fire.

°°°°"Have you finished your game?" said Grandet, without looking up fromhis letter.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" replied Madame des Grassins, taking a seat near Charles.Eugenie, prompted by a thought often born in the heart of a young girlwhen sentiment enters it for the first time, left the room to go andhelp her mother and Nanon. Had an able confessor then questioned hershe would, no doubt, have avowed to him that she thought neither ofher mother nor of Nanon, but was pricked by a poignant desire to lookafter her cousin's room and concern herself with her cousin; to supplywhat might be needed, to remedy any forgetfulness, to see that all wasdone to make it, as far as possible, suitable and elegant; and, infact, she arrived in time to prove to her mother and Nanon thateverything still remained to be done. She put into Nanon's head thenotion of passing a warming-pan between the sheets. She herselfcovered the old table with a cloth and requested Nanon to change itevery morning; she convinced her mother that it was necessary to lighta good fire, and persuaded Nanon to bring up a great pile of wood intothe corridor without saying anything to her father. She ran to get,from one of the corner-shelves of the hall, a tray of old lacquerwhich was part of the inheritance of the late Monsieur de laBertelliere, catching up at the same time a six-sided crystal goblet,a little tarnished gilt spoon, an antique flask engraved with cupids,all of which she put triumphantly on the corner of her cousin'schimney-piece. More ideas surged through her head in one quarter of anhour than she had ever had since she came into the world."Mamma," she said, "my cousin will never bear the smell of a tallowcandle; suppose we buy a wax one?" And she darted, swift as a bird, toget the five-franc piece which she had just received for her monthlyexpenses. "Here, Nanon," she cried, "quick!"

°°°°"What will your father say?" This terrible remonstrance was uttered byMadame Grandet as she beheld her daughter armed with an old Sevressugar-basin which Grandet had brought home from the chateau ofFroidfond. "And where will you get the sugar? Are you crazy?""Mamma, Nanon can buy some sugar as well as the candle."

°°°°"But your father?"

°°°°"Surely his nephew ought not to go without a glass of /eau sucree/?Besides, he will not notice it."

°°°°"Your father sees everything," said Madame Grandet, shaking her head.Nanon hesitated; she knew her master.

°°°°"Come, Nanon, go,--because it is my birthday."

°°°°Nanon gave a loud laugh as she heard the first little jest her youngmistress had ever made, and then obeyed her.

°°°°While Eugenie and her mother were trying to embellish the bedroomassigned by Monsieur Grandet for his nephew, Charles himself was theobject of Madame des Grassins' attentions; to all appearances she wassetting her cap at him.

°°°°"You are very courageous, monsieur," she said to the young dandy, "toleave the pleasures of the capital at this season and take up yourabode in Saumur. But if we do not frighten you away, you will findthere are some amusements even here."

°°°°She threw him the ogling glance of the provinces, where women put somuch prudence and reserve into their eyes that they impart to them theprudish concupiscence peculiar to certain ecclesiastics to whom allpleasure is either a theft or an error. Charles was so completely outof his element in this abode, and so far from the vast chateau and thesumptuous life with which his fancy had endowed his uncle, that as helooked at Madame des Grassins he perceived a dim likeness to Parisianfaces. He gracefully responded to the species of invitation addressedto him, and began very naturally a conversation, in which Madame desGrassins gradually lowered her voice so as to bring it into harmonywith the nature of the confidences she was making. With her, as withCharles, there was the need of conference; so after a few momentsspent in coquettish phrases and a little serious jesting, the cleverprovincial said, thinking herself unheard by the others, who werediscussing the sale of wines which at that season filled the heads ofevery one in Saumur,--

°°°°"Monsieur if you will do us the honor to come and see us, you willgive as much pleasure to my husband as to myself. Our salon is theonly one in Saumur where you will find the higher business circlesmingling with the nobility. We belong to both societies, who meet atour house simply because they find it amusing. My husband--I say itwith pride--is as much valued by the one class as by the other. Wewill try to relieve the monotony of your visit here. If you stay allthe time with Monsieur Grandet, good heavens! what will become of you?Your uncle is a sordid miser who thinks of nothing but his vines; youraunt is a pious soul who can't put two ideas together; and your cousinis a little fool, without education, perfectly common, no fortune, whowill spend her life in darning towels."

°°°°"She is really very nice, this woman," thought Charles Grandet as heduly responded to Madame des Grassins' coquetries.

°°°°"It seems to me, wife, that you are taking possession of monsieur,"said the stout banker, laughing.

°°°°On this remark the notary and the president said a few words that weremore or less significant; but the abbe, looking at them slyly, broughttheir thoughts to a focus by taking a pinch of snuff and saying as hehanded round his snuff-box: "Who can do the honors of Saumur formonsieur so well as madame?"

°°°°"Ah! what do you mean by that, monsieur l'abbe?" demanded Monsieur desGrassins.

°°°°"I mean it in the best possible sense for you, for madame, for thetown of Saumur, and for monsieur," said the wily old man, turning toCharles.

°°°°The Abbe Cruchot had guessed the conversation between Charles andMadame des Grassins without seeming to pay attention to it."Monsieur," said Adolphe to Charles with an air which he tried to makefree and easy, "I don't know whether you remember me, but I had thehonor of dancing as your /vis-a-vis/ at a ball given by the Baron deNucingen, and--"

°°°°"Perfectly; I remember perfectly, monsieur," answered Charles, pleasedto find himself the object of general attention.

°°°°"Monsieur is your son?" he said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°The abbe looked at her maliciously.

°°°°"Yes, monsieur," she answered.

°°°°"Then you were very young when you were in Paris?" said Charles,addressing Adolphe.

°°°°"You must know, monsieur," said the abbe, "that we send them toBabylon as soon as they are weaned."

°°°°Madame des Grassins examined the abbe with a glance of extremepenetration.

°°°°"It is only in the provinces," he continued, "that you will find womenof thirty and more years as fresh as madame, here, with a son about totake his degree. I almost fancy myself back in the days when the youngmen stood on chairs in the ball-room to see you dance, madame," saidthe abbe, turning to his female adversary. "To me, your triumphs arebut of yesterday--"

°°°°"The old rogue!" thought Madame Grassins; "can he have guessed myintentions?"

°°°°"It seems that I shall have a good deal of success in Saumur," thoughtCharles as he unbuttoned his great-coat, put a hand into hiswaistcoat, and cast a glance into the far distance, to imitate theattitude which Chantrey has given to Lord Byron.

°°°°The inattention of Pere Grandet, or, to speak more truly, thepreoccupation of mind into which the reading of the letter had plungedhim, did not escape the vigilance of the notary and the president, whotried to guess the contents of the letter by the almost imperceptiblemotions of the miser's face, which was then under the full light ofthe candle. He maintained the habitual calm of his features withevident difficulty; we may, in fact, picture to ourselves thecountenance such a man endeavored to preserve as he read the fatalletter which here follows:--

°°°°My Brother,--It is almost twenty-three years since we have seen

°°°°each other. My marriage was the occasion of our last interview,

°°°°after which we parted, and both of us were happy. Assuredly I

°°°°could not then foresee that you would one day be the prop of the

°°°°family whose prosperity you then predicted.

°°°°When you hold this letter within your hands I shall be no longer

°°°°living. In the position I now hold I cannot survive the disgrace

°°°°of bankruptcy. I have waited on the edge of the gulf until the

°°°°last moment, hoping to save myself. The end has come, I must sink

°°°°into it. The double bankruptcies of my broker and of Roguin, my

°°°°notary, have carried off my last resources and left me nothing. I

°°°°have the bitterness of owing nearly four millions, with assets not

°°°°more than twenty-five per cent in value to pay them. The wines in

°°°°my warehouses suffer from the fall in prices caused by the

°°°°abundance and quality of your vintage. In three days Paris will

°°°°cry out: "Monsieur Grandet was a knave!" and I, an honest man,

°°°°shall be lying in my winding-sheet of infamy. I deprive my son of

°°°°a good name, which I have stained, and the fortune of his mother,

°°°°which I have lost. He knows nothing of all this,--my unfortunate

°°°°child whom I idolize! We parted tenderly. He was ignorant,

°°°°happily, that the last beatings of my heart were spent in that

°°°°farewell. Will he not some day curse me? My brother, my brother!

°°°°the curses of our children are horrible; they can appeal against

°°°°ours, but theirs are irrevocable. Grandet, you are my elder

°°°°brother, you owe me your protection; act for me so that Charles

°°°°may cast no bitter words upon my grave! My brother, if I were

°°°°writing with my blood, with my tears, no greater anguish could I

°°°°put into this letter,--nor as great, for then I should weep, I

°°°°should bleed, I should die, I should suffer no more, but now I

°°°°suffer and look at death with dry eyes.

°°°°From henceforth you are my son's father; he has no relations, as

°°°°you well know, on his mother's side. Why did I not consider social

°°°°prejudices? Why did I yield to love? Why did I marry the natural

°°°°daughter of a great lord? Charles has no family. Oh, my unhappy

°°°°son! my son! Listen, Grandet! I implore nothing for myself,--

°°°°besides, your property may not be large enough to carry a mortgage

°°°°of three millions,--but for my son! Brother, my suppliant hands

°°°°are clasped as I think of you; behold them! Grandet, I confide my

°°°°son to you in dying, and I look at the means of death with less

°°°°pain as I think that you will be to him a father. He loved me

°°°°well, my Charles; I was good to him, I never thwarted him; he will

°°°°not curse me. Ah, you see! he is gentle, he is like his mother, he

°°°°will cause you no grief. Poor boy! accustomed to all the

°°°°enjoyments of luxury, he knows nothing of the privations to which

°°°°you and I were condemned by the poverty of our youth. And I leave

°°°°him ruined! alone! Yes, all my friends will avoid him, and it is I

°°°°who have brought this humiliation upon him! Would that I had the

°°°°force to send him with one thrust into the heavens to his mother's

°°°°side! Madness! I come back to my disaster--to his. I send him to

°°°°you that you may tell him in some fitting way of my death, of his

°°°°future fate. Be a father to him, but a good father. Do not tear

°°°°him all at once from his idle life, it would kill him. I beg him

°°°°on my knees to renounce all rights that, as his mother's heir, he

°°°°may have on my estate. But the prayer is superfluous; he is

°°°°honorable, and he will feel that he must not appear among my

°°°°creditors. Bring him to see this at the right time; reveal to him

°°°°the hard conditions of the life I have made for him: and if he

°°°°still has tender thoughts of me, tell him in my name that all is

°°°°not lost for him. Yes, work, labor, which saved us both, may give

°°°°him back the fortune of which I have deprived him; and if he

°°°°listens to his father's voice as it reaches him from the grave, he

°°°°will go the Indies. My brother, Charles is an upright and

°°°°courageous young man; give him the wherewithal to make his

°°°°venture; he will die sooner than not repay you the funds which you

°°°°may lend him. Grandet! if you will not do this, you will lay up

°°°°for yourself remorse. Ah, should my child find neither tenderness

°°°°nor succor in you, I would call down the vengeance of God upon

°°°°your cruelty!

°°°°If I had been able to save something from the wreck, I might have

°°°°had the right to leave him at least a portion of his mother's

°°°°property; but my last monthly payments have absorbed everything. I

°°°°did not wish to die uncertain of my child's fate; I hoped to feel

°°°°a sacred promise in a clasp of your hand which might have warmed

°°°°my heart: but time fails me. While Charles is journeying to you I

°°°°shall be preparing my assignment. I shall endeavor to show by the

°°°°order and good faith of my accounts that my disaster comes neither

°°°°from a faulty life nor from dishonesty. It is for my son's sake

°°°°that I strive to do this.

°°°°Farewell, my brother! May the blessing of God be yours for the

°°°°generous guardianship I lay upon you, and which, I doubt not, you

°°°°will accept. A voice will henceforth and forever pray for you in

°°°°that world where we must all go, and where I am now as you read

°°°°these lines.

°°°°Victor-Ange-Guillaume Grandet.

°°°°"So you are talking?" said Pere Grandet as he carefully folded theletter in its original creases and put it into his waistcoat-pocket.He looked at his nephew with a humble, timid air, beneath which he hidhis feelings and his calculations. "Have you warmed yourself?" he saidto him.

°°°°"Thoroughly, my dear uncle."

°°°°"Well, where are the women?" said his uncle, already forgetting thathis nephew was to sleep at the house. At this moment Eugenie andMadame Grandet returned.

°°°°"Is the room all ready?" said Grandet, recovering his composure."Yes, father."

°°°°"Well then, my nephew, if you are tired, Nanon shall show you yourroom. It isn't a dandy's room; but you will excuse a poor wine-growerwho never has a penny to spare. Taxes swallow up everything.""We do not wish to intrude, Grandet," said the banker; "you may wantto talk to your nephew, and therefore we will bid you good-night."At these words the assembly rose, and each made a parting bow inkeeping with his or her own character. The old notary went to the doorto fetch his lantern and came back to light it, offering to accompanythe des Grassins on their way. Madame des Grassins had not foreseenthe incident which brought the evening prematurely to an end, herservant therefore had not arrived.

°°°°"Will you do me the honor to take my arm, madame?" said the abbe."Thank you, monsieur l'abbe, but I have my son," she answered dryly."Ladies cannot compromise themselves with me," said the abbe."Take Monsieur Cruchot's arm," said her husband.

°°°°The abbe walked off with the pretty lady so quickly that they weresoon some distance in advance of the caravan.

°°°°"That is a good-looking young man, madame," he said, pressing her arm."Good-by to the grapes, the vintage is done. It is all over with us.We may as well say adieu to Mademoiselle Grandet. Eugenie will belongto the dandy. Unless this cousin is enamoured of some Parisian woman,your son Adolphe will find another rival in--"

°°°°"Not at all, monsieur l'abbe. This young man cannot fail to see thatEugenie is a little fool,--a girl without the least freshness. Did younotice her to-night? She was as yellow as a quince."

°°°°"Perhaps you made the cousin notice it?"

°°°°"I did not take the trouble--"

°°°°"Place yourself always beside Eugenie, madame, and you need never takethe trouble to say anything to the young man against his cousin; hewill make his own comparisons, which--"

°°°°"Well, he has promised to dine with me the day after to-morrow.""Ah! if you only /would/, madame--" said the abbe.

°°°°"What is it that you wish me to do, monsieur l'abbe? Do you mean tooffer me bad advice? I have not reached the age of thirty-nine,without a stain upon my reputation, thank God! to compromise myselfnow, even for the empire of the Great Mogul. You and I are of an agewhen we both know the meaning of words. For an ecclesiastic, youcertainly have ideas that are very incongruous. Fie! it is worthy ofFaublas!"

°°°°"You have read Faublas?"

°°°°"No, monsieur l'abbe; I meant to say the /Liaisons dangereuses/.""Ah! that book is infinitely more moral," said the abbe, laughing."But you make me out as wicked as a young man of the present day; Ionly meant--"

°°°°"Do you dare to tell me you were not thinking of putting wicked thingsinto my head? Isn't it perfectly clear? If this young man--who I admitis very good-looking--were to make love to me, he would not think ofhis cousin. In Paris, I know, good mothers do devote themselves inthis way to the happiness and welfare of their children; but we livein the provinces, monsieur l'abbe."

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"And," she continued, "I do not want, and Adolphe himself would notwant, a hundred millions brought at such a price."

°°°°"Madame, I said nothing about a hundred millions; that temptationmight be too great for either of us to withstand. Only, I do thinkthat an honest woman may permit herself, in all honor, certainharmless little coquetries, which are, in fact, part of her socialduty and which--"

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"Are we not bound, madame, to make ourselves agreeable to each other?--Permit me to blow my nose.--I assure you, madame," he resumed, "thatthe young gentleman ogled you through his glass in a more flatteringmanner than he put on when he looked at me; but I forgive him fordoing homage to beauty in preference to old age--"

°°°°"It is quite apparent," said the president in his loud voice, "thatMonsieur Grandet of Paris has sent his son to Saumur with extremelymatrimonial intentions."

°°°°"But in that case the cousin wouldn't have fallen among us like acannon-ball," answered the notary.

°°°°"That doesn't prove anything," said Monsieur des Grassins; "the oldmiser is always making mysteries."

°°°°"Des Grassins, my friend, I have invited the young man to dinner. Youmust go and ask Monsieur and Madame de Larsonniere and the du Hautoys,with the beautiful demoiselle du Hautoy, of course. I hope she will beproperly dressed; that jealous mother of hers does make such a frightof her! Gentlemen, I trust that you will all do us the honor to come,"she added, stopping the procession to address the two Cruchots."Here you are at home, madame," said the notary.

°°°°After bowing to the three des Grassins, the three Cruchots returnedhome, applying their provincial genius for analysis to studying, underall its aspects, the great event of the evening, which undoubtedlychanged the respective positions of Grassinists and Cruchotines. Theadmirable common-sense which guided all the actions of these greatmachinators made each side feel the necessity of a momentary allianceagainst a common enemy. Must they not mutually hinder Eugenie fromloving her cousin, and the cousin from thinking of Eugenie? Could theParisian resist the influence of treacherous insinuations, soft-spokencalumnies, slanders full of faint praise and artless denials, whichshould be made to circle incessantly about him and deceive him?IV

°°°°When the four relations were left alone, Monsieur Grandet said to hisnephew,--

°°°°"We must go to bed. It is too late to talk about the matters whichhave brought you here; to-morrow we will take a suitable moment. Webreakfast at eight o'clock; at midday we eat a little fruit or a bitof bread, and drink a glass of white wine; and we dine, like theParisians, at five o'clock. That's the order of the day. If you liketo go and see the town and the environs you are free to do so. Youwill excuse me if my occupations do not permit me to accompany you.You may perhaps hear people say that I am rich,--Monsieur Grandetthis, Monsieur Grandet that. I let them talk; their gossip does nothurt my credit. But I have not a penny; I work in my old age like anapprentice whose worldly goods are a bad plane and two good arms.Perhaps you'll soon know yourself what a franc costs when you have gotto sweat for it. Nanon, where are the candles?"

°°°°"I trust, my nephew, that you will find all you want," said MadameGrandet; "but if you should need anything else, you can call Nanon.""My dear aunt, I shall need nothing; I have, I believe, broughteverything with me. Permit me to bid you good-night, and my youngcousin also."

°°°°Charles took a lighted wax candle from Nanon's hand,--an Anjou candle,very yellow in color, and so shopworn that it looked like tallow anddeceived Monsieur Grandet, who, incapable of suspecting its presenceunder his roof, did not perceive this magnificence.

°°°°"I will show you the way," he said.

°°°°Instead of leaving the hall by the door which opened under thearchway, Grandet ceremoniously went through the passage which dividedthe hall from the kitchen. A swing-door, furnished with a large ovalpane of glass, shut this passage from the staircase, so as to fend offthe cold air which rushed through it. But the north wind whistled nonethe less keenly in winter, and, in spite of the sand-bags at thebottom of the doors of the living-room, the temperature within couldscarcely be kept at a proper height. Nanon went to bolt the outerdoor; then she closed the hall and let loose a wolf-dog, whose barkwas so strangled that he seemed to have laryngitis. This animal, notedfor his ferocity, recognized no one but Nanon; the two untutoredchildren of the fields understood each other.

°°°°When Charles saw the yellow, smoke-stained walls of the well of thestaircase, where each worm-eaten step shook under the heavy foot-fallof his uncle, his expectations began to sober more and more. Hefancied himself in a hen-roost. His aunt and cousin, to whom he turnedan inquiring look, were so used to the staircase that they did notguess the cause of his amazement, and took the glance for anexpression of friendliness, which they answered by a smile that madehim desperate.

°°°°"Why the devil did my father send me to such a place?" he said tohimself.

°°°°When they reached the first landing he saw three doors painted inEtruscan red and without casings,--doors sunk in the dusty walls andprovided with iron bars, which in fact were bolts, each ending withthe pattern of a flame, as did both ends of the long sheath of thelock. The first door at the top of the staircase, which opened into aroom directly above the kitchen, was evidently walled up. In fact, theonly entrance to that room was through Grandet's bedchamber; the roomitself was his office. The single window which lighted it, on the sideof the court, was protected by a lattice of strong iron bars. No one,not even Madame Grandet, had permission to enter it. The old man choseto be alone, like an alchemist in his laboratory. There, no doubt,some hiding-place had been ingeniously constructed; there the title-deeds of property were stored; there hung the scales on which to weighthe louis; there were devised, by night and secretly, the estimates,the profits, the receipts, so that business men, finding Grandetprepared at all points, imagined that he got his cue from fairies ordemons; there, no doubt, while Nanon's loud snoring shook the rafters,while the wolf-dog watched and yawned in the courtyard, while Madameand Mademoiselle Grandet were quietly sleeping, came the old cooper tocuddle, to con over, to caress and clutch and clasp his gold. Thewalls were thick, the screens sure. He alone had the key of thislaboratory, where--so people declared--he studied the maps on whichhis fruit-trees were marked, and calculated his profits to a vine, andalmost to a twig.

°°°°The door of Eugenie's chamber was opposite to the walled-up entranceto this room. At the other end of the landing were the appartements ofthe married pair, which occupied the whole front of the house. MadameGrandet had a room next to that of Eugenie, which was entered througha glass door. The master's chamber was separated from that of his wifeby a partition, and from the mysterious strong-room by a thick wall.Pere Grandet lodged his nephew on the second floor, in the highmansarde attic which was above his own bedroom, so that he might hearhim if the young man took it into his head to go and come. WhenEugenie and her mother reached the middle of the landing they kissedeach other for good-night; then with a few words of adieu to Charles,cold upon the lips, but certainly very warm in the heart of the younggirl, they withdrew into their own chambers.

°°°°"Here you are in your room, my nephew," said Pere Grandet as he openedthe door. "If you need to go out, call Nanon; without her, beware! thedog would eat you up without a word. Sleep well. Good-night. Ha! why,they have made you a fire!" he cried.

°°°°At this moment Nanon appeared with the warming pan.

°°°°"Here's something more!" said Monsieur Grandet. "Do you take my nephewfor a lying-in woman? Carry off your brazier, Nanon!"

°°°°"But, monsieur, the sheets are damp, and this gentleman is as delicateas a woman."

°°°°"Well, go on, as you've taken it into your head," said Grandet,pushing her by the shoulders; "but don't set things on fire." Sosaying, the miser went down-stairs, grumbling indistinct sentences.Charles stood aghast in the midst of his trunks. After casting hiseyes on the attic-walls covered with that yellow paper sprinkled withbouquets so well known in dance-houses, on the fireplace of ribbedstone whose very look was chilling, on the chairs of yellow wood withvarnished cane seats that seemed to have more than the usual fourangles, on the open night-table capacious enough to hold a smallsergeant-at-arms, on the meagre bit of rag-carpet beside the bed, onthe tester whose cloth valance shook as if, devoured by moths, it wasabout to fall, he turned gravely to la Grande Nanon and said,--"Look here! my dear woman, just tell me, am I in the house of MonsieurGrandet, formerly mayor of Saumur, and brother to Monsieur Grandet ofParis?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur; and a very good, a very kind, a very perfectgentleman. Shall I help you to unpack your trunks?"

°°°°"Faith! yes, if you will, my old trooper. Didn't you serve in themarines of the Imperial Guard?"

°°°°"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Nanon. "What's that,--the marines of the guard?Is it salt? Does it go in the water?"

°°°°"Here, get me my dressing-gown out of that valise; there's the key."Nanon was wonder-struck by the sight of a dressing-gown made of greensilk, brocaded with gold flowers of an antique design.

°°°°"Are you going to put that on to go to bed with?" she asked."Yes."

°°°°"Holy Virgin! what a beautiful altar-cloth it would make for theparish church! My dear darling monsieur, give it to the church, andyou'll save your soul; if you don't, you'll lose it. Oh, how nice youlook in it! I must call mademoiselle to see you."

°°°°"Come, Nanon, if Nanon you are, hold your tongue; let me go to bed.I'll arrange my things to-morrow. If my dressing-gown pleases you somuch, you shall save your soul. I'm too good a Christian not to giveit to you when I go away, and you can do what you like with it."Nanon stood rooted to the ground, gazing at Charles and unable to putfaith into his words.

°°°°"Good night, Nanon."

°°°°"What in the world have I come here for?" thought Charles as he wentto sleep. "My father is not a fool; my journey must have some object.Pshaw! put off serious thought till the morrow, as some Greek idiotsaid."

°°°°"Blessed Virgin! how charming he is, my cousin!" Eugenie was saying,interrupting her prayers, which that night at least were neverfinished.

°°°°Madame Grandet had no thoughts at all as she went to bed. She heardthe miser walking up and down his room through the door ofcommunication which was in the middle of the partition. Like all timidwomen, she had studied the character of her lord. Just as the petrelforesees the storm, she knew by imperceptible signs when an inwardtempest shook her husband; and at such times, to use an expression ofher own, she "feigned dead."

°°°°Grandet gazed at the door lined with sheet-iron which he lately put tohis sanctum, and said to himself,--

°°°°"What a crazy idea of my brother to bequeath his son to me! A finelegacy! I have not fifty francs to give him. What are fifty francs toa dandy who looked at my barometer as if he meant to make firewood ofit!"

°°°°In thinking over the consequences of that legacy of anguish Grandetwas perhaps more agitated than his brother had been at the moment ofwriting it.

°°°°"I shall have that golden robe," thought Nanon, who went to sleeptricked out in her altar-cloth, dreaming for the first time in herlife of flowers, embroidery, and damask, just as Eugenie was dreamingof love.

°°°°*****

°°°°In the pure and monotonous life of young girls there comes a delicioushour when the sun sheds its rays into their soul, when the flowersexpress their thoughts, when the throbbings of the heart send upwardto the brain their fertilizing warmth and melt all thoughts into avague desire,--day of innocent melancholy and of dulcet joys! Whenbabes begin to see, they smile; when a young girl first perceives thesentiment of nature, she smiles as she smiled when an infant. If lightis the first love of life, is not love a light to the heart? Themoment to see within the veil of earthly things had come for Eugenie.An early riser, like all provincial girls, she was up betimes and saidher prayers, and then began the business of dressing,--a businesswhich henceforth was to have a meaning. First she brushed and smoothedher chestnut hair and twisted its heavy masses to the top of her headwith the utmost care, preventing the loose tresses from straying, andgiving to her head a symmetry which heightened the timid candor of herface; for the simplicity of these accessories accorded well with theinnocent sincerity of its lines. As she washed her hands again andagain in the cold water which hardened and reddened the skin, shelooked at her handsome round arms and asked herself what her cousindid to make his hands so softly white, his nails so delicately curved.She put on new stockings and her prettiest shoes. She laced her corsetstraight, without skipping a single eyelet. And then, wishing for thefirst time in her life to appear to advantage, she felt the joy ofhaving a new gown, well made, which rendered her attractive.As she finished her toilet the clock of the parish church struck thehour; to her astonishment, it was only seven. The desire of havingplenty of time for dressing carefully had led her to get up too early.Ignorant of the art of retouching every curl and studying everyeffect, Eugenie simply crossed her arms, sat down by the window, andlooked at the court-yard, the narrow garden, and the high terracedwalls that over-topped it: a dismal, hedged-in prospect, yet notwholly devoid of those mysterious beauties which belong to solitary oruncultivated nature. Near the kitchen was a well surrounded by a curb,with a pulley fastened to a bent iron rod clasped by a vine whoseleaves were withered, reddened, and shrivelled by the season. Fromthence the tortuous shoots straggled to the wall, clutched it, and ranthe whole length of the house, ending near the wood-pile, where thelogs were ranged with as much precision as the books in a library. Thepavement of the court-yard showed the black stains produced in time bylichens, herbage, and the absence of all movement or friction. Thethick walls wore a coating of green moss streaked with waving brownlines, and the eight stone steps at the bottom of the court-yard whichled up to the gate of the garden were disjointed and hidden beneathtall plants, like the tomb of a knight buried by his widow in the daysof the Crusades. Above a foundation of moss-grown, crumbling stoneswas a trellis of rotten wood, half fallen from decay; over themclambered and intertwined at will a mass of clustering creepers. Oneach side of the latticed gate stretched the crooked arms of twostunted apple-trees. Three parallel walks, gravelled and separatedfrom each other by square beds, where the earth was held in by box-borders, made the garden, which terminated, beneath a terrace of theold walls, in a group of lindens. At the farther end were raspberry-bushes; at the other, near the house, an immense walnut-tree droopedits branches almost into the window of the miser's sanctum.A clear day and the beautiful autumnal sun common to the banks of theLoire was beginning to melt the hoar-frost which the night had laid onthese picturesque objects, on the walls, and on the plants whichswathed the court-yard. Eugenie found a novel charm in the aspect ofthings lately so insignificant to her. A thousand confused thoughtscame to birth in her mind and grew there, as the sunbeams grew withoutalong the wall. She felt that impulse of delight, vague, inexplicable,which wraps the moral being as a cloud wraps the physical body. Herthoughts were all in keeping with the details of this strangelandscape, and the harmonies of her heart blended with the harmoniesof nature. When the sun reached an angle of the wall where the "Venus-hair" of southern climes drooped its thick leaves, lit with thechanging colors of a pigeon's breast, celestial rays of hope illuminedthe future to her eyes, and thenceforth she loved to gaze upon thatpiece of wall, on its pale flowers, its blue harebells, its wiltingherbage, with which she mingled memories as tender as those ofchildhood. The noise made by each leaf as it fell from its twig in thevoid of that echoing court gave answer to the secret questionings ofthe young girl, who could have stayed there the livelong day withoutperceiving the flight of time. Then came tumultuous heavings of thesoul. She rose often, went to her glass, and looked at herself, as anauthor in good faith looks at his work to criticise it and blame it inhis own mind.

°°°°"I am not beautiful enough for him!" Such was Eugenie's thought,--ahumble thought, fertile in suffering. The poor girl did not do herselfjustice; but modesty, or rather fear, is among the first of love'svirtues. Eugenie belonged to the type of children with sturdyconstitutions, such as we see among the lesser bourgeoisie, whosebeauties always seem a little vulgar; and yet, though she resembledthe Venus of Milo, the lines of her figure were ennobled by the softerChristian sentiment which purifies womanhood and gives it adistinction unknown to the sculptors of antiquity. She had an enormoushead, with the masculine yet delicate forehead of the Jupiter ofPhidias, and gray eyes, to which her chaste life, penetrating fullyinto them, carried a flood of light. The features of her round face,formerly fresh and rosy, were at one time swollen by the small-pox,which destroyed the velvet texture of the skin, though it kindly leftno other traces, and her cheek was still so soft and delicate that hermother's kiss made a momentary red mark upon it. Her nose was somewhattoo thick, but it harmonized well with the vermilion mouth, whoselips, creased in many lines, were full of love and kindness. Thethroat was exquisitely round. The bust, well curved and carefullycovered, attracted the eye and inspired reverie. It lacked, no doubt,the grace which a fitting dress can bestow; but to a connoisseur thenon-flexibility of her figure had its own charm. Eugenie, tall andstrongly made, had none of the prettiness which pleases the masses;but she was beautiful with a beauty which the spirit recognizes, andnone but artists truly love. A painter seeking here below for a typeof Mary's celestial purity, searching womankind for those proud modesteyes which Raphael divined, for those virgin lines, often due tochances of conception, which the modesty of Christian life alone canbestow or keep unchanged,--such a painter, in love with his ideal,would have found in the face of Eugenie the innate nobleness that isignorant of itself; he would have seen beneath the calmness of thatbrow a world of love; he would have felt, in the shape of the eyes, inthe fall of the eyelids, the presence of the nameless something thatwe call divine. Her features, the contour of her head, which noexpression of pleasure had ever altered or wearied, were like thelines of the horizon softly traced in the far distance across thetranquil lakes. That calm and rosy countenance, margined with lightlike a lovely full-blown flower, rested the mind, held the eye, andimparted the charm of the conscience that was there reflected. Eugeniewas standing on the shore of life where young illusions flower, wheredaisies are gathered with delights ere long to be unknown; and thusshe said, looking at her image in the glass, unconscious as yet oflove: "I am too ugly; he will not notice me."

°°°°Then she opened the door of her chamber which led to the staircase,and stretched out her neck to listen for the household noises. "He isnot up," she thought, hearing Nanon's morning cough as the good soulwent and came, sweeping out the halls, lighting her fire, chaining thedog, and speaking to the beasts in the stable. Eugenie at once wentdown and ran to Nanon, who was milking the cow.

°°°°"Nanon, my good Nanon, make a little cream for my cousin's breakfast.""Why, mademoiselle, you should have thought of that yesterday," saidNanon, bursting into a loud peal of laughter. "I can't make cream.Your cousin is a darling, a darling! oh, that he is! You should haveseen him in his dressing-gown, all silk and gold! I saw him, I did! Hewears linen as fine as the surplice of monsieur le cure.""Nanon, please make us a /galette/."

°°°°"And who'll give me wood for the oven, and flour and butter for thecakes?" said Nanon, who in her function of prime-minister to Grandetassumed at times enormous importance in the eyes of Eugenie and hermother. "Mustn't rob the master to feast the cousin. You ask him forbutter and flour and wood: he's your father, perhaps he'll give yousome. See! there he is now, coming to give out the provisions."Eugenie escaped into the garden, quite frightened as she heard thestaircase shaking under her father's step. Already she felt theeffects of that virgin modesty and that special consciousness ofhappiness which lead us to fancy, not perhaps without reason, that ourthoughts are graven on our foreheads and are open to the eyes of all.Perceiving for the first time the cold nakedness of her father'shouse, the poor girl felt a sort of rage that she could not put it inharmony with her cousin's elegance. She felt the need of doingsomething for him,--what, she did not know. Ingenuous and truthful,she followed her angelic nature without mistrusting her impressions orher feelings. The mere sight of her cousin had wakened within her thenatural yearnings of a woman,--yearnings that were the more likely todevelop ardently because, having reached her twenty-third year, shewas in the plenitude of her intelligence and her desires. For thefirst time in her life her heart was full of terror at the sight ofher father; in him she saw the master of the fate, and she fanciedherself guilty of wrong-doing in hiding from his knowledge certainthoughts. She walked with hasty steps, surprised to breathe a purerair, to feel the sun's rays quickening her pulses, to absorb fromtheir heat a moral warmth and a new life. As she turned over in hermind some stratagem by which to get the cake, a quarrel--an event asrare as the sight of swallows in winter--broke out between la GrandeNanon and Grandet. Armed with his keys, the master had come to doleout provisions for the day's consumption.

°°°°"Is there any bread left from yesterday?" he said to Nanon."Not a crumb, monsieur."

°°°°Grandet took a large round loaf, well floured and moulded in one ofthe flat baskets which they use for baking in Anjou, and was about tocut it, when Nanon said to him,--

°°°°"We are five, to-day, monsieur."

°°°°"That's true," said Grandet, "but your loaves weigh six pounds;there'll be some left. Besides, these young fellows from Paris don'teat bread, you'll see."

°°°°"Then they must eat /frippe/?" said Nanon.

°°°°/Frippe/ is a word of the local lexicon of Anjou, and means anyaccompaniment of bread, from butter which is spread upon it, thecommonest kind of /frippe/, to peach preserve, the most distinguishedof all the /frippes/; those who in their childhood have licked the/frippe/ and left the bread, will comprehend the meaning of Nanon'sspeech.

°°°°"No," answered Grandet, "they eat neither bread nor /frippe/; they aresomething like marriageable girls."

°°°°After ordering the meals for the day with his usual parsimony, thegoodman, having locked the closets containing the supplies, was aboutto go towards the fruit-garden, when Nanon stopped him to say,--"Monsieur, give me a little flour and some butter, and I'll make a/galette/ for the young ones."

°°°°"Are you going to pillage the house on account of my nephew?""I wasn't thinking any more of your nephew than I was of your dog,--not more than you think yourself; for, look here, you've only forkedout six bits of sugar. I want eight."

°°°°"What's all this, Nanon? I have never seen you like this before. Whathave you got in your head? Are you the mistress here? You sha'n't havemore than six pieces of sugar."

°°°°"Well, then, how is your nephew to sweeten his coffee?"

°°°°"With two pieces; I'll go without myself."

°°°°"Go without sugar at your age! I'd rather buy you some out of my ownpocket."

°°°°"Mind your own business."

°°°°In spite of the recent fall in prices, sugar was still in Grandet'seyes the most valuable of all the colonial products; to him it wasalways six francs a pound. The necessity of economizing it, acquiredunder the Empire, had grown to be the most inveterate of his habits.All women, even the greatest ninnies, know how to dodge and dodge toget their ends; Nanon abandoned the sugar for the sake of getting the/galette/.

°°°°"Mademoiselle!" she called through the window, "do you want some/galette/?"

°°°°"No, no," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Come, Nanon," said Grandet, hearing his daughter's voice. "See here."He opened the cupboard where the flour was kept, gave her a cupful,and added a few ounces of butter to the piece he had already cut off."I shall want wood for the oven," said the implacable Nanon."Well, take what you want," he answered sadly; "but in that case youmust make us a fruit-tart, and you'll cook the whole dinner in theoven. In that way you won't need two fires."

°°°°"Goodness!" cried Nanon, "you needn't tell me that."

°°°°Grandet cast a look that was well-nigh paternal upon his faithfuldeputy.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she cried, when his back was turned, "we shall havethe /galette/."

°°°°Pere Grandet returned from the garden with the fruit and arranged aplateful on the kitchen-table.

°°°°"Just see, monsieur," said Nanon, "what pretty boots your nephew has.What leather! why it smells good! What does he clean it with, Iwonder? Am I to put your egg-polish on it?"

°°°°"Nanon, I think eggs would injure that kind of leather. Tell him youdon't know how to black morocco; yes, that's morocco. He will get yousomething himself in Saumur to polish those boots with. I have heardthat they put sugar into the blacking to make it shine."

°°°°"They look good to eat," said the cook, putting the boots to her nose."Bless me! if they don't smell like madame's eau-de-cologne. Ah! howfunny!"

°°°°"Funny!" said her master. "Do you call it funny to put more money intoboots than the man who stands in them is worth?"

°°°°"Monsieur," she said, when Grandet returned the second time, afterlocking the fruit-garden, "won't you have the /pot-au-feu/ put on onceor twice a week on account of your nephew?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Am I to go to the butcher's?"

°°°°"Certainly not. We will make the broth of fowls; the farmers willbring them. I shall tell Cornoiller to shoot some crows; they make thebest soup in the world."

°°°°"Isn't it true, monsieur, that crows eat the dead?"

°°°°"You are a fool, Nanon. They eat what they can get, like the rest ofthe world. Don't we all live on the dead? What are legacies?"Monsieur Grandet, having no further orders to give, drew out hiswatch, and seeing that he had half an hour to dispose of beforebreakfast, he took his hat, went and kissed his daughter, and said toher:

°°°°"Do you want to come for a walk in the fields, down by the Loire? Ihave something to do there."

°°°°Eugenie fetched her straw bonnet, lined with pink taffeta; then thefather and daughter went down the winding street to the shore."Where are you going at this early hour?" said Cruchot, the notary,meeting them.

°°°°"To see something," answered Grandet, not duped by the matutinalappearance of his friend.

°°°°When Pere Grandet went to "see something," the notary knew byexperience there was something to be got by going with him; so hewent.

°°°°"Come, Cruchot," said Grandet, "you are one of my friends. I'll showyou what folly it is to plant poplar-trees on good ground.""Do you call the sixty thousand francs that you pocketed for thosethat were in your fields down by the Loire, folly?" said MaitreCruchot, opening his eyes with amazement. "What luck you have had! Tocut down your trees at the very time they ran short of white-wood atNantes, and to sell them at thirty francs!"

°°°°Eugenie listened, without knowing that she approached the most solemnmoment of her whole life, and that the notary was about to bring downupon her head a paternal and supreme sentence. Grandet had now reachedthe magnificent fields which he owned on the banks of the Loire, wherethirty workmen were employed in clearing away, filling up, andlevelling the spots formerly occupied by the poplars.

°°°°"Maitre Cruchot, see how much ground this tree once took up! Jean," hecried to a laborer, "m-m-measure with your r-r-rule, b-both ways.""Four times eight feet," said the man.

°°°°"Thirty-two feet lost," said Grandet to Cruchot. "I had three hundredpoplars in this one line, isn't that so? Well, then, three h-h-hundredtimes thir-thirty-two lost m-m-me five hundred in h-h-hay; add twiceas much for the side rows,--fifteen hundred; the middle rows as muchmore. So we may c-c-call it a th-thousand b-b-bales of h-h-hay--""Very good," said Cruchot, to help out his friend; "a thousand balesare worth about six hundred francs."

°°°°"Say t-t-twelve hundred, be-c-cause there's three or four hundredfrancs on the second crop. Well, then, c-c-calculate that t-twelvethousand francs a year for f-f-forty years with interest c-c-comesto--"

°°°°"Say sixty thousand francs," said the notary.

°°°°"I am willing; c-c-comes t-t-to sixty th-th-thousand. Very good,"continued Grandet, without stuttering: "two thousand poplars fortyyears old will only yield me fifty thousand francs. There's a loss. Ihave found that myself," said Grandet, getting on his high horse."Jean, fill up all the holes except those at the bank of the river;there you are to plant the poplars I have bought. Plant 'em there, andthey'll get nourishment from the government," he said, turning toCruchot, and giving a slight motion to the wen on his nose, whichexpressed more than the most ironical of smiles.

°°°°"True enough; poplars should only be planted on poor soil," saidCruchot, amazed at Grandet's calculations.

°°°°"Y-y-yes, monsieur," answered the old man satirically.

°°°°Eugenie, who was gazing at the sublime scenery of the Loire, andpaying no attention to her father's reckonings, presently turned anear to the remarks of Cruchot when she heard him say,--

°°°°"So you have brought a son-in-law from Paris. All Saumur is talkingabout your nephew. I shall soon have the marriage-contract to draw up,hey! Pere Grandet?"

°°°°"You g-g-got up very early to t-t-tell me that," said Grandet,accompanying the remark with a motion of his wen. "Well, oldc-c-comrade, I'll be frank, and t-t-tell you what you want t-t-toknow. I would rather, do you see, f-f-fling my daughter into the Loirethan g-g-give her to her c-c-cousin. You may t-t-tell that everywhere,--no, never mind; let the world t-t-talk."

°°°°This answer dazzled and blinded the young girl with sudden light. Thedistant hopes upspringing in her heart bloomed suddenly, became real,tangible, like a cluster of flowers, and she saw them cut down andwilting on the earth. Since the previous evening she had attachedherself to Charles by those links of happiness which bind soul tosoul; from henceforth suffering was to rivet them. Is it not the nobledestiny of women to be more moved by the dark solemnities of griefthan by the splendors of fortune? How was it that fatherly feeling haddied out of her father's heart? Of what crime had Charles been guilty?Mysterious questions! Already her dawning love, a mystery so profound,was wrapping itself in mystery. She walked back trembling in all herlimbs; and when she reached the gloomy street, lately so joyous toher, she felt its sadness, she breathed the melancholy which time andevents had printed there. None of love's lessons lacked. A few stepsfrom their own door she went on before her father and waited at thethreshold. But Grandet, who saw a newspaper in the notary's hand,stopped short and asked,--

°°°°"How are the Funds?"

°°°°"You never listen to my advice, Grandet," answered Cruchot. "Buy soon;you will still make twenty per cent in two years, besides getting anexcellent rate of interest,--five thousand a year for eighty thousandfrancs fifty centimes."

°°°°"We'll see about that," answered Grandet, rubbing his chin."Good God!" exclaimed the notary.

°°°°"Well, what?" cried Grandet; and at the same moment Cruchot put thenewspaper under his eyes and said:

°°°°"Read that!"

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, one of the most respected merchants in Paris,

°°°°blew his brains out yesterday, after making his usual appearance

°°°°at the Bourse. He had sent his resignation to the president of the

°°°°Chamber of Deputies, and had also resigned his functions as a

°°°°judge of the commercial courts. The failures of Monsieur Roguin

°°°°and Monsieur Souchet, his broker and his notary, had ruined him.

°°°°The esteem felt for Monsieur Grandet and the credit he enjoyed

°°°°were nevertheless such that he might have obtained the necessary

°°°°assistance from other business houses. It is much to be regretted

°°°°that so honorable a man should have yielded to momentary despair,"

°°°°etc.

°°°°"I knew it," said the old wine-grower to the notary.

°°°°The words sent a chill of horror through Maitre Cruchot, who,notwithstanding his impassibility as a notary, felt the cold runningdown his spine as he thought that Grandet of Paris had possiblyimplored in vain the millions of Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"And his son, so joyous yesterday--"

°°°°"He knows nothing as yet," answered Grandet, with the same composure."Adieu! Monsieur Grandet," said Cruchot, who now understood the stateof the case, and went off to reassure Monsieur de Bonfons.On entering, Grandet found breakfast ready. Madame Grandet, roundwhose neck Eugenie had flung her arms, kissing her with the quickeffusion of feeling often caused by secret grief, was already seatedin her chair on castors, knitting sleeves for the coming winter."You can begin to eat," said Nanon, coming downstairs four steps at atime; "the young one is sleeping like a cherub. Isn't he a darlingwith his eyes shut? I went in and I called him: no answer.""Let him sleep," said Grandet; "he'll wake soon enough to hear ill-tidings."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Eugenie, putting into her coffee the two littlebits of sugar weighing less than half an ounce which the old miseramused himself by cutting up in his leisure hours. Madame Grandet, whodid not dare to put the question, gazed at her husband.

°°°°"His father has blown his brains out."

°°°°"My uncle?" said Eugenie.

°°°°"Poor young man!" exclaimed Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Poor indeed!" said Grandet; "he isn't worth a sou!"

°°°°"Eh! poor boy, and he's sleeping like the king of the world!" saidNanon in a gentle voice.

°°°°Eugenie stopped eating. Her heart was wrung, as the young heart iswrung when pity for the suffering of one she loves overflows, for thefirst time, the whole being of a woman. The poor girl wept."What are you crying about? You didn't know your uncle," said herfather, giving her one of those hungry tigerish looks he doubtlessthrew upon his piles of gold.

°°°°"But, monsieur," said Nanon, "who wouldn't feel pity for the pooryoung man, sleeping there like a wooden shoe, without knowing what'scoming?"

°°°°"I didn't speak to you, Nanon. Hold your tongue!"

°°°°Eugenie learned at that moment that the woman who loves must be ableto hide her feelings. She did not answer.

°°°°"You will say nothing to him about it, Ma'ame Grandet, till I return,"said the old man. "I have to go and straighten the line of my hedgealong the high-road. I shall be back at noon, in time for the secondbreakfast, and then I will talk with my nephew about his affairs. Asfor you, Mademoiselle Eugenie, if it is for that dandy you are crying,that's enough, child. He's going off like a shot to the Indies. Youwill never see him again."

°°°°The father took his gloves from the brim of his hat, put them on withhis usual composure, pushed them in place by shoving the fingers ofboth hands together, and went out.

°°°°"Mamma, I am suffocating!" cried Eugenie when she was alone with hermother; "I have never suffered like this."

°°°°Madame Grandet, seeing that she turned pale, opened the window and lether breathe fresh air.

°°°°"I feel better!" said Eugenie after a moment.

°°°°This nervous excitement in a nature hitherto, to all appearance, calmand cold, reacted on Madame Grandet; she looked at her daughter withthe sympathetic intuition with which mothers are gifted for theobjects of their tenderness, and guessed all. In truth the life of theHungarian sisters, bound together by a freak of nature, could scarcelyhave been more intimate than that of Eugenie and her mother,--alwaystogether in the embrasure of that window, and sleeping together in thesame atmosphere.

°°°°"My poor child!" said Madame Grandet, taking Eugenie's head and layingit upon her bosom.

°°°°At these words the young girl raised her head, questioned her motherby a look, and seemed to search out her inmost thought.

°°°°"Why send him to the Indies?" she said. "If he is unhappy, ought henot to stay with us? Is he not our nearest relation?"

°°°°"Yes, my child, it seems natural; but your father has his reasons: wemust respect them."

°°°°The mother and daughter sat down in silence, the former upon herraised seat, the latter in her little armchair, and both took up theirwork. Swelling with gratitude for the full heart-understanding hermother had given her, Eugenie kissed the dear hand, saying,--"How good you are, my kind mamma!"

°°°°The words sent a glow of light into the motherly face, worn andblighted as it was by many sorrows.

°°°°"You like him?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°Madame Grandet only smiled in reply. Then, after a moment's silence,she said in a low voice: "Do you love him already? That is wrong.""Wrong?" said Eugenie. "Why is it wrong? You are pleased with him,Nanon is pleased with him; why should he not please me? Come, mamma,let us set the table for his breakfast."

°°°°She threw down her work, and her mother did the same, saying, "Foolishchild!" But she sanctioned the child's folly by sharing it. Eugeniecalled Nanon.

°°°°"What do you want now, mademoiselle?"

°°°°"Nanon, can we have cream by midday?"

°°°°"Ah! midday, to be sure you can," answered the old servant."Well, let him have his coffee very strong; I heard Monsieur desGrassins say that they make the coffee very strong in Paris. Put in agreat deal."

°°°°"Where am I to get it?"

°°°°"Buy some."

°°°°"Suppose monsieur meets me?"

°°°°"He has gone to his fields."

°°°°"I'll run, then. But Monsieur Fessard asked me yesterday if the Magihad come to stay with us when I bought the wax candle. All the townwill know our goings-on."

°°°°"If your father finds it out," said Madame Grandet, "he is capable ofbeating us."

°°°°"Well, let him beat us; we will take his blows on our knees."Madame Grandet for all answer raised her eyes to heaven. Nanon put onher hood and went off. Eugenie got out some clean table-linen, andwent to fetch a few bunches of grapes which she had amused herself byhanging on a string across the attic; she walked softly along thecorridor, so as not to waken her cousin, and she could not helplistening at the door to his quiet breathing.

°°°°"Sorrow is watching while he sleeps," she thought.

°°°°She took the freshest vine-leaves and arranged her dish of grapes ascoquettishly as a practised house-keeper might have done, and placedit triumphantly on the table. She laid hands on the pears counted outby her father, and piled them in a pyramid mixed with leaves. She wentand came, and skipped and ran. She would have liked to lay undercontribution everything in her father's house; but the keys were inhis pocket. Nanon came back with two fresh eggs. At sight of themEugenie almost hugged her round the neck.

°°°°"The farmer from Lande had them in his basket. I asked him for them,and he gave them to me, the darling, for nothing, as an attention!"VAfter two hours' thought and care, during which Eugenie jumped uptwenty times from her work to see if the coffee were boiling, or to goand listen to the noise her cousin made in dressing, she succeeded inpreparing a simple little breakfast, very inexpensive, but which,nevertheless, departed alarmingly from the inveterate customs of thehouse. The midday breakfast was always taken standing. Each took aslice of bread, a little fruit or some butter, and a glass of wine. AsEugenie looked at the table drawn up near the fire with an arm-chairplaced before her cousin's plate, at the two dishes of fruit, the egg-cup, the bottle of white wine, the bread, and the sugar heaped up in asaucer, she trembled in all her limbs at the mere thought of the lookher father would give her if he should come in at that moment. Sheglanced often at the clock to see if her cousin could breakfast beforethe master's return.

°°°°"Don't be troubled, Eugenie; if your father comes in, I will take itall upon myself," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Eugenie could not repress a tear.

°°°°"Oh, my good mother!" she cried, "I have never loved you enough."Charles, who had been tramping about his room for some time, singingto himself, now came down. Happily, it was only eleven o'clock. Thetrue Parisian! he had put as much dandyism into his dress as if hewere in the chateau of the noble lady then travelling in Scotland. Hecame into the room with the smiling, courteous manner so becoming toyouth, which made Eugenie's heart beat with mournful joy. He had takenthe destruction of his castles in Anjou as a joke, and came up to hisaunt gaily.

°°°°"Have you slept well, dear aunt? and you, too, my cousin?""Very well, monsieur; did you?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"I? perfectly."

°°°°"You must be hungry, cousin," said Eugenie; "will you take your seat?""I never breakfast before midday; I never get up till then. However, Ifared so badly on the journey that I am glad to eat something at once.Besides--" here he pulled out the prettiest watch Breguet ever made."Dear me! I am early, it is only eleven o'clock!"

°°°°"Early?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Yes; but I wanted to put my things in order. Well, I shall be glad tohave anything to eat,--anything, it doesn't matter what, a chicken, apartridge."

°°°°"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Nanon, overhearing the words.

°°°°"A partridge!" whispered Eugenie to herself; she would gladly havegiven the whole of her little hoard for a partridge.

°°°°"Come and sit down," said his aunt.

°°°°The young dandy let himself drop into an easy-chair, just as a prettywoman falls gracefully upon a sofa. Eugenie and her mother tookordinary chairs and sat beside him, near the fire.

°°°°"Do you always live here?" said Charles, thinking the room uglier bydaylight than it had seemed the night before.

°°°°"Always," answered Eugenie, looking at him, "except during thevintage. Then we go and help Nanon, and live at the Abbaye desNoyers."

°°°°"Don't you ever take walks?"

°°°°"Sometimes on Sunday after vespers, when the weather is fine," saidMadame Grandet, "we walk on the bridge, or we go and watch thehaymakers."

°°°°"Have you a theatre?"

°°°°"Go to the theatre!" exclaimed Madame Grandet, "see a play! Why,monsieur, don't you know it is a mortal sin?"

°°°°"See here, monsieur," said Nanon, bringing in the eggs, "here are yourchickens,--in the shell."

°°°°"Oh! fresh eggs," said Charles, who, like all people accustomed toluxury, had already forgotten about his partridge, "that is delicious:now, if you will give me the butter, my good girl."

°°°°"Butter! then you can't have the /galette/."

°°°°"Nanon, bring the butter," cried Eugenie.

°°°°The young girl watched her cousin as he cut his sippets, with as muchpleasure as a grisette takes in a melodrama where innocence and virtuetriumph. Charles, brought up by a charming mother, improved, andtrained by a woman of fashion, had the elegant, dainty, foppishmovements of a coxcomb. The compassionate sympathy and tenderness of ayoung girl possess a power that is actually magnetic; so that Charles,finding himself the object of the attentions of his aunt and cousin,could not escape the influence of feelings which flowed towards him,as it were, and inundated him. He gave Eugenie a bright, caressinglook full of kindness,--a look which seemed itself a smile. Heperceived, as his eyes lingered upon her, the exquisite harmony offeatures in the pure face, the grace of her innocent attitude, themagic clearness of the eyes, where young love sparkled and desireshone unconsciously.

°°°°"Ah! my dear cousin, if you were in full dress at the Opera, I assureyou my aunt's words would come true,--you would make the men committhe mortal sin of envy, and the women the sin of jealousy."The compliment went to Eugenie's heart and set it beating, though shedid not understand its meaning.

°°°°"Oh! cousin," she said, "you are laughing at a poor little countrygirl."

°°°°"If you knew me, my cousin, you would know that I abhor ridicule; itwithers the heart and jars upon all my feelings." Here he swallowedhis buttered sippet very gracefully. "No, I really have not enoughmind to make fun of others; and doubtless it is a great defect. InParis, when they want to disparage a man, they say: 'He has a goodheart.' The phrase means: 'The poor fellow is as stupid as arhinoceros.' But as I am rich, and known to hit the bull's-eye atthirty paces with any kind of pistol, and even in the open fields,ridicule respects me."

°°°°"My dear nephew, that bespeaks a good heart."

°°°°"You have a very pretty ring," said Eugenie; "is there any harm inasking to see it?"

°°°°Charles held out his hand after loosening the ring, and Eugenieblushed as she touched the pink nails of her cousin with the tips ofher fingers.

°°°°"See, mamma, what beautiful workmanship."

°°°°"My! there's a lot of gold!" said Nanon, bringing in the coffee."What is that?" exclaimed Charles, laughing, as he pointed to anoblong pot of brown earthenware, glazed on the inside, and edged witha fringe of ashes, from the bottom of which the coffee-grounds werebubbling up and falling in the boiling liquid.

°°°°"It is boiled coffee," said Nanon.

°°°°"Ah! my dear aunt, I shall at least leave one beneficent trace of myvisit here. You are indeed behind the age! I must teach you to makegood coffee in a Chaptal coffee-pot."

°°°°He tried to explain the process of a Chaptal coffee-pot.

°°°°"Gracious! if there are so many things as all that to do," said Nanon,"we may as well give up our lives to it. I shall never make coffeethat way; I know that! Pray, who is to get the fodder for the cowwhile I make the coffee?"

°°°°"I will make it," said Eugenie.

°°°°"Child!" said Madame Grandet, looking at her daughter.

°°°°The word recalled to their minds the sorrow that was about to fallupon the unfortunate young man; the three women were silent, andlooked at him with an air of commiseration that caught his attention."Is anything the matter, my cousin?" he said.

°°°°"Hush!" said Madame Grandet to Eugenie, who was about to answer; "youknow, my daughter, that your father charged us not to speak tomonsieur--"

°°°°"Say Charles," said young Grandet.

°°°°"Ah! you are called Charles? What a beautiful name!" cried Eugenie.Presentiments of evil are almost always justified. At this momentNanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie, who had all three been thinkingwith a shudder of the old man's return, heard the knock whose echoesthey knew but too well.

°°°°"There's papa!" said Eugenie.

°°°°She removed the saucer filled with sugar, leaving a few pieces on thetable-cloth; Nanon carried off the egg-cup; Madame Grandet sat up likea frightened hare. It was evidently a panic, which amazed Charles, whowas wholly unable to understand it.

°°°°"Why! what is the matter?" he asked.

°°°°"My father has come," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, what of that?"

°°°°Monsieur Grandet entered the room, threw his keen eye upon the table,upon Charles, and saw the whole thing.

°°°°"Ha! ha! so you have been making a feast for your nephew; very good,very good, very good indeed!" he said, without stuttering. "When thecat's away, the mice will play."

°°°°"Feast!" thought Charles, incapable of suspecting or imagining therules and customs of the household.

°°°°"Give me my glass, Nanon," said the master

°°°°Eugenie brought the glass. Grandet drew a horn-handled knife with abig blade from his breeches' pocket, cut a slice of bread, took asmall bit of butter, spread it carefully on the bread, and ate itstanding. At this moment Charlie was sweetening his coffee. PereGrandet saw the bits of sugar, looked at his wife, who turned pale,and made three steps forward; he leaned down to the poor woman's earand said,--

°°°°"Where did you get all that sugar?"

°°°°"Nanon fetched it from Fessard's; there was none."

°°°°It is impossible to picture the profound interest the three women tookin this mute scene. Nanon had left her kitchen and stood looking intothe room to see what would happen. Charles, having tasted his coffee,found it bitter and glanced about for the sugar, which Grandet hadalready put away.

°°°°"What do you want?" said his uncle.

°°°°"The sugar."

°°°°"Put in more milk," answered the master of the house; "your coffeewill taste sweeter."

°°°°Eugenie took the saucer which Grandet had put away and placed it onthe table, looking calmly at her father as she did so. Most assuredly,the Parisian woman who held a silken ladder with her feeble arms tofacilitate the flight of her lover, showed no greater courage thanEugenie displayed when she replaced the sugar upon the table. Thelover rewarded his mistress when she proudly showed him her beautifulbruised arm, and bathed every swollen vein with tears and kisses tillit was cured with happiness. Charles, on the other hand, never so muchas knew the secret of the cruel agitation that shook and bruised theheart of his cousin, crushed as it was by the look of the old miser."You are not eating your breakfast, wife."

°°°°The poor helot came forward with a piteous look, cut herself a pieceof bread, and took a pear. Eugenie boldly offered her father somegrapes, saying,--

°°°°"Taste my preserves, papa. My cousin, you will eat some, will you not?I went to get these pretty grapes expressly for you."

°°°°"If no one stops them, they will pillage Saumur for you, nephew. Whenyou have finished, we will go into the garden; I have something totell you which can't be sweetened."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother cast a look on Charles whose meaning the youngman could not mistake.

°°°°"What is it you mean, uncle? Since the death of my poor mother"--atthese words his voice softened--"no other sorrow can touch me.""My nephew, who knows by what afflictions God is pleased to try us?"said his aunt.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta," said Grandet, "there's your nonsense beginning. I amsorry to see those white hands of yours, nephew"; and he showed theshoulder-of-mutton fists which Nature had put at the end of his ownarms. "There's a pair of hands made to pick up silver pieces. You'vebeen brought up to put your feet in the kid out of which we make thepurses we keep our money in. A bad look-out! Very bad!"

°°°°"What do you mean, uncle? I'll be hanged if I understand a single wordof what you are saying."

°°°°"Come!" said Grandet.

°°°°The miser closed the blade of his knife with a snap, drank the last ofhis wine, and opened the door.

°°°°"My cousin, take courage!"

°°°°The tone of the young girl struck terror to Charles's heart, and hefollowed his terrible uncle, a prey to disquieting thoughts. Eugenie,her mother, and Nanon went into the kitchen, moved by irresistiblecuriosity to watch the two actors in the scene which was about to takeplace in the garden, where at first the uncle walked silently ahead ofthe nephew. Grandet was not at all troubled at having to tell Charlesof the death of his father; but he did feel a sort of compassion inknowing him to be without a penny, and he sought for some phrase orformula by which to soften the communication of that cruel truth. "Youhave lost your father," seemed to him a mere nothing to say; fathersdie before their children. But "you are absolutely without means,"--all the misfortunes of life were summed up in those words! Grandetwalked round the garden three times, the gravel crunching under hisheavy step.

°°°°In the crucial moments of life our minds fasten upon the localitywhere joys or sorrows overwhelm us. Charles noticed with minuteattention the box-borders of the little garden, the yellow leaves asthey fluttered down, the dilapidated walls, the gnarled fruit-trees,--picturesque details which were destined to remain forever in hismemory, blending eternally, by the mnemonics that belong exclusivelyto the passions, with the recollections of this solemn hour."It is very fine weather, very warm," said Grandet, drawing a longbreath.

°°°°"Yes, uncle; but why--"

°°°°"Well, my lad," answered his uncle, "I have some bad news to give you.Your father is ill--"

°°°°"Then why am I here?" said Charles. "Nanon," he cried, "order post-horses! I can get a carriage somewhere?" he added, turning to hisuncle, who stood motionless.

°°°°"Horses and carriages are useless," answered Grandet, looking atCharles, who remained silent, his eyes growing fixed. "Yes, my poorboy, you guess the truth,--he is dead. But that's nothing; there issomething worse: he blew out his brains."

°°°°"My father!"

°°°°"Yes, but that's not the worst; the newspapers are all talking aboutit. Here, read that."

°°°°Grandet, who had borrowed the fatal article from Cruchot, thrust thepaper under his nephew's eyes. The poor young man, still a child,still at an age when feelings wear no mask, burst into tears."That's good!" thought Grandet; "his eyes frightened me. He'll be allright if he weeps,--That is not the worst, my poor nephew," he saidaloud, not noticing whether Charles heard him, "that is nothing; youwill get over it: but--"

°°°°"Never, never! My father! Oh, my father!"

°°°°"He has ruined you, you haven't a penny."

°°°°"What does that matter? My father! Where is my father?"

°°°°His sobs resounded horribly against those dreary walls andreverberated in the echoes. The three women, filled with pity, weptalso; for tears are often as contagious as laughter. Charles, withoutlistening further to his uncle, ran through the court and up thestaircase to his chamber, where he threw himself across the bed andhid his face in the sheets, to weep in peace for his lost parents."The first burst must have its way," said Grandet, entering theliving-room, where Eugenie and her mother had hastily resumed theirseats and were sewing with trembling hands, after wiping their eyes."But that young man is good for nothing; his head is more taken upwith the dead than with his money."

°°°°Eugenie shuddered as she heard her father's comment on the most sacredof all griefs. From that moment she began to judge him. Charles'ssobs, though muffled, still sounded through the sepulchral house; andhis deep groans, which seemed to come from the earth beneath, onlyceased towards evening, after growing gradually feebler.

°°°°"Poor young man!" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Fatal exclamation! Pere Grandet looked at his wife, at Eugenie, and atthe sugar-bowl. He recollected the extraordinary breakfast preparedfor the unfortunate youth, and he took a position in the middle of theroom.

°°°°"Listen to me," he said, with his usual composure. "I hope that youwill not continue this extravagance, Madame Grandet. I don't give youMY money to stuff that young fellow with sugar."

°°°°"My mother had nothing to do with it," said Eugenie; "it was I who--""Is it because you are of age," said Grandet, interrupting hisdaughter, "that you choose to contradict me? Remember, Eugenie--""Father, the son of your brother ought to receive from us--""Ta, ta, ta, ta!" exclaimed the cooper on four chromatic tones; "theson of my brother this, my nephew that! Charles is nothing at all tous; he hasn't a farthing, his father has failed; and when this dandyhas cried his fill, off he goes from here. I won't have himrevolutionize my household."

°°°°"What is 'failing,' father?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°"To fail," answered her father, "is to commit the most dishonorableaction that can disgrace a man."

°°°°"It must be a great sin," said Madame Grandet, "and our brother may bedamned."

°°°°"There, there, don't begin with your litanies!" said Grandet,shrugging his shoulders. "To fail, Eugenie," he resumed, "is to commita theft which the law, unfortunately, takes under its protection.People have given their property to Guillaume Grandet trusting to hisreputation for honor and integrity; he has made away with it all, andleft them nothing but their eyes to weep with. A highway robber isbetter than a bankrupt: the one attacks you and you can defendyourself, he risks his own life; but the other--in short, Charles isdishonored."

°°°°The words rang in the poor girl's heart and weighed it down with theirheavy meaning. Upright and delicate as a flower born in the depths ofa forest, she knew nothing of the world's maxims, of its deceitfularguments and specious sophisms; she therefore believed the atrociousexplanation which her father gave her designedly, concealing thedistinction which exists between an involuntary failure and anintentional one.

°°°°"Father, could you not have prevented such a misfortune?""My brother did not consult me. Besides, he owes four millions.""What is a 'million,' father?" she asked, with the simplicity of achild which thinks it can find out at once all that it wants to know."A million?" said Grandet, "why, it is a million pieces of twenty souseach, and it takes five twenty sous pieces to make five francs.""Dear me!" cried Eugenie, "how could my uncle possibly have had fourmillions? Is there any one else in France who ever had so manymillions?" Pere Grandet stroked his chin, smiled, and his wen seemedto dilate. "But what will become of my cousin Charles?"

°°°°"He is going off to the West Indies by his father's request, and hewill try to make his fortune there."

°°°°"Has he got the money to go with?"

°°°°"I shall pay for his journey as far as--yes, as far as Nantes."Eugenie sprang into his arms.

°°°°"Oh, father, how good you are!"

°°°°She kissed him with a warmth that almost made Grandet ashamed ofhimself, for his conscience galled him a little.

°°°°"Will it take much time to amass a million?" she asked.

°°°°"Look here!" said the old miser, "you know what a napoleon is? Well,it takes fifty thousand napoleons to make a million."

°°°°"Mamma, we must say a great many /neuvaines/ for him."

°°°°"I was thinking so," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"That's the way, always spending my money!" cried the father. "Do youthink there are francs on every bush?"

°°°°At this moment a muffled cry, more distressing than all the others,echoed through the garrets and struck a chill to the hearts of Eugenieand her mother.

°°°°"Nanon, go upstairs and see that he does not kill himself," saidGrandet. "Now, then," he added, looking at his wife and daughter, whohad turned pale at his words, "no nonsense, you two! I must leave you;I have got to see about the Dutchmen who are going away to-day. Andthen I must find Cruchot, and talk with him about all this."He departed. As soon as he had shut the door Eugenie and her motherbreathed more freely. Until this morning the young girl had never feltconstrained in the presence of her father; but for the last few hoursevery moment wrought a change in her feelings and ideas.

°°°°"Mamma, how many louis are there in a cask of wine?"

°°°°"Your father sells his from a hundred to a hundred and fifty francs,sometimes two hundred,--at least, so I've heard say."

°°°°"Then papa must be rich?"

°°°°"Perhaps he is. But Monsieur Cruchot told me he bought Froidfond twoyears ago; that may have pinched him."

°°°°Eugenie, not being able to understand the question of her father'sfortune, stopped short in her calculations.

°°°°"He didn't even see me, the darling!" said Nanon, coming back from hererrand. "He's stretched out like a calf on his bed and crying like theMadeleine, and that's a blessing! What's the matter with the poor dearyoung man!"

°°°°"Let us go and console him, mamma; if any one knocks, we can comedown."

°°°°Madame Grandet was helpless against the sweet persuasive tones of herdaughter's voice. Eugenie was sublime: she had become a woman. Thetwo, with beating hearts, went up to Charles's room. The door wasopen. The young man heard and saw nothing; plunged in grief, he onlyuttered inarticulate cries.

°°°°"How he loves his father!" said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°In the utterance of those words it was impossible to mistake the hopesof a heart that, unknown to itself, had suddenly become passionate.Madame Grandet cast a mother's look upon her daughter, and thenwhispered in her ear,--

°°°°"Take care, you will love him!"

°°°°"Love him!" answered Eugenie. "Ah! if you did but know what my fathersaid to Monsieur Cruchot."

°°°°Charles turned over, and saw his aunt and cousin.

°°°°"I have lost my father, my poor father! If he had told me his secrettroubles we might have worked together to repair them. My God! my poorfather! I was so sure I should see him again that I think I kissed himquite coldly--"

°°°°Sobs cut short the words.

°°°°"We will pray for him," said Madame Grandet. "Resign yourself to thewill of God."

°°°°"Cousin," said Eugenie, "take courage! Your loss is irreparable;therefore think only of saving your honor."

°°°°With the delicate instinct of a woman who intuitively puts her mindinto all things, even at the moment when she offers consolation,Eugenie sought to cheat her cousin's grief by turning his thoughtsinward upon himself.

°°°°"My honor?" exclaimed the young man, tossing aside his hair with animpatient gesture as he sat up on his bed and crossed his arms. "Ah!that is true. My uncle said my father had failed." He uttered a heart-rending cry, and hid his face in his hands. "Leave me, leave me,cousin! My God! my God! forgive my father, for he must have sufferedsorely!"

°°°°There was something terribly attractive in the sight of this youngsorrow, sincere without reasoning or afterthought. It was a virgingrief which the simple hearts of Eugenie and her mother were fitted tocomprehend, and they obeyed the sign Charles made them to leave him tohimself. They went downstairs in silence and took their accustomedplaces by the window and sewed for nearly an hour without exchanging aword. Eugenie had seen in the furtive glance that she cast about theyoung man's room--that girlish glance which sees all in the twinklingof an eye--the pretty trifles of his dressing-case, his scissors, hisrazors embossed with gold. This gleam of luxury across her cousin'sgrief only made him the more interesting to her, possibly by way ofcontrast. Never before had so serious an event, so dramatic a sight,touched the imaginations of these two passive beings, hitherto sunk inthe stillness and calm of solitude.

°°°°"Mamma," said Eugenie, "we must wear mourning for my uncle.""Your father will decide that," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°They relapsed into silence. Eugenie drew her stitches with a uniformmotion which revealed to an observer the teeming thoughts of hermeditation. The first desire of the girl's heart was to share hercousin's mourning.

°°°°VI

°°°°About four o'clock an abrupt knock at the door struck sharply on theheart of Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What can have happened to your father?" she said to her daughter.Grandet entered joyously. After taking off his gloves, he rubbed hishands hard enough to take off their skin as well, if his epidermis hadnot been tanned and cured like Russia leather,--saving, of course, theperfume of larch-trees and incense. Presently his secret escaped him."Wife," he said, without stuttering, "I've trapped them all! Our wineis sold! The Dutch and the Belgians have gone. I walked about themarket-place in front of their inn, pretending to be doing nothing.That Belgian fellow--you know who I mean--came up to me. The owners ofall the good vineyards have kept back their vintages, intending towait; well, I didn't hinder them. The Belgian was in despair; I sawthat. In a minute the bargain was made. He takes my vintage at twohundred francs the puncheon, half down. He paid me in gold; the notesare drawn. Here are six louis for you. In three months wines will havefallen."

°°°°These words, uttered in a quiet tone of voice, were nevertheless sobitterly sarcastic that the inhabitants of Saumur, grouped at thismoment in the market-place and overwhelmed by the news of the saleGrandet had just effected, would have shuddered had they heard them.Their panic would have brought the price of wines down fifty per centat once.

°°°°"Did you have a thousand puncheons this year, father?"

°°°°"Yes, little one."

°°°°That term applied to his daughter was the superlative expression ofthe old miser's joy.

°°°°"Then that makes two hundred thousand pieces of twenty sous each?""Yes, Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"Then, father, you can easily help Charles."

°°°°The amazement, the anger, the stupefaction of Belshazzar when he sawthe /Mene-Tekel-Upharsin/ before his eyes is not to be compared withthe cold rage of Grandet, who, having forgotten his nephew, now foundhim enshrined in the heart and calculations of his daughter."What's this? Ever since that dandy put foot in MY house everythinggoes wrong! You behave as if you had the right to buy sugar-plums andmake feasts and weddings. I won't have that sort of thing. I hope Iknow my duty at my time of life! I certainly sha'n't take lessons frommy daughter, or from anybody else. I shall do for my nephew what it isproper to do, and you have no need to poke your nose into it. As foryou, Eugenie," he added, facing her, "don't speak of this again, orI'll send you to the Abbaye des Noyers with Nanon, see if I don't; andno later than to-morrow either, if you disobey me! Where is thatfellow, has he come down yet?"

°°°°"No, my friend," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What is he doing then?"

°°°°"He is weeping for his father," said Eugenie.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter without finding a word to say; afterall, he was a father. He made a couple of turns up and down the room,and then went hurriedly to his secret den to think over an investmenthe was meditating in the public Funds. The thinning out of his twothousand acres of forest land had yielded him six hundred thousandfrancs: putting this sum to that derived from the sale of his poplarsand to his other gains for the last year and for the current year, hehad amassed a total of nine hundred thousand francs, without countingthe two hundred thousand he had got by the sale just concluded. Thetwenty per cent which Cruchot assured him would gain in a short timefrom the Funds, then quoted at seventy, tempted him. He figured outhis calculation on the margin of the newspaper which gave the accountof his brother's death, all the while hearing the moans of his nephew,but without listening to them. Nanon came and knocked on the wall tosummon him to dinner. On the last step of the staircase he was sayingto himself as he came down,--

°°°°"I'll do it; I shall get eight per cent interest. In two years I shallhave fifteen hundred thousand francs, which I will then draw out ingood gold,--Well, where's my nephew?"

°°°°"He says he doesn't want anything to eat," answered Nanon; "that's notgood for him."

°°°°"So much saved," retorted her master.

°°°°"That's so," she said.

°°°°"Bah! he won't cry long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the woods."The dinner was eaten in silence.

°°°°"My good friend," said Madame Grandet, when the cloth was removed, "wemust put on mourning."

°°°°"Upon my word, Madame Grandet! what will you invent next to spendmoney on? Mourning is in the heart, and not in the clothes.""But mourning for a brother is indispensable; and the Church commandsus to--"

°°°°"Buy your mourning out of your six louis. Give me a hat-band; that'senough for me."

°°°°Eugenie raised her eyes to heaven without uttering a word. Hergenerous instincts, slumbering and long repressed but now suddenly andfor the first time awakened, were galled at every turn. The eveningpassed to all appearance like a thousand other evenings of theirmonotonous life, yet it was certainly the most horrible. Eugenie sewedwithout raising her head, and did not use the workbox which Charleshad despised the night before. Madame Grandet knitted her sleeves.Grandet twirled his thumbs for four hours, absorbed in calculationswhose results were on the morrow to astonish Saumur. No one came tovisit the family that day. The whole town was ringing with the news ofthe business trick just played by Grandet, the failure of his brother,and the arrival of his nephew. Obeying the desire to gossip over theirmutual interests, all the upper and middle-class wine-growers inSaumur met at Monsieur des Grassins, where terrible imprecations werebeing fulminated against the ex-mayor. Nanon was spinning, and thewhirr of her wheel was the only sound heard beneath the gray raftersof that silent hall.

°°°°"We don't waste our tongues," she said, showing her teeth, as largeand white as peeled almonds.

°°°°"Nothing should be wasted," answered Grandet, rousing himself from hisreverie. He saw a perspective of eight millions in three years, and hewas sailing along that sheet of gold. "Let us go to bed. I will bid mynephew good-night for the rest of you, and see if he will takeanything."

°°°°Madame Grandet remained on the landing of the first storey to hear theconversation that was about to take place between the goodman and hisnephew. Eugenie, bolder than her mother, went up two stairs."Well, nephew, you are in trouble. Yes, weep, that's natural. A fatheris a father; but we must bear our troubles patiently. I am a gooduncle to you, remember that. Come, take courage! Will you have alittle glass of wine?" (Wine costs nothing in Saumur, and they offerit as tea is offered in China.) "Why!" added Grandet, "you have got nolight! That's bad, very bad; you ought to see what you are about," andhe walked to the chimney-piece. "What's this?" he cried. "A waxcandle! How the devil did they filch a wax candle? The spendthriftswould tear down the ceilings of my house to boil the fellow's eggs."Hearing these words, mother and daughter slipped back into their roomsand burrowed in their beds, with the celerity of frightened micegetting back to their holes.

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you found a mine?" said the man, coming into thechamber of his wife.

°°°°"My friend, wait; I am saying my prayers," said the poor mother in atrembling voice.

°°°°"The devil take your good God!" growled Grandet in reply.Misers have no belief in a future life; the present is their all inall. This thought casts a terrible light upon our present epoch, inwhich, far more than at any former period, money sways the laws andpolitics and morals.  Institutions, books, men, and dogmas, allconspire to undermine belief in a future life,--a belief upon whichthe social edifice has rested for eighteen hundred years. The grave,as a means of transition, is little feared in our day. The future,which once opened to us beyond the requiems, has now been importedinto the present. To obtain /per fas et nefas/ a terrestrial paradiseof luxury and earthly enjoyment, to harden the heart and macerate thebody for the sake of fleeting possessions, as the martyrs oncesuffered all things to reach eternal joys, this is now the universalthought--a thought written everywhere, even in the very laws which askof the legislator, "What do you pay?" instead of asking him, "What doyou think?" When this doctrine has passed down from the bourgeoisie tothe populace, where will this country be?

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you done?" asked the old man.

°°°°"My friend, I am praying for you."

°°°°"Very good! Good-night; to-morrow morning we will have a talk."The poor woman went to sleep like a schoolboy who, not having learnedhis lessons, knows he will see his master's angry face on the morrow.At the moment when, filled with fear, she was drawing the sheet aboveher head that she might stifle hearing, Eugenie, in her night-gown andwith naked feet, ran to her side and kissed her brow.

°°°°"Oh! my good mother," she said, "to-morrow I will tell him it was I.""No; he would send you to Noyers. Leave me to manage it; he cannot eatme."

°°°°"Do you hear, mamma?"

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"/He/ is weeping still."

°°°°"Go to bed, my daughter; you will take cold in your feet: the floor isdamp."

°°°°*****

°°°°Thus passed the solemn day which was destined to weight upon the wholelife of the rich and poor heiress, whose sleep was never again to beso calm, nor yet so pure, as it had been up to this moment. It oftenhappens that certain actions of human life seem, literally speaking,improbable, though actual. Is not this because we constantly omit toturn the stream of psychological light upon our impulsivedeterminations, and fail to explain the subtile reasons, mysteriouslyconceived in our minds, which impelled them? Perhaps Eugenie's deeppassion should be analyzed in its most delicate fibres; for it became,scoffers might say, a malady which influenced her whole existence.Many people prefer to deny results rather than estimate the force ofties and links and bonds, which secretly join one fact to another inthe moral order. Here, therefore, Eugenie's past life will offer toobservers of human nature an explanation of her naive want ofreflection and the suddenness of the emotions which overflowed hersoul. The more tranquil her life had been, the more vivid was herwomanly pity, the more simple-minded were the sentiments now developedin her soul.

°°°°Made restless by the events of the day, she woke at intervals tolisten to her cousin, thinking she heard the sighs which still echoedin her heart. Sometimes she saw him dying of his trouble, sometimesshe dreamed that he fainted from hunger. Towards morning she wascertain that she heard a startling cry. She dressed at once and ran,in the dawning light, with a swift foot to her cousin's chamber, thedoor of which he had left open. The candle had burned down to thesocket. Charles, overcome by nature, was sleeping, dressed and sittingin an armchair beside the bed, on which his head rested; he dreamed asmen dream on an empty stomach. Eugenie might weep at her ease; shemight admire the young and handsome face blotted with grief, the eyesswollen with weeping, that seemed, sleeping as they were, to wellforth tears. Charles felt sympathetically the young girl's presence;he opened his eyes and saw her pitying him.

°°°°"Pardon me, my cousin," he said, evidently not knowing the hour northe place in which he found himself.

°°°°"There are hearts who hear you, cousin, and /we/ thought you mightneed something. You should go to bed; you tire yourself by sittingthus."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, then, adieu!"

°°°°She escaped, ashamed and happy at having gone there. Innocence alonecan dare to be so bold. Once enlightened, virtue makes hercalculations as well as vice. Eugenie, who had not trembled beside hercousin, could scarcely stand upon her legs when she regained herchamber. Her ignorant life had suddenly come to an end; she reasoned,she rebuked herself with many reproaches.

°°°°"What will he think of me? He will think that I love him!"That was what she most wished him to think. An honest love has its ownprescience, and knows that love begets love. What an event for thispoor solitary girl thus to have entered the chamber of a young man!Are there not thoughts and actions in the life of love which tocertain souls bear the full meaning of the holiest espousals? An hourlater she went to her mother and dressed her as usual. Then they bothcame down and sat in their places before the window waiting forGrandet, with that cruel anxiety which, according to the individualcharacter, freezes the heart or warms it, shrivels or dilates it, whena scene is feared, a punishment expected,--a feeling so natural thateven domestic animals possess it, and whine at the slightest pain ofpunishment, though they make no outcry when they inadvertently hurtthemselves. The goodman came down; but he spoke to his wife with anabsent manner, kissed Eugenie, and sat down to table without appearingto remember his threats of the night before.

°°°°"What has become of my nephew? The lad gives no trouble.""Monsieur, he is asleep," answered Nanon.

°°°°"So much the better; he won't want a wax candle," said Grandet in ajeering tone.

°°°°This unusual clemency, this bitter gaiety, struck Madame Grandet withamazement, and she looked at her husband attentively. The goodman--here it may be well to explain that in Touraine, Anjou, Pitou, andBretagne the word "goodman," already used to designate Grandet, isbestowed as often upon harsh and cruel men as upon those of kindlytemperament, when either have reached a certain age; the title meansnothing on the score of individual gentleness--the goodman took hishat and gloves, saying as he went out,--

°°°°"I am going to loiter about the market-place and find Cruchot.""Eugenie, your father certainly has something on his mind."Grandet, who was a poor sleeper, employed half his nights in thepreliminary calculations which gave such astonishing accuracy to hisviews and observations and schemes, and secured to them the unfailingsuccess at sight of which his townsmen stood amazed. All human poweris a compound of time and patience. Powerful beings will and wait. Thelife of a miser is the constant exercise of human power put to theservice of self. It rests on two sentiments only,--self-love and self-interest; but self-interest being to a certain extent compact andintelligent self-love, the visible sign of real superiority, itfollows that self-love and self-interest are two parts of the samewhole,--egotism. From this arises, perhaps, the excessive curiosityshown in the habits of a miser's life whenever they are put before theworld. Every nature holds by a thread to those beings who challengeall human sentiments by concentrating all in one passion. Where is theman without desire? and what social desire can be satisfied withoutmoney?

°°°°Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

°°°°In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

°°°°"My cousin!"

°°°°"Yes, cousin."

°°°°"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

°°°°"Where you like."

°°°°"How do you feel?"

°°°°"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

°°°°This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

°°°°She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

°°°°That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

°°°°"What troubles you?" she said.

°°°°"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

°°°°Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

°°°°When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

°°°°"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

°°°°"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

°°°°Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

°°°°"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

°°°°"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

°°°°The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

°°°°"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

°°°°Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

°°°°"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

°°°°"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

°°°°*****

°°°°About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

°°°°VII

°°°°At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

°°°°The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

°°°°"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

°°°°"Certainly, nephew."

°°°°As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

°°°°He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

°°°°"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

°°°°"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

°°°°"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

°°°°"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

°°°°"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

°°°°"--is threatened with insolvency--"

°°°°"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

°°°°"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

°°°°"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

°°°°"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

°°°°"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

°°°°"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

°°°°"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

°°°°"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

°°°°"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

°°°°"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

°°°°Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

°°°°"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

°°°°"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

°°°°"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

°°°°"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Exactly so," said the president.

°°°°"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

°°°°"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

°°°°"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

°°°°"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

°°°°"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

°°°°"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

°°°°"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

°°°°"Bentham, an Englishman.'

°°°°"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

°°°°"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

°°°°"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

°°°°"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

°°°°"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

°°°°"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

°°°°"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

°°°°"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

°°°°"That's very true."

°°°°"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

°°°°"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

°°°°"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

°°°°"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

°°°°A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

°°°°"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

°°°°He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

°°°°"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

°°°°"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

°°°°These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

°°°°"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

°°°°"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

°°°°The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

°°°°"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

°°°°She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

°°°°"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

°°°°"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

°°°°"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

°°°°"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

°°°°"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

°°°°"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

°°°°"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

°°°°"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

°°°°"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

°°°°The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

°°°°"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

°°°°"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

°°°°"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

°°°°When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

°°°°"Are not they fuming, hein?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

°°°°"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

°°°°In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

°°°°When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

°°°°"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

°°°°So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

°°°°"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

°°°°Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

°°°°"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

°°°°"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

°°°°The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

°°°°"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

°°°°"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

°°°°"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

°°°°"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

°°°°"I didn't know where."

°°°°"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

°°°°"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

°°°°"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

°°°°"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

°°°°The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

°°°°VIII

°°°°"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

°°°°"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

°°°°"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

°°°°"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

°°°°These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

°°°°She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

°°°°"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

°°°°My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

°°°°great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

°°°°foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

°°°°fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

°°°°when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

°°°°yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

°°°°plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

°°°°If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

°°°°that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

°°°°fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

°°°°my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

°°°°me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

°°°°so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

°°°°the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

°°°°bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

°°°°killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

°°°°there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

°°°°ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

°°°°I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

°°°°last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

°°°°enterprise.

°°°°"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

°°°°She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

°°°°I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

°°°°hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

°°°°not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

°°°°even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

°°°°have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

°°°°to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

°°°°world like other men who have started young without a sou and

°°°°brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

°°°°faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

°°°°another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

°°°°so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

°°°°my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

°°°°life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

°°°°Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

°°°°young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

°°°°caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

°°°°family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

°°°°were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

°°°°Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

°°°°grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

°°°°with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

°°°°your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

°°°°expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

°°°°accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

°°°°Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

°°°°When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

°°°°ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

°°°°hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

°°°°your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

°°°°spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

°°°°cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

°°°°ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

°°°°depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

°°°°of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

°°°°poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

°°°°see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

°°°°life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

°°°°can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

°°°°necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

°°°°have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

°°°°face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

°°°°seems to me--

°°°°"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

°°°°Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

°°°°Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

°°°°"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

°°°°Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

°°°°Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

°°°°My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

°°°°friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

°°°°of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

°°°°settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

°°°°can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

°°°°have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

°°°°have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

°°°°and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

°°°°can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

°°°°horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

°°°°keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

°°°°the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

°°°°will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

°°°°these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

°°°°nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

°°°°give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

°°°°his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

°°°°travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

°°°°them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

°°°°do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

°°°°seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

°°°°British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

°°°°pay him--

°°°°"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

°°°°Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

°°°°"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

°°°°"I have read those letters."

°°°°Charles colored.

°°°°"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

°°°°"And what?" asked Charles.

°°°°"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

°°°°"My dear cousin--"

°°°°"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

°°°°Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

°°°°"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

°°°°Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

°°°°As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

°°°°"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

°°°°Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

°°°°"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

°°°°"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

°°°°"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

°°°°"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

°°°°Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

°°°°"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

°°°°"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

°°°°"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

°°°°"But he owns Froidfond."

°°°°"What is Froidfond worth?"

°°°°"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

°°°°"Nothing but a poor farm!"

°°°°"He has vineyards and fields."

°°°°"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

°°°°"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

°°°°Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

°°°°Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

°°°°It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

°°°°"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

°°°°"Nothing," answered the old man.

°°°°Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

°°°°"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

°°°°"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

°°°°"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

°°°°"Say /was/ worth--"

°°°°"Where the devil have they got any?"

°°°°"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

°°°°"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

°°°°"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

°°°°"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

°°°°"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

°°°°Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

°°°°"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

°°°°The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

°°°°"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

°°°°Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

°°°°"Dans les gardes francaises

°°°°J'avais un bon papa."

°°°°Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

°°°°"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

°°°°He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

°°°°"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

°°°°"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

°°°°"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

°°°°"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

°°°°IX

°°°°The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

°°°°For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

°°°°After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

°°°°Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

°°°°"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

°°°°"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

°°°°"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

°°°°"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

°°°°"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

°°°°"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

°°°°"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

°°°°"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

°°°°"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

°°°°"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

°°°°The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

°°°°"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

°°°°Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

°°°°"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

°°°°He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

°°°°"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

°°°°"I must," he said, bowing his head.

°°°°For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

°°°°"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

°°°°"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

°°°°When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

°°°°"Do you love me?" she said.

°°°°"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

°°°°"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

°°°°She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

°°°°"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

°°°°"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

°°°°The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

°°°°"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

°°°°"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

°°°°"Then my heart will be always there."

°°°°"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

°°°°No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

°°°°"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

°°°°At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

°°°°"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

°°°°"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

°°°°"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

°°°°Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

°°°°Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

°°°°"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

°°°°Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

°°°°In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

°°°°Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

°°°°In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

°°°°"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

°°°°Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

°°°°"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

°°°°"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

°°°°The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

°°°°But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

°°°°As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

°°°°"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

°°°°"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

°°°°"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

°°°°In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

°°°°*****

°°°°In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

°°°°"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

°°°°Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

°°°°"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

°°°°X

°°°°Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

°°°°"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

°°°°The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

°°°°"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

°°°°"Where could we have got the money?"

°°°°"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

°°°°"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

°°°°Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

°°°°"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

°°°°There was a moment's silence.

°°°°"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

°°°°"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

°°°°"I'm always gay,--

°°°°"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

°°°°Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

°°°°he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

°°°°Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

°°°°"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

°°°°The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

°°°°When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

°°°°"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

°°°°"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

°°°°"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

°°°°"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

°°°°"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

°°°°"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur."

°°°°"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

°°°°"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

°°°°Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

°°°°"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

°°°°"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

°°°°"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

°°°°"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

°°°°The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

°°°°"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

°°°°At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

°°°°"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

°°°°"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

°°°°The two women were dumb.

°°°°"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

°°°°Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

°°°°"I have not got /my/ gold."

°°°°"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

°°°°"No, I have not got it."

°°°°"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

°°°°"No."

°°°°"By the shears of my father!"

°°°°Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

°°°°"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

°°°°Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

°°°°"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

°°°°Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

°°°°"Yes, father."

°°°°She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

°°°°"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

°°°°"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

°°°°Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

°°°°"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

°°°°"What use?"

°°°°"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

°°°°"And this is mine."

°°°°"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

°°°°"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

°°°°"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

°°°°She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

°°°°"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

°°°°Eugenie was silent and impassive.

°°°°"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

°°°°"You are a child."

°°°°"Of age."

°°°°Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

°°°°He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

°°°°Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

°°°°"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

°°°°Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

°°°°"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

°°°°"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

°°°°"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

°°°°"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

°°°°Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

°°°°"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

°°°°"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

°°°°"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

°°°°"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

°°°°"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

°°°°"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

°°°°He looked fixedly at his wife.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

°°°°"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

°°°°"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

°°°°"I will ask God to punish only me."

°°°°"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

°°°°"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

°°°°"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

°°°°"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

°°°°*****

°°°°Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

°°°°"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

°°°°"It is grease I'm trying out."

°°°°"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

°°°°The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

°°°°"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

°°°°At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

°°°°"How is Madame Grandet?"

°°°°"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

°°°°"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

°°°°They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

°°°°"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

°°°°When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

°°°°"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

°°°°"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

°°°°XI

°°°°For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

°°°°"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

°°°°"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

°°°°Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

°°°°One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

°°°°"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

°°°°"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

°°°°"All" meant "him."

°°°°"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

°°°°"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

°°°°Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

°°°°"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

°°°°Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

°°°°When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

°°°°"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

°°°°At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

°°°°"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

°°°°"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

°°°°"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

°°°°On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

°°°°"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

°°°°"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

°°°°"What do you mean?"

°°°°"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

°°°°"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

°°°°These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

°°°°"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

°°°°"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

°°°°"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

°°°°"She has given away her gold!"

°°°°"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

°°°°"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

°°°°"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

°°°°"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

°°°°"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

°°°°"How much?"

°°°°"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

°°°°"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

°°°°After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

°°°°"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

°°°°"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

°°°°"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

°°°°"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

°°°°"She has not a month to live."

°°°°Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

°°°°"What can be done?"

°°°°"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

°°°°"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

°°°°"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

°°°°"The scoundrels!"

°°°°"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

°°°°"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

°°°°He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

°°°°"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

°°°°"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

°°°°But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

°°°°"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

°°°°He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

°°°°"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

°°°°"O God, have pity upon us!"

°°°°The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

°°°°"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

°°°°Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

°°°°"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

°°°°"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

°°°°"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

°°°°"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

°°°°"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

°°°°Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

°°°°"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

°°°°"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

°°°°The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

°°°°"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

°°°°"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

°°°°"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

°°°°Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

°°°°"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

°°°°Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

°°°°"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

°°°°"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

°°°°"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

°°°°"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

°°°°XII

°°°°On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

°°°°"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

°°°°"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

°°°°"Oh! father--"

°°°°"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

°°°°"What is it you wish me to do?"

°°°°"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

°°°°"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

°°°°"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

°°°°"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

°°°°"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

°°°°Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

°°°°"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

°°°°"I will do all you wish, father."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

°°°°"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

°°°°He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

°°°°"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

°°°°The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

°°°°"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

°°°°"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

°°°°"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

°°°°Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

°°°°*****

°°°°Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

°°°°At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

°°°°"Yes, my father," she would answer.

°°°°"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

°°°°Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

°°°°"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

°°°°When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

°°°°"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

°°°°"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

°°°°*****

°°°°Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

°°°°"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

°°°°The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

°°°°"Nanon, we are alone--"

°°°°"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

°°°°"The ocean is between us," she said.

°°°°While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

°°°°"Fast colors!" said the draper.

°°°°"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

°°°°"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

°°°°When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

°°°°At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

°°°°It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

°°°°"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

°°°°"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

°°°°"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

°°°°"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

°°°°Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

°°°°Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

°°°°"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

°°°°"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

°°°°XIII

°°°°While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

°°°°With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

°°°°Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

°°°°Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

°°°°"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

°°°°Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

°°°°Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

°°°°"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

°°°°*****

°°°°At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

°°°°"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

°°°°The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

°°°°"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

°°°°Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

°°°°"Read it, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

°°°°Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

°°°°My dear Cousin,--

°°°°"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

°°°°You--

°°°°"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

°°°°"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

°°°°"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

°°°°She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

°°°°My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

°°°°success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

°°°°rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

°°°°together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

°°°°des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

°°°°we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

°°°°Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

°°°°the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

°°°°be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

°°°°life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

°°°°To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

°°°°dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

°°°°realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

°°°°from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

°°°°forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

°°°°long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

°°°°Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

°°°°--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

°°°°forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

°°°°night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

°°°°to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

°°°°heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

°°°°Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

°°°°sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

°°°°deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

°°°°all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

°°°°present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

°°°°all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

°°°°Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

°°°°your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

°°°°will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

°°°°education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

°°°°with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

°°°°myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

°°°°to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

°°°°think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

°°°°be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

°°°°right to understand it and to judge it.

°°°°I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

°°°°francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

°°°°Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

°°°°me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

°°°°Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

°°°°dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

°°°°marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

°°°°advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

°°°°are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

°°°°my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

°°°°have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

°°°°year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

°°°°proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

°°°°You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

°°°°heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

°°°°years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

°°°°but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

°°°°remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

°°°°which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

°°°°and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

°°°°you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

°°°°convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

°°°°putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

°°°°of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

°°°°ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

°°°°simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

°°°°Your devoted cousin,

°°°°Charles.

°°°°"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

°°°°P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

°°°°thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

°°°°capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

°°°°am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

°°°°which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

°°°°gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

°°°°hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

°°°°"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

°°°°Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

°°°°"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

°°°°Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

°°°°This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

°°°°"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

°°°°"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

°°°°"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

°°°°"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

°°°°"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

°°°°At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

°°°°"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

°°°°"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

°°°°"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

°°°°"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

°°°°Eugenie read the following letter:--

°°°°My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

°°°°has been in Paris about a month--

°°°°"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

°°°°I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

°°°°Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

°°°°the banns are published--

°°°°"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

°°°°The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

°°°°will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

°°°°tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

°°°°business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

°°°°keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

°°°°fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

°°°°devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

°°°°/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

°°°°the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

°°°°francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

°°°°there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

°°°°creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

°°°°I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

°°°°Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

°°°°Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

°°°°for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

°°°°have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

°°°°happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

°°°°matter before you have spoken to her about it--

°°°°There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

°°°°"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

°°°°"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

°°°°"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

°°°°"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

°°°°"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

°°°°The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

°°°°"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

°°°°There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

°°°°"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

°°°°"A love game," said the notary.

°°°°Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

°°°°"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

°°°°"I am ready for all things," said the president.

°°°°"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

°°°°The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

°°°°"I will be your slave!" he said.

°°°°"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

°°°°The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

°°°°When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

°°°°The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

°°°°The president gave Charles the following letter:--

°°°°My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

°°°°place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

°°°°also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

°°°°sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

°°°°I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

°°°°Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

°°°°mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

°°°°I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

°°°°not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

°°°°according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

°°°°our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

°°°°your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

°°°°in your cousin

°°°°Eugenie.

°°°°The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

°°°°"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

°°°°"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

°°°°Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

°°°°"Seventeen mil--"

°°°°"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

°°°°"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

°°°°"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

°°°°"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

°°°°"In money?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

°°°°"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

°°°°"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

°°°°The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

°°°°"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

°°°°The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

°°°°"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

°°°°"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

°°°°Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

°°°°God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

°°°°The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

°°°°Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

°°°°End





°°°°Colonel Chabert

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage and Clara Bell

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Madame la Comtesse Ida de Bocarme nee du Chasteler.

°°°°COLONEL CHABERT

°°°°"HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!"

°°°°This exclamation was made by a lawyer's clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper--a messenger in fact--who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread with a hearty appetite. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

°°°°"Come, Simonnin, don't play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!" said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

°°°°The lawyer's messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and /billets-doux/ keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

°°°°"If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?" asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

°°°°And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

°°°°"What trick can we play that cove?" said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

°°°°Then he went on improvising:

°°°°"/But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth/--(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned-- you, as you engross it!)--/when he resumed the reins of Government, understood/--(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)--/the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!/--(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)--/and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents/--('numerous' is flattering, and ought to please the Bench)--/all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in/--Stop," said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, "that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.--Well," he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, "well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!"

°°°°And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating--"/given in/--Are you ready?"

°°°°"Yes," cried the three writers.

°°°°It all went all together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

°°°°"/Given in/--Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our /i/'s and cross our /t/'s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages."

°°°°"By Jingo!" repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

°°°°"What! have you written /by Jingo/?" cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

°°°°"Why, yes," said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor's copy, "he has written, '/We must dot our i's/' and spelt it /by Gingo/!"

°°°°All the clerks shouted with laughter.

°°°°"Why! Monsieur Hure, you take 'By Jingo' for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!" exclaimed Simonnin.

°°°°"Scratch it cleanly out," said the head clerk. "If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the 'Shoulder arms!' of the law."

°°°°"/Given in--in/?" asked Godeschal.--"Tell me when, Boucard."

°°°°"June 1814," replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

°°°°A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, "Come in!"

°°°°Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers--/broutilles/ (odds and ends) in French law jargon--and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

°°°°The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk's cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk's table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

°°°°The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,--all the glory of a lawyer's office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine --neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of /remainders/, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to /Chlet/)--a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

°°°°So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients--something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities--an attorney's office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

°°°°But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man's soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

°°°°"Where is my penknife?"

°°°°"I am eating my breakfast."

°°°°"You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen!"

°°°°These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

°°°°"Monsieur, is your master at home?"

°°°°The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, "I am deaf."

°°°°"What do you want, sir?" asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

°°°°"This is the fifth time I have called," replied the victim. "I wish to speak to M. Derville."

°°°°"On business?"

°°°°"Yes, but I can explain it to no one but--"

°°°°"M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to----"

°°°°The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers' clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the old man, "as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up."

°°°°Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

°°°°"It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning." The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in "parties," went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

°°°°"I will come again to-night," said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

°°°°The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

°°°°"What do you think of that for a cracked pot?" said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

°°°°"He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again," said a clerk.

°°°°"He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay," said the head clerk.

°°°°"No, he is a retired concierge," said Godeschal.

°°°°"I bet you he is a nobleman," cried Boucard.

°°°°"I bet you he has been a porter," retorted Godeschal. "Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body's. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch."

°°°°"He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch," cried Desroches. "It has been known!"

°°°°"No," Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, "I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic."

°°°°"I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Done with you," answered Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur! Monsieur!" shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

°°°°"What are you at now, Simonnin?" asked Boucard.

°°°°"I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know."

°°°°All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

°°°°"What can we say to him?" cried Godeschal.

°°°°"Leave it to me," replied Boucard.

°°°°The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Boucard, "will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know----"

°°°°"Chabert."

°°°°"The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?" asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

°°°°"The same, monsieur," replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

°°°°"Whew!"

°°°°"Done brown!"

°°°°"Poof!"

°°°°"Oh!"

°°°°"Ah!"

°°°°"Boum!"

°°°°"The old rogue!"

°°°°"Ting-a-ring-ting!"

°°°°"Sold again!"

°°°°"Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying," said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

°°°°There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopeia of the language would fail to represent.

°°°°"Which theatre shall we go to?"

°°°°"To the opera," cried the head clerk.

°°°°"In the first place," said Godeschal, "I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui."

°°°°"Madame Saqui is not the play."

°°°°"What is a play?" replied Godeschal. "First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen--"

°°°°"But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!" cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

°°°°"To be seen for money," Godeschal added.

°°°°"But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective," said Desroches.

°°°°"But do listen to me!"

°°°°"You are talking nonsense, my dear boy," said Boucard.

°°°°"Is Curtius' a play?" said Godeschal.

°°°°"No," said the head clerk, "it is a collection of figures--but it is a spectacle."

°°°°"I bet you a hundred francs to a sou," Godeschal resumed, "that Curtius' Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy."

°°°°"And so on, and so forth!" said Simonnin.

°°°°"You mind I don't box your ears!" said Godeschal.

°°°°The clerk shrugged their shoulders.

°°°°"Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us," he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. "On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients."

°°°°"Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow," said Boucard. "To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!"

°°°°"If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?" said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal's.

°°°°"Since nothing is settled," said Boucard, "let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in 'Nero.' Simonnin may go to the pit."

°°°°And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

°°°°"/Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen/ (in words)," said Godeschal. "Ready?"

°°°°"Yes," replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

°°°°"/And we hope that my lords on the Bench/," the extemporizing clerk went on. "Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself."

°°°°"Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines," said Boucard.

°°°°"/We hope/," Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, "/that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth/----"

°°°°"Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn't you like a glass of water?" said the little messenger.

°°°°"That imp of a boy!" said Boucard. "Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides."

°°°°"/Here set forth/," Godeschal went on. "Add /in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse/ (at full length) /de Grandlieu/."

°°°°"What!" cried the chief, "are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor--a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of 'inasmuch,' and go to the Courts myself."

°°°°This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, "Those were good times."

°°°°At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maitre Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

°°°°Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at finding the head clerk busily arranging in a convenient order on his master's dining-room table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take a seat, which the client did.

°°°°"On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you named such an hour for an interview," said the old man, with the forced mirth of a ruined man, who does his best to smile.

°°°°"The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too," replied the man, going on with his work. "M. Derville chooses this hour for studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect is freer at this hour--the only time when he can have the silence and quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case, read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business, then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money."

°°°°As he listened to this explanation, the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an expression so bereft of intelligence, that the clerk, after looking at him, thought no more about him.

°°°°A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers. The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius' collection to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This quiescence would not have been a subject for astonishment if it had not completed the supernatural aspect of the man's whole person. The old soldier was dry and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, if I may use such a vulgar expression, was as the face of the dead. Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

°°°°Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head was due to some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by Rembrandt, without a frame. The brim of the hat which covered the old man's brow cast a black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This grotesque effect, though natural, threw into relief by contrast the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a certain look of melancholy madness, and the deteriorating symptoms characteristic of senility, giving the face an indescribably ill- starred look which no human words could render.

°°°°But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had worn into this face, as drops of water from the sky falling on fine marble at last destroy its beauty. A physician, an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama at the sight of its sublime horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques which artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of the lithographic stone while chatting with a friend.

°°°°On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful reverie in silence and at night. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow to the young man; the leather lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was, "His intelligence must have escaped through that cut."

°°°°"If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!" thought Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Derville, "to whom have I the honor of speaking?"

°°°°"To Colonel Chabert."

°°°°"Which?"

°°°°"He who was killed at Eylau," replied the old man.

°°°°On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each other, as much as to say, "He is mad."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Colonel went on, "I wish to confide to you the secret of my position."

°°°°A thing worthy of note is the natural intrepidity of lawyers. Whether from the habit of receiving a great many persons, or from the deep sense of the protection conferred on them by the law, or from confidence in their missions, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing, like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

°°°°"During the day, sir," said the attorney, "I am not so miserly of my time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise. Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I may consider necessary. Speak."

°°°°Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he turned over the bundles of papers.

°°°°"You know, perhaps," said the dead man, "that I commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat's famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is a historical fact, recorded in /Victoires et Conquetes/, where it is related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor, after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the enemy's cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers, perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse. Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men, fifteen hundred of them--there might have been more! My death was announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution --for he was fond of me, was the master--wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and bring me into Hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, for he was very busy, 'Go and see whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.' These rascally saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse, and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was probably made out in accordance with the rules of military jurisprudence."

°°°°As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and relate a story so probable though so strange, the young lawyer ceased fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

°°°°"Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud," he said, interrupting the speaker, "Colonel Chabert's widow?"

°°°°"My wife--yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the custom in time of the war, and thrown into the common grave by the men ordered to bury the dead?

°°°°"Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded. Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a ball.

°°°°"When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. the little air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room. I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die. This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard--or I thought I heard, I will assert nothing--groans from the world of dead among whom I was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very indistinct, in spite of my impressions of far more acute suffering I was fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

°°°°"But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such as I have never known elsewhere--literally, the silence of the grave. At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would seem that, thanks to the carelessness and the haste with which we had been pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules! A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unhoped-for help, I must have perished. But with a fury you may imagine, I began to work my way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which had no doubt been thrown over us--I say us, as if there had been others living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms. This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw daylight, but through snow!

°°°°"At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse, who knows, had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow. However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole, where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the moment for saying, 'Respect courage in misfortune!' In short, monsieur, after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy, of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them they got me to their poor hovel.

°°°°"It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy--allow me to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which, from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

°°°°"You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave as naked as I came from my mother's; so that six months afterwards, when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert, and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man, named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

°°°°"Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence, nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond, begging my bread, treated as a madman when I have told my story, without ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert. For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample reason for shutting a man up.

°°°°"At the end of two years' detention, which I was compelled to submit to, after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, 'Here is a poor man who thinks he is Colonel Chabert' to people who would reply, 'Poor fellow!' I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh, monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I----"

°°°°Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study, which Derville respected.

°°°°"One fine day," his visitor resumed, "one spring day, they gave me the key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me. If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name, no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field- Marshal in Austria or Russia. Who knows?"

°°°°"Monsieur," said the attorney, "you have upset all my ideas. I feel as if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you."

°°°°"You are the only person," said the Colonel, with a melancholy look, "who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary documents to begin my lawsuit--"

°°°°"What lawsuit?" said the attorney, who had forgotten his client's painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

°°°°"Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a son. When I tell lawyers these things--men of sense; when I propose-- I, a beggar--to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I--a dead man--bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold politeness, which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler or a madman--it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts, under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!"

°°°°"Pray resume your narrative," said Derville.

°°°°" 'Pray resume it!' " cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer's hand. "That is the first polite word I have heard since----"

°°°°The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing and unutterable eloquence that lies in the eyes, in a gesture, even in silence, entirely convinced Derville, and touched him deeply.

°°°°"Listen, monsieur," said he; "I have this evening won three hundred francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his fortune to make. Proceed."

°°°°The Colonel, as he called himself, sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps it was in obedience to the inexplicable feeling, the latent germ in every man's heart, to which we owe the experiments of alchemists, the passion for glory, the discoveries of astronomy and of physics, everything which prompts man to expand his being by multiplying himself through deeds or ideas. In his mind the /Ego/ was now but a secondary object, just as the vanity of success or the pleasures of winning become dearer to the gambler than the object he has at stake. The young lawyer's words were as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer's office the ten gold pieces which had so long been refused him by so many people, and in so many ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured. There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us, it is like a thunderbolt; they burn us. The poor man's gratitude was too great to find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found his voice.

°°°°"Where was I?" said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier, and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in France.

°°°°"At Stuttgart. You were out of prison," said Derville.

°°°°"You know my wife?" asked the Colonel.

°°°°"Yes," said Derville, with a bow.

°°°°"What is she like?"

°°°°"Still quite charming."

°°°°The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation that is characteristic of men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, with a sort of cheerfulness--for he breathed again, the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave; he had just melted a covering of snow less easily thawed than that which had once before frozen his head; and he drew a deep breath, as if he had just escaped from a dungeon--"Monsieur, if I had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a /sans-culotte/. I was more like an Esquimaux than a Frenchman--I, who had formerly been considered one of the smartest of fops in 1799!--I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

°°°°"Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier's name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; but though I recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin's mouth opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known. It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was, then, unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former friends!

°°°°"I had once saved Boutin's life, but it was only the repayment of a debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but, like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I recalled them to his mind his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me, were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered triumphantly.

°°°°"He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon's first abdication. That news was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

°°°°"We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland, Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies. Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert. That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage, whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose only protector is the Almighty.--Nay, I am wrong! I had a father--the Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see /his Chabert/, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my wife's silence!

°°°°"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar. Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me. I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

°°°°"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu. There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me! Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

°°°°"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur, knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury, "when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

°°°°"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness; well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not know what will become of me!"

°°°°With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

°°°°"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg, it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

°°°°"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I fail, I can die--but not alone."

°°°°The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy, lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

°°°°"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

°°°°"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

°°°°"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to recover; you are rich."

°°°°This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

°°°°"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

°°°°The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville, and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

°°°°"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

°°°°The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs, and held a light for him.

°°°°"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the day."

°°°°When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

°°°°"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.

°°°°About three months after this interview, at night, in Derville's room, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville's account to his eccentric client, came to consult the attorney on a serious matter, and began by begging him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

°°°°"Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?" said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought up the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

°°°°"I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair," replied Derville. "My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty- five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism."

°°°°As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers his head clerk had laid out for him. His eye was struck by the appearance of the stamps--long, square, and triangular, in red and blue ink, which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

°°°°"Ah ha!" said he with a laugh, "here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!"

°°°°He took up the letter and opened it; but he could not read it; it was written in German.

°°°°"Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately," said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

°°°°The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, all perfectly regular and duly witnessed, and legally stamped to serve as evidence in law. He also informed him that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

°°°°"This looks like business," cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. "But look here, my boy," he went on, addressing the notary, "I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?"

°°°°"We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin," interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

°°°°"Well, was it not that ill-used man who has just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients' money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert's estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud."

°°°°"Yes," said Crottat. "It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollections, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at the time of his decease, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury."

°°°°"So that Comte Chabert's personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?"

°°°°"Consequently so it was, old fellow!" said Crottat. "You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other."

°°°°Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint- Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were rather too deep for cab wheels. Looking about him on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, "Vergniaud, dairyman." To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, all painted in white. The gate was open, and no doubt remained open all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels built in the neighborhood of Paris, which are like nothing else, not even the most wretched dwellings in the country, of which they have all the poverty without their poetry.

°°°°Indeed, in the midst of the fields, even a hovel may have a certain grace derived from the pure air, the verdure, the open country--a hill, a serpentine road, vineyards, quickset hedges, moss-grown thatch and rural implements; but poverty in Paris gains dignity only by horror. Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found a legitimate use; they had been collected from the various demolitions which are going on every day in Paris. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, "Fancy Goods." The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed to be the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil, and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall of this frail construction, which seemed rather more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred their numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes, the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough deal boards nailed so as to overlap, and shabbily thatched with rushes.

°°°°Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of the necessity for being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags that were used to clean them, fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat was munching the shoots of a starved and dusty vine that clung to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, was licking them over. The fowls, scared by Derville's approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

°°°°"And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!" said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the general effect of the squalid scene.

°°°°The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, in the hope that they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole thing tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither of them replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity, if I may combine those two words. Derville repeated his questions, but without success. Provoked by the saucy cunning of these three imps, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry which young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

°°°°The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold of his doorway with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely- colored pipe--a technical phrase to a smoker--a humble, short clay pipe of the kind called "/brule-queule/." He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join his benefactor the sooner, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

°°°°"Silence in the ranks!"

°°°°The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

°°°°"Why did you not write to me?" he said to Derville. "Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there," he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer's hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

°°°°Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; and, in fact, Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel's bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread two or three of those old fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating salt-petre, green with mould, and full of cracks, were so excessively damp that on the side where the Colonel's bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the /Bulletins de la Grande Armee/, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel's reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit to Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived in them traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

°°°°"Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?" he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

°°°°"But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!"

°°°°The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the deplorable experience which they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

°°°°"Here," said he to himself, "is a man who has of course spent my money in satisfying a trooper's three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!"

°°°°"To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----" And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--"I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace."

°°°°Derville reflected that there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums of money he had advanced, so he merely said:

°°°°"But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, but where you would have been better lodged?"

°°°°"Why," replied the Colonel, "the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me /gratis/ for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old /Egyptian/--"

°°°°"An Egyptian!"

°°°°"We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read."

°°°°"He might have lodged you better for your money," said Derville.

°°°°"Bah!" said the Colonel, "his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune . . . However, it does very well."

°°°°"Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!"

°°°°"Curse the money! To think I haven't got any!" he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

°°°°Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

°°°°"Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business," said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

°°°°"To me," said the soldier, "it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau."

°°°°"Things are not done so in the legal world," said Derville. "Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing that justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

°°°°"In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets."

°°°°"And my fortune?"

°°°°"Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?"

°°°°"Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?"

°°°°"My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs."

°°°°"And you call that justice!" said the Colonel, in dismay.

°°°°"Why, certainly--"

°°°°"A pretty kind of justice!"

°°°°"So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, that what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor."

°°°°"But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----"

°°°°"I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to."

°°°°"That would be to sell my wife!"

°°°°"With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in the position in which you are, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice."

°°°°"Let us go together."

°°°°"What, just as you are?" said the lawyer. "No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot."

°°°°"Can I possibly gain it?"

°°°°"On every count," replied Derville. "But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor."

°°°°"To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that," said he simply.

°°°°"Well, until then," Derville went on, "will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it."

°°°°Large tears gathered in the poor veteran's faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

°°°°"I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!" he cried. "I will call out: 'I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!'--The statue--he--he will know me."

°°°°"And you will find yourself in Charenton."

°°°°At this terrible name the soldier's transports collapsed.

°°°°"And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?"

°°°°"The war office!" said Derville. "Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire."

°°°°The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

°°°°His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements, which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

°°°°Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

°°°°"Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests."

°°°°"Do what you will," said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death."

°°°°"Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?"

°°°°"That is not my view of it," said the lawyer. "We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud's intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension."

°°°°"Well, proceed then," said Chabert. "I put myself entirely in your hands."

°°°°"I will send you a power of attorney to sign," said Derville. "Good- bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me."

°°°°Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer's hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him excepting with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

°°°°During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer's; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir," said he, taking Derville by the arm, "if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General's."

°°°°"And what then?" replied Derville. "What concern have you with him?-- But who are you?" said the cautious lawyer.

°°°°"I am Louis Vergniaud," he replied at once. "I have a few words to say to you."

°°°°"So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?"

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think? --Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it's neighbors' fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings."

°°°°"He?"

°°°°"Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, 'Really, General----' 'Bah!' says he, 'I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.'--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados-- Do you know him, sir?"

°°°°"But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you."

°°°°"He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it's just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----"

°°°°Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

°°°°"On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!" thought he.

°°°°"All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure."

°°°°"And will that be soon?"

°°°°"Why, yes."

°°°°"Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!" and the cowkeeper's tanned face seemed to expand.

°°°°"Now," said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, "let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but . . ."

°°°°And he set to work to study the Countess' position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves up when concocting their own plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

°°°°But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer's cleverness.

°°°°Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old /Parlement/ of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon's blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor's advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised the restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

°°°°The Emperor fell.

°°°°At the time of Comte Chabert's death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband's fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving of this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband's will; but Napoleon's hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count's marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

°°°°Then came the Restoration. The Count's political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the "Gulf of Revolution should be closed"--for this phrase of the King's, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer's preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

°°°°Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master's influence, and he made the Count's fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness of which most women have a share more or less, understood the man's motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well, that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

°°°°The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess' abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress' capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on the housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess' greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

°°°°At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert's widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

°°°°A speech he made, /a propos/ of Talleyrand's marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess' heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband's return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

°°°°"There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud's position," said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. "How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the /pairie/ by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the /Parlement/ is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King's great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess," thought he as he went up the steps.

°°°°Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

°°°°She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, while playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert's wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

°°°°"The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them."

°°°°A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

°°°°"Good-morning, Monsieur Derville," said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

°°°°"Madame," said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. "I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter."

°°°°"I am so /grieved/, M. le Comte is away--"

°°°°"I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count."

°°°°"Then I will send for Delbecq," said she.

°°°°"He would be of no use to you, clever as he is," replied Derville. "Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!"

°°°°"Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?" said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

°°°°"Madame," he said with cold and piercing solemnity, "you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point."

°°°°"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

°°°°"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

°°°°"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come."

°°°°"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

°°°°"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--"

°°°°"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

°°°°"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----"

°°°°The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's attorney, be so good as to--"

°°°°"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening."

°°°°"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

°°°°"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

°°°°"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

°°°°"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you."

°°°°"And who is he?"

°°°°"Comte Ferraud."

°°°°"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--"

°°°°"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--"

°°°°"He would defend me, monsieur."

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

°°°°"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

°°°°The Countess turned pale.

°°°°"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

°°°°"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?"

°°°°"Compromise!" said Derville.

°°°°"Does he still love me?" she said.

°°°°"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

°°°°The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

°°°°"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.

°°°°A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and seemed to have acquired youth and /impasto/, to borrow a picturesque word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture and a book.

°°°°When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville's office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off, when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a dress which, though simple, was cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was. She wore a pretty drawn bonnet lined with pink, which framed her face to perfection, softening its outlines and making it look younger.

°°°°If the clients were rejuvenescent, the office was unaltered, and presented the same picture as that described at the beginning of this story. Simonnin was eating his breakfast, his shoulder leaning against the window, which was then open, and he was staring up at the blue sky in the opening of the courtyard enclosed by four gloomy houses.

°°°°"Ah, ha!" cried the little clerk, "who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?"

°°°°"The chief is a great magician," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Then there is no trick to play on him this time?" asked Desroches.

°°°°"His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud," said Boucard.

°°°°"What next?" said Godeschal. "Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?"

°°°°"Here she is," answered Simonnin.

°°°°"So you are not deaf, you young rogue!" said Chabert, taking the gutter-jumper by the ear and twisting it, to the delight of the other clerks, who began to laugh, looking at the Colonel with the curious attention due to so singular a personage.

°°°°Comte Chabert was in Derville's private room at the moment when his wife came in by the door of the office.

°°°°"I say, Boucard, there is going to be a queer scene in the chief's room! There is a woman who can spend her days alternately, the odd with Comte Ferraud, and the even with Comte Chabert."

°°°°"And in leap year," said Godeschal, "they must settle the /count/ between them."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen, you can be heard!" said Boucard severely. "I never was in an office where there was so much jesting as there is here over the clients."

°°°°Derville had made the Colonel retire to the bedroom when the Countess was admitted.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert, I have placed you apart. If, however, you should wish it--"

°°°°"It is an attention for which I am obliged to you."

°°°°"I have drawn up the memorandum of an agreement of which you and M. Chabert can discuss the conditions, here, and now. I will go alternately to him and to you, and explain your views respectively."

°°°°"Let me see, monsieur," said the Countess impatiently.

°°°°Derville read aloud:

°°°°" 'Between the undersigned:

°°°°" 'M. Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, Marechal de Camp, and Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, living in Paris, Rue du Petit-Banquier, on the one part;

°°°°" 'And Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the aforesaid M. le Comte Chabert, /nee/--' "

°°°°"Pass over the preliminaries," said she. "Come to the conditions."

°°°°"Madame," said the lawyer, "the preamble briefly sets forth the position in which you stand to each other. Then, by the first clause, you acknowledge, in the presence of three witnesses, of whom two shall be notaries, and one the dairyman with whom your husband has been lodging, to all of whom your secret is known, and who will be absolutely silent--you acknowledge, I say, that the individual designated in the documents subjoined to the deed, and whose identity is to be further proved by an act of recognition prepared by your notary, Alexandre Crottat, is your first husband, Comte Chabert. By the second clause Comte Chabert, to secure your happiness, will undertake to assert his rights only under certain circumstances set forth in the deed.--And these," said Derville, in a parenthesis, "are none other than a failure to carry out the conditions of this secret agreement.--M. Chabert, on his part, agrees to accept judgment on a friendly suit, by which his certificate of death shall be annulled, and his marriage dissolved."

°°°°"That will not suit me in the least," said the Countess with surprise. "I will be a party to no suit; you know why."

°°°°"By the third clause," Derville went on, with imperturbable coolness, "you pledge yourself to secure to Hyacinthe Comte Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock held in his name, to revert to you at his death--"

°°°°"But it is much too dear!" exclaimed the Countess.

°°°°"Can you compromise the matter cheaper?"

°°°°"Possibly."

°°°°"But what do you want, madame?"

°°°°"I want--I will not have a lawsuit. I want--"

°°°°"You want him to remain dead?" said Derville, interrupting her hastily.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, "if twenty-four thousand francs a year are necessary, we will go to law--"

°°°°"Yes, we will go to law," said the Colonel in a deep voice, as he opened the door and stood before his wife, with one hand in his waistcoat and the other hanging by his side--an attitude to which the recollection of his adventure gave horrible significance.

°°°°"It is he," said the Countess to herself.

°°°°"Too dear!" the old soldier exclaimed. "I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you--you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved--"

°°°°"But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!" cried the Countess, in feigned amazement.

°°°°"Indeed!" said the old man, in a tone of intense irony. "Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais Royal----"

°°°°The Countess turned pale. Seeing her grow white under her rouge, the old soldier paused, touched by the acute suffering he was inflicting on the woman he had once so ardently loved; but she shot such a venomous glance at him that he abruptly went on:

°°°°"You were with La--"

°°°°"Allow me, Monsieur Derville," said the Countess to the lawyer. "You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things."

°°°°She rose and went out. Derville rushed after her; but the Countess had taken wings, and seemed to have flown from the place.

°°°°On returning to his private room, he found the Colonel in a towering rage, striding up and down.

°°°°"In those times a man took his wife where he chose," said he. "But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted to appearances. She has no heart."

°°°°"Well, Colonel, was I not right to beg you not to come?--I am now positive of your identity; when you came in, the Countess gave a little start, of which the meaning was unequivocal. But you have lost your chances. Your wife knows that you are unrecognizable."

°°°°"I will kill her!"

°°°°"Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch. Besides you might miss! That would be unpardonable. A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife.--Let me set things straight; you are only a big child. Go now. Take care of yourself; she is capable of setting some trap for you and shutting you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you against a surprise."

°°°°The unhappy Colonel obeyed his young benefactor, and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly went down the dark staircase, lost in gloomy thoughts, and crushed perhaps by the blow just dealt him--the most cruel he could feel, the thrust that could most deeply pierce his heart--when he heard the rustle of a woman's dress on the lowest landing, and his wife stood before him.

°°°°"Come, monsieur," said she, taking his arm with a gesture like those familiar to him of old. Her action and the accent of her voice, which had recovered its graciousness, were enough to allay the Colonel's wrath, and he allowed himself to be led to the carriage.

°°°°"Well, get in!" said she, when the footman had let down the step.

°°°°And as if by magic, he found himself sitting by his wife in the brougham.

°°°°"Where to?" asked the servant.

°°°°"To Groslay," said she.

°°°°The horses started at once, and carried them all across Paris.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, in a tone of voice which betrayed one of those emotions which are rare in our lives, and which agitate every part of our being. At such moments the heart, fibres, nerves, countenance, soul, and body, everything, every pore even, feels a thrill. Life no longer seems to be within us; it flows out, springs forth, is communicated as if by contagion, transmitted by a look, a tone of voice, a gesture, impressing our will on others. The old soldier started on hearing this single word, this first, terrible "monsieur!" But still it was at once a reproach and a pardon, a hope and a despair, a question and an answer. This word included them all; none but an actress could have thrown so much eloquence, so many feelings into a single word. Truth is less complete in its utterance; it does not put everything on the outside; it allows us to see what is within. The Colonel was filled with remorse for his suspicions, his demands, and his anger; he looked down not to betray his agitation.

°°°°"Monsieur," repeated she, after an imperceptible pause, "I knew you at once."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old soldier, "those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes."

°°°°Two large tears rolled hot on to his wife's hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

°°°°"Monsieur," she went on, "could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false as mine now is? If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in the privacy of my family. Ought not such a secret to remain buried in our hearts? You will forgive me, I hope, for my apparent indifference to the woes of a Chabert in whose existence I could not possibly believe. I received your letters," she hastily added, seeing in his face the objection it expressed, "but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing was unrecognizable; and after obtaining Napoleon's signature to my second marriage contract, I could not help believing that some clever swindler wanted to make a fool of me. Therefore, to avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud's peace of mind, and disturbing family ties, I was obliged to take precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right, I ask you?"

°°°°"Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot, the owl, the dolt, not to have calculated better what the consequences of such a position might be.--But where are we going?" he asked, seeing that they had reached the barrier of La Chapelle.

°°°°"To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There, monsieur, we will consider the steps to be taken. I know my duties. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? We need not inform the public of a situation, which for me has its ridiculous side, and let us preserve our dignity. You still love me," she said, with a sad, sweet gaze at the Colonel, "but have not I been authorized to form other ties? In so strange a position, a secret voice bids me trust to your kindness, which is so well known to me. Can I be wrong in taking you as the sole arbiter of my fate? Be at once judge and party to the suit. I trust in your noble character; you will be generous enough to forgive me for the consequences of faults committed in innocence. I may then confess to you: I love M. Ferraud. I believed that I had a right to love him. I do not blush to make this confession to you; even if it offends you, it does not disgrace us. I cannot conceal the facts. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother."

°°°°The Colonel with a wave of his hand bid his wife be silent, and for a mile and a half they sat without speaking a single word. Chabert could fancy he saw the two little ones before him.

°°°°"Rosine."

°°°°"Monsieur?"

°°°°"The dead are very wrong to come to life again."

°°°°"Oh, monsieur, no, no! Do not think me ungrateful. Only, you find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old man in a softened tone, "I no longer feel any resentment against you. We will forget anything," he added, with one of those smiles which always reflect a noble soul; "I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me."

°°°°The Countess gave him a flashing look full of such deep gratitude that poor Chabert would have been glad to sink again into his grave at Eylau. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion, of which the whole reward consists in the assurance that they have made the person they love happy.

°°°°"My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested," said the Countess.

°°°°The conversation turned to other subjects, for it was impossible to dwell very long on this one. Though the couple came back again and again to their singular position, either by some allusion or of serious purpose, they had a delightful drive, recalling the events of their former life together and the times of the Empire. The Countess knew how to lend peculiar charm to her reminiscences, and gave the conversation the tinge of melancholy that was needed to keep it serious. She revived his love without awakening his desires, and allowed her first husband to discern the mental wealth she had acquired while trying to accustom him to moderate his pleasure to that which a father may feel in the society of a favorite daughter.

°°°°The Colonel had known the Countess of the Empire; he found her a Countess of the Restoration.

°°°°At last, by a cross-road, they arrived at the entrance to a large park lying in the little valley which divides the heights of Margency from the pretty village of Groslay. The Countess had there a delightful house, where the Colonel on arriving found everything in readiness for his stay there, as well as for his wife's. Misfortune is a kind of talisman whose virtue consists in its power to confirm our original nature; in some men it increases their distrust and malignancy, just as it improves the goodness of those who have a kind heart.

°°°°Sorrow had made the Colonel even more helpful and good than he had always been, and he could understand some secrets of womanly distress which are unrevealed to most men. Nevertheless, in spite of his loyal trustfulness, he could not help saying to his wife:

°°°°"Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?"

°°°°"Yes," replied she, "if I found Colonel Chabert in Derville's client."

°°°°The appearance of truth she contrived to give to this answer dissipated the slight suspicions which the Colonel was ashamed to have felt. For three days the Countess was quite charming to her first husband. By tender attentions and unfailing sweetness she seemed anxious to wipe out the memory of the sufferings he had endured, and to earn forgiveness for the woes which, as she confessed, she had innocently caused him. She delighted in displaying for him the charms she knew he took pleasure in, while at the same time she assumed a kind of melancholy; for men are more especially accessible to certain ways, certain graces of the heart or of the mind which they cannot resist. She aimed at interesting him in her position, and appealing to his feelings so far as to take possession of his mind and control him despotically.

°°°°Ready for anything to attain her ends, she did not yet know what she was to do with this man; but at any rate she meant to annihilate him socially. On the evening of the third day she felt that in spite of her efforts she could not conceal her uneasiness as to the results of her manoeuvres. To give herself a minute's reprieve she went up to her room, sat down before her writing-table, and laid aside the mask of composure which she wore in Chabert's presence, like an actress who, returning to her dressing-room after a fatiguing fifth act, drops half dead, leaving with the audience an image of herself which she no longer resembles. She proceeded to finish a letter she had begun to Delbecq, whom she desired to go in her name and demand of Derville the deeds relating to Colonel Chabert, to copy them, and to come to her at once to Groslay. She had hardly finished when she heard the Colonel's step in the passage; uneasy at her absence, he had come to look for her.

°°°°"Alas!" she exclaimed, "I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable . . ."

°°°°"Why, what is the matter?" asked the good man.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing!" she replied.

°°°°She rose, left the Colonel, and went down to speak privately to her maid, whom she sent off to Paris, impressing on her that she was herself to deliver to Delbecq the letter just written, and to bring it back to the writer as soon as he had read it. Then the Countess went out to sit on a bench sufficiently in sight for the Colonel to join her as soon as he might choose. The Colonel, who was looking for her, hastened up and sat down by her.

°°°°"Rosine," said he, "what is the matter with you?"

°°°°She did not answer.

°°°°It was one of those glorious, calm evenings in the month of June, whose secret harmonies infuse such sweetness into the sunset. The air was clear, the stillness perfect, so that far away in the park they could hear the voices of some children, which added a kind of melody to the sublimity of the scene.

°°°°"You do not answer me?" the Colonel said to his wife.

°°°°"My husband----" said the Countess, who broke off, started a little, and with a blush stopped to ask him, "What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?"

°°°°"Call him your husband, my poor child," replied the Colonel, in a kind voice. "Is he not the father of your children?"

°°°°"Well, then," she said, "if he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out that I came here, alone, with a stranger, what am I to say to him? Listen, monsieur," she went on, assuming a dignified attitude, "decide my fate, I am resigned to anything--"

°°°°"My dear," said the Colonel, taking possession of his wife's hands, "I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness--"

°°°°"That is impossible!" she exclaimed, with a sudden spasmodic movement. "Remember that you would have to renounce your identity, and in an authenticated form."

°°°°"What?" said the Colonel. "Is not my word enough for you?"

°°°°The word "authenticated" fell on the old man's heart, and roused involuntary distrust. He looked at his wife in a way that made her color, she cast down her eyes, and he feared that he might find himself compelled to despise her. The Countess was afraid lest she had scared the shy modesty, the stern honesty, of a man whose generous temper and primitive virtues were known to her. Though these feelings had brought the clouds to her brow, they immediately recovered their harmony. This was the way of it. A child's cry was heard in the distance.

°°°°"Jules, leave your sister in peace," the Countess called out.

°°°°"What, are your children here?" said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but I told them not to trouble you."

°°°°The old soldier understood the delicacy, the womanly tact of so gracious a precaution, and took the Countess' hand to kiss it.

°°°°"But let them come," said he.

°°°°The little girl ran up to complain of her brother.

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"It was Jules--"

°°°°"It was her--"

°°°°Their little hands were held out to their mother, and the two childish voices mingled; it was an unexpected and charming picture.

°°°°"Poor little things!" cried the Countess, no longer restraining her tears, "I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother's heart cannot be divided; I want them, I want them."

°°°°"Are you making mamma cry?" said Jules, looking fiercely at the Colonel.

°°°°"Silence, Jules!" said the mother in a decided tone.

°°°°The two children stood speechless, examining their mother and the stranger with a curiosity which it is impossible to express in words.

°°°°"Oh yes!" she cried. "If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything . . ."

°°°°This was the decisive speech which gained all that she had hoped from it.

°°°°"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, as if he were ending a sentence already begun in his mind, "I must return underground again. I had told myself so already."

°°°°"Can I accept such a sacrifice?" replied his wife. "If some men have died to save a mistress' honor, they gave their life but once. But in this case you would be giving your life every day. No, no. It is impossible. If it were only your life, it would be nothing; but to sign a declaration that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to sacrifice your honor, and live a lie every hour of the day! Human devotion cannot go so far. Only think!--No. But for my poor children I would have fled with you by this time to the other end of the world."

°°°°"But," said Chabert, "cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn out as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but a little tobacco and the /Constitutionnel/."

°°°°The Countess melted into tears. There was a contest of generosity between the Comtesse Ferraud and Colonel Chabert, and the soldier came out victorious. One evening, seeing this mother with her children, the soldier was bewitched by the touching grace of a family picture in the country, in the shade and the silence; he made a resolution to remain dead, and, frightened no longer at the authentication of a deed, he asked what he could do to secure beyond all risk the happiness of this family.

°°°°"Do exactly as you like," said the Countess. "I declare to you that I will have nothing to do with this affair. I ought not."

°°°°Delbecq had arrived some days before, and in obedience to the Countess' verbal instructions, the intendant had succeeded in gaining the old soldier's confidence. So on the following morning Colonel Chabert went with the erewhile attorney to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had caused the notary to draw up an affidavit in such terms that, after hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

°°°°"Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!" he exclaimed.

°°°°"Indeed, monsieur," said Delbecq, "I should advise you not to sign in haste. In your place I would get at least thirty thousand francs a year out of the bargain. Madame would pay them."

°°°°After annihilating this scoundrel /emeritus/ by the lightning look of an honest man insulted, the Colonel rushed off, carried away by a thousand contrary emotions. He was suspicious, indignant, and calm again by turns.

°°°°Finally he made his way back into the park of Groslay by a gap in a fence, and slowly walked on to sit down and rest, and meditate at his ease, in a little room under a gazebo, from which the road to Saint- Leu could be seen. The path being strewn with the yellowish sand which is used instead of river-gravel, the Countess, who was sitting in the upper room of this little summer-house, did not hear the Colonel's approach, for she was too much preoccupied with the success of her business to pay the smallest attention to the slight noise made by her husband. Nor did the old man notice that his wife was in the room over him.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur Delbecq, has he signed?" the Countess asked her secretary, whom she saw alone on the road beyond the hedge of a haha.

°°°°"No, madame. I do not even know what has become of our man. The old horse reared."

°°°°"Then we shall be obliged to put him into Charenton," said she, "since we have got him."

°°°°The Colonel, who recovered the elasticity of youth to leap the haha, in the twinkling of an eye was standing in front of Delbecq, on whom he bestowed the two finest slaps that ever a scoundrel's cheeks received.

°°°°"And you may add that old horses can kick!" said he.

°°°°His rage spent, the Colonel no longer felt vigorous enough to leap the ditch. He had seen the truth in all its nakedness. The Countess' speech and Delbecq's reply had revealed the conspiracy of which he was to be the victim. The care taken of him was but a bait to entrap him in a snare. That speech was like a drop of subtle poison, bringing on in the old soldier a return of all his sufferings, physical and moral. He came back to the summer-house through the park gate, walking slowly like a broken man.

°°°°Then for him there was to be neither peace nor truce. From this moment he must begin the odious warfare with this woman of which Derville had spoken, enter on a life of litigation, feed on gall, drink every morning of the cup of bitterness. And then--fearful thought!--where was he to find the money needful to pay the cost of the first proceedings? He felt such disgust of life, that if there had been any water at hand he would have thrown himself into it; that if he had had a pistol, he would have blown out his brains. Then he relapsed into the indecision of mind which, since his conversation with Derville at the dairyman's had changed his character.

°°°°At last, having reached the kiosque, he went up to the gazebo, where little rose-windows afforded a view over each lovely landscape of the valley, and where he found his wife seated on a chair. The Countess was gazing at the distance, and preserved a calm countenance, showing that impenetrable face which women can assume when resolved to do their worst. She wiped her eyes as if she had been weeping, and played absently with the pink ribbons of her sash. Nevertheless, in spite of her apparent assurance, she could not help shuddering slightly when she saw before her her venerable benefactor, standing with folded arms, his face pale, his brow stern.

°°°°"Madame," he said, after gazing at her fixedly for a moment and compelling her to blush, "Madame, I do not curse you--I scorn you. I can now thank the chance that has divided us. I do not feel even a desire for revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on the strength of my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps have made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of the sunshine.--Farewell!"

°°°°The Countess threw herself at his feet; she would have detained him by taking his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust, saying:

°°°°"Do not touch me!"

°°°°The Countess' expression when she heard her husband's retreating steps is quite indescribable. Then, with the deep perspicacity given only by utter villainy, or by fierce worldly selfishness, she knew that she might live in peace on the word and the contempt of this loyal veteran.

°°°°Chabert, in fact, disappeared. The dairyman failed in business, and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel, perhaps, took up some similar industry for a time. Perhaps, like a stone flung into a chasm, he went falling from ledge to ledge, to be lost in the mire of rags that seethes through the streets of Paris.

°°°°Six months after this event, Derville, hearing no more of Colonel Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed that they had no doubt come to a compromise, which the Countess, out of revenge, had had arranged by some other lawyer. So one morning he added up the sums he had advanced to the said Chabert with the costs, and begged the Comtesse Ferraud to claim from M. le Comte Chabert the amount of the bill, assuming that she would know where to find her first husband.

°°°°The very next day Comte Ferraud's man of business, lately appointed President of the County Court in a town of some importance, wrote this distressing note to Derville:

°°°°"MONSIEUR,--

°°°°"Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your   client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the   individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he   came forward under false pretences. "Yours, etc.,                DELBECQ."

°°°°"One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half," cried Derville. "They don't deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand- franc notes!"

°°°°Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader to whom he wished to speak, and who was employed in the Police Court. As chance would have it, Derville went into Court Number 6 at the moment when the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months' imprisonment as a vagabond, and subsequently to be taken to the Mendicity House of Detention, a sentence which, by magistrates' law, is equivalent to perpetual imprisonment. On hearing the name of Hyacinthe, Derville looked at the deliquent, sitting between two /gendarmes/ on the bench for the accused, and recognized in the condemned man his false Colonel Chabert.

°°°°The old soldier was placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In spite of his rags, in spite of the misery stamped on his countenance, it gave evidence of noble pride. His eye had a stoical expression which no magistrate ought to have misunderstood; but as soon as a man has fallen into the hands of justice, he is no more than a moral entity, a matter of law or of fact, just as to statists he has become a zero.

°°°°When the veteran was taken back to the lock-up, to be removed later with the batch of vagabonds at that moment at the bar, Derville availed himself of the privilege accorded to lawyers of going wherever they please in the Courts, and followed him to the lock-up, where he stood scrutinizing him for some minutes, as well as the curious crew of beggars among whom he found himself. The passage to the lock-up at that moment afforded one of those spectacles which, unfortunately, neither legislators, nor philanthropists, nor painters, nor writers come to study. Like all the laboratories of the law, this ante-room is a dark and malodorous place; along the walls runs a wooden seat, blackened by the constant presence there of the wretches who come to this meeting-place of every form of social squalor, where not one of them is missing.

°°°°A poet might say that the day was ashamed to light up this dreadful sewer through which so much misery flows! There is not a spot on that plank where some crime has not sat, in embryo or matured; not a corner where a man has never stood who, driven to despair by the blight which justice has set upon him after his first fault, has not there begun a career, at the end of which looms the guillotine or the pistol-snap of the suicide. All who fall on the pavement of Paris rebound against these yellow-gray walls, on which a philanthropist who was not a speculator might read a justification of the numerous suicides complained of by hypocritical writers who are incapable of taking a step to prevent them--for that justification is written in that ante- room, like a preface to the dramas of the Morgue, or to those enacted on the Place de la Greve.

°°°°At this moment Colonel Chabert was sitting among these men--men with coarse faces, clothed in the horrible livery of misery, and silent at intervals, or talking in a low tone, for three gendarmes on duty paced to and fro, their sabres clattering on the floor.

°°°°"Do you recognize me?" said Derville to the old man, standing in front of him.

°°°°"Yes, sir," said Chabert, rising.

°°°°"If you are an honest man," Derville went on in an undertone, "how could you remain in my debt?"

°°°°The old soldier blushed as a young girl might when accused by her mother of a clandestine love affair.

°°°°"What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?" cried he in a loud voice.

°°°°"Paid me?" said Derville. "She wrote to me that you were a swindler."

°°°°The Colonel cast up his eyes in a sublime impulse of horror and imprecation, as if to call heaven to witness to this fresh subterfuge.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, in a voice that was calm by sheer huskiness, "get the gendarmes to allow me to go into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored."

°°°°At a word from Derville to the sergeant he was allowed to take his client into the room, where Hyacinthe wrote a few lines, and addressed them to the Comtesse Ferraud.

°°°°"Send her that," said the soldier, "and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is not the less there," and he laid his hand on his heart. "Yes, it is there, deep and sincere. But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all."

°°°°"What!" said Derville. "Did you not stipulate for an allowance?"

°°°°"Do not speak of it!" cried the old man. "You cannot conceive how deep my contempt is for the outside life to which most men cling. I was suddenly attacked by a sickness--disgust of humanity. When I think that Napoleon is at Saint-Helena, everything on earth is a matter of indifference to me. I can no longer be a soldier; that is my only real grief. After all," he added with a gesture of childish simplicity, "it is better to enjoy luxury of feeling than of dress. For my part, I fear nobody's contempt."

°°°°And the Colonel sat down on his bench again.

°°°°Derville went away. On returning to his office, he sent Godeschal, at that time his second clerk, to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert's lawyer.

°°°°In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now himself an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, to whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal's staff among beggars by living on at Bicetre as poor women live on at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures who are lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners, which consists in drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords to its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

°°°°"I say, Derville," said Godeschal to his traveling companion, "look at that old fellow. Isn't he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy."

°°°°Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

°°°°"That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?"

°°°°"Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious," said Godeschal.

°°°°"That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger's glare she shot at him at that moment."

°°°°This opening having excited Godeschal's curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

°°°°Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

°°°°"Good-morning, Colonel Chabert," said Derville.

°°°°"Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe," replied the veteran. "I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7," he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--"Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?" he asked after a moment's silence. "He is not married! He is very lucky!"

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Godeschal. "Would you like something to buy snuff?"

°°°°With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

°°°°"Brave troopers!"

°°°°He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

°°°°"Fire! both arms! /Vive Napoleon/!" And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

°°°°"The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish," said Derville.

°°°°"Childish! he?" said another old pauper, who was looking on. "Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, 'Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.'--'I was too young to be there,' said Hyacinthe. 'But I was at Jena.' And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions."

°°°°"What a destiny!" exclaimed Derville. "Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow," Derville went on after a pause, "there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

°°°°"How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris."

°°°°"I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches' office," replied Godeschal.

°°°°PARIS, February-March 1832.

°°°°End



°°°°Father Goriot

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage

°°°°To the great and illustrious Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a token of admiration for his works and genius. DE BALZAC.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans) is an elderly person, who for the past forty years has kept a lodging-house in the Rue Nueve- Sainte-Genevieve, in the district that lies between the Latin Quarter and the Faubourg Saint-Marcel. Her house (known in the neighborhood as the Maison Vauquer) receives men and women, old and young, and no word has ever been breathed against her respectable establishment; but, at the same time, it must be said that as a matter of fact no young woman has been under her roof for thirty years, and that if a young man stays there for any length of time it is a sure sign that his allowance must be of the slenderest. In 1819, however, the time when this drama opens, there was an almost penniless young girl among Mme. Vauquer's boarders.

°°°°That word drama has been somewhat discredited of late; it has been overworked and twisted to strange uses in these days of dolorous literature; but it must do service again here, not because this story is dramatic in the restricted sense of the word, but because some tears may perhaps be shed intra et extra muros before it is over.

°°°°Will any one without the walls of Paris understand it? It is open to doubt. The only audience who could appreciate the results of close observation, the careful reproduction of minute detail and local color, are dwellers between the heights of Montrouge and Montmartre, in a vale of crumbling stucco watered by streams of black mud, a vale of sorrows which are real and joys too often hollow; but this audience is so accustomed to terrible sensations, that only some unimaginable and well-neigh impossible woe could produce any lasting impression there. Now and again there are tragedies so awful and so grand by reason of the complication of virtues and vices that bring them about, that egotism and selfishness are forced to pause and are moved to pity; but the impression that they receive is like a luscious fruit, soon consumed. Civilization, like the car of Juggernaut, is scarcely stayed perceptibly in its progress by a heart less easy to break than the others that lie in its course; this also is broken, and Civilization continues on her course triumphant. And you, too, will do the like; you who with this book in your white hand will sink back among the cushions of your armchair, and say to yourself, "Perhaps this may amuse me." You will read the story of Father Goriot's secret woes, and, dining thereafter with an unspoiled appetite, will lay the blame of your insensibility upon the writer, and accuse him of exaggeration, of writing romances. Ah! once for all, this drama is neither a fiction nor a romance! ALL IS TRUE,--so true, that every one can discern the elements of the tragedy in his own house, perhaps in his own heart.

°°°°The lodging-house is Mme. Vauquer's own property. It is still standing in the lower end of the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, just where the road slopes so sharply down to the Rue de l'Arbalete, that wheeled traffic seldom passes that way, because it is so stony and steep. This position is sufficient to account for the silence prevalent in the streets shut in between the dome of the Pantheon and the dome of the Val-de-Grace, two conspicuous public buildings which give a yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies beneath the shadow of their leaden- hued cupolas.

°°°°In that district the pavements are clean and dry, there is neither mud nor water in the gutters, grass grows in the chinks of the walls. The most heedless passer-by feels the depressing influences of a place where the sound of wheels creates a sensation; there is a grim look about the houses, a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls. A Parisian straying into a suburb apparently composed of lodging-houses and public institutions would see poverty and dullness, old age lying down to die, and joyous youth condemned to drudgery. It is the ugliest quarter of Paris, and, it may be added, the least known. But, before all things, the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve is like a bronze frame for a picture for which the mind cannot be too well prepared by the contemplation of sad hues and sober images. Even so, step by step the daylight decreases, and the cicerone's droning voice grows hollower as the traveler descends into the Catacombs. The comparison holds good! Who shall say which is more ghastly, the sight of the bleached skulls or of dried-up human hearts?

°°°°The front of the lodging-house is at right angles to the road, and looks out upon a little garden, so that you see the side of the house in section, as it were, from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. Beneath the wall of the house front there lies a channel, a fathom wide, paved with cobble-stones, and beside it runs a graveled walk bordered by geraniums and oleanders and pomegranates set in great blue and white glazed earthenware pots. Access into the graveled walk is afforded by a door, above which the words MAISON VAUQUER may be read, and beneath, in rather smaller letters, "Lodgings for both sexes, etc."

°°°°During the day a glimpse into the garden is easily obtained through a wicket to which a bell is attached. On the opposite wall, at the further end of the graveled walk, a green marble arch was painted once upon a time by a local artist, and in this semblance of a shrine a statue representing Cupid is installed; a Parisian Cupid, so blistered and disfigured that he looks like a candidate for one of the adjacent hospitals, and might suggest an allegory to lovers of symbolism. The half-obliterated inscription on the pedestal beneath determines the date of this work of art, for it bears witness to the widespread enthusiasm felt for Voltaire on his return to Paris in 1777:

°°°°"Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;   He is, or was, or ought to be."

°°°°At night the wicket gate is replaced by a solid door. The little garden is no wider than the front of the house; it is shut in between the wall of the street and the partition wall of the neighboring house. A mantle of ivy conceals the bricks and attracts the eyes of passers-by to an effect which is picturesque in Paris, for each of the walls is covered with trellised vines that yield a scanty dusty crop of fruit, and furnish besides a subject of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her lodgers; every year the widow trembles for her vintage.

°°°°A straight path beneath the walls on either side of the garden leads to a clump of lime-trees at the further end of it; LINE- trees, as Mme. Vauquer persists in calling them, in spite of the fact that she was a de Conflans, and regardless of repeated corrections from her lodgers.

°°°°The central space between the walls is filled with artichokes and rows of pyramid fruit-trees, and surrounded by a border of lettuce, pot-herbs, and parsley. Under the lime-trees there are a few green-painted garden seats and a wooden table, and hither, during the dog-days, such of the lodgers as are rich enough to indulge in a cup of coffee come to take their pleasure, though it is hot enough to roast eggs even in the shade.

°°°°The house itself is three stories high, without counting the attics under the roof. It is built of rough stone, and covered with the yellowish stucco that gives a mean appearance to almost every house in Paris. There are five windows in each story in the front of the house; all the blinds visible through the small square panes are drawn up awry, so that the lines are all at cross purposes. At the side of the house there are but two windows on each floor, and the lowest of all are adorned with a heavy iron grating.

°°°°Behind the house a yard extends for some twenty feet, a space inhabited by a happy family of pigs, poultry, and rabbits; the wood-shed is situated on the further side, and on the wall between the wood-shed and the kitchen window hangs the meat-safe, just above the place where the sink discharges its greasy streams. The cook sweeps all the refuse out through a little door into the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, and frequently cleanses the yard with copious supplies of water, under pain of pestilence.

°°°°The house might have been built on purpose for its present uses. Access is given by a French window to the first room on the ground floor, a sitting-room which looks out upon the street through the two barred windows already mentioned. Another door opens out of it into the dining-room, which is separated from the kitchen by the well of the staircase, the steps being constructed partly of wood, partly of tiles, which are colored and beeswaxed. Nothing can be more depressing than the sight of that sitting- room. The furniture is covered with horse hair woven in alternate dull and glossy stripes. There is a round table in the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from Telemaque are depicted, the various classical personages being colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

°°°°The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the language, and which should be called the odeur de pension. The damp atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy, musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet, in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining dining- room.

°°°°The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which the lodgers' table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine, are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long table is so greasy that a waggish externe will write his name on the surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky, worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one- eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire, parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet, its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

°°°°This apartment is in all its glory at seven o'clock in the morning, when Mme. Vauquer's cat appears, announcing the near approach of his mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated countenance, and a nose like a parrot's beak set in the middle of it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn; there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and interpretation of her lodging- house, as surely as her lodging-house implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital. The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room, and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its mistress.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who "have seen a deal of trouble." She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still, "she is a good woman at bottom," said the lodgers who believed that the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

°°°°What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head. How had she lost her money? "Through trouble," was her answer. He had treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody, because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every possible misfortune.

°°°°Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress' shuffling footsteps, hastened to serve the lodgers' breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these externes usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty francs a month.

°°°°At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme. Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary- general in the service of the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred francs a year.

°°°°The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on the third floor were also let-- one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle. Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli, Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as "Father Goriot." The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of passage, to impecunious students, who like "Father Goriot" and Mlle. Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of better.

°°°°At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him. Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that their parents' hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as by those who had brought it to pass.

°°°°Above the third story there was a garret where the linen was hung to dry, and a couple of attics. Christophe, the man-of-all-work, slept in one, and Sylvie, the stout cook, in the other. Beside the seven inmates thus enumerated, taking one year with another, some eight law or medical students dined in the house, as well as two or three regular comers who lived in the neighborhood. There were usually eighteen people at dinner, and there was room, if need be, for twenty at Mme. Vauquer's table; at breakfast, however, only the seven lodgers appeared. It was almost like a family party. Every one came down in dressing-gown and slippers, and the conversation usually turned on anything that had happened the evening before; comments on the dress or appearance of the dinner contingent were exchanged in friendly confidence.

°°°°These seven lodgers were Mme. Vauquer's spoiled children. Among them she distributed, with astronomical precision, the exact proportion of respect and attention due to the varying amounts they paid for their board. One single consideration influenced all these human beings thrown together by chance. The two second- floor lodgers only paid seventy-two francs a month. Such prices as these are confined to the Faubourg Saint-Marcel and the district between La Bourbe and the Salpetriere; and, as might be expected, poverty, more or less apparent, weighed upon them all, Mme. Couture being the sole exception to the rule.

°°°°The dreary surroundings were reflected in the costumes of the inmates of the house; all were alike threadbare. The color of the men's coats were problematical; such shoes, in more fashionable quarters, are only to be seen lying in the gutter; the cuffs and collars were worn and frayed at the edges; every limp article of clothing looked like the ghost of its former self. The women's dresses were faded, old-fashioned, dyed and re-dyed; they wore gloves that were glazed with hard wear, much-mended lace, dingy ruffles, crumpled muslin fichus. So much for their clothing; but, for the most part, their frames were solid enough; their constitutions had weathered the storms of life; their cold, hard faces were worn like coins that have been withdrawn from circulation, but there were greedy teeth behind the withered lips. Dramas brought to a close or still in progress are foreshadowed by the sight of such actors as these, not the dramas that are played before the footlights and against a background of painted canvas, but dumb dramas of life, frost-bound dramas that sere hearts like fire, dramas that do not end with the actors' lives.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau, that elderly young lady, screened her weak eyes from the daylight by a soiled green silk shade with a rim of brass, an object fit to scare away the Angel of Pity himself. Her shawl, with its scanty, draggled fringe, might have covered a skeleton, so meagre and angular was the form beneath it. Yet she must have been pretty and shapely once. What corrosive had destroyed the feminine outlines? Was it trouble, or vice, or greed? Had she loved too well? Had she been a second-hand clothes dealer, a frequenter of the backstairs of great houses, or had she been merely a courtesan? Was she expiating the flaunting triumphs of a youth overcrowded with pleasures by an old age in which she was shunned by every passer-by? Her vacant gaze sent a chill through you; her shriveled face seemed like a menace. Her voice was like the shrill, thin note of the grasshopper sounding from the thicket when winter is at hand. She said that she had nursed an old gentleman, ill of catarrh of the bladder, and left to die by his children, who thought that he had nothing left. His bequest to her, a life annuity of a thousand francs, was periodically disputed by his heirs, who mingled slander with their persecutions. In spite of the ravages of conflicting passions, her face retained some traces of its former fairness and fineness of tissue, some vestiges of the physical charms of her youth still survived.

°°°°M. Poiret was a sort of automaton. He might be seen any day sailing like a gray shadow along the walks of the Jardin des Plantes, on his head a shabby cap, a cane with an old yellow ivory handle in the tips of his thin fingers; the outspread skirts of his threadbare overcoat failed to conceal his meagre figure; his breeches hung loosely on his shrunken limbs; the thin, blue-stockinged legs trembled like those of a drunken man; there was a notable breach of continuity between the dingy white waistcoat and crumpled shirt frills and the cravat twisted about a throat like a turkey gobbler's; altogether, his appearance set people wondering whether this outlandish ghost belonged to the audacious race of the sons of Japhet who flutter about on the Boulevard Italien. What devouring kind of toil could have so shriveled him? What devouring passions had darkened that bulbous countenance, which would have seemed outrageous as a caricature? What had he been? Well, perhaps he had been part of the machinery of justice, a clerk in the office to which the executioner sends in his accounts,--so much for providing black veils for parricides, so much for sawdust, so much for pulleys and cord for the knife. Or he might have been a receiver at the door of a public slaughter-house, or a sub-inspector of nuisances. Indeed, the man appeared to have been one of the beasts of burden in our great social mill; one of those Parisian Ratons whom their Bertrands do not even know by sight; a pivot in the obscure machinery that disposes of misery and things unclean; one of those men, in short, at sight of whom we are prompted to remark that, "After all, we cannot do without them."

°°°°Stately Paris ignores the existence of these faces bleached by moral or physical suffering; but, then, Paris is in truth an ocean that no line can plumb. You may survey its surface and describe it; but no matter how numerous and painstaking the toilers in this sea, there will always be lonely and unexplored regions in its depths, caverns unknown, flowers and pearls and monsters of the deep overlooked or forgotten by the divers of literature. The Maison Vauquer is one of these curious monstrosities.

°°°°Two, however, of Mme. Vauquer's boarders formed a striking contrast to the rest. There was a sickly pallor, such as is often seen in anaemic girls, in Mlle. Victorine Taillefer's face; and her unvarying expression of sadness, like her embarrassed manner and pinched look, was in keeping with the general wretchedness of the establishment in the Rue Nueve-Saint-Genevieve, which forms a background to this picture; but her face was young, there was youthfulness in her voice and elasticity in her movements. This young misfortune was not unlike a shrub, newly planted in an uncongenial soil, where its leaves have already begun to wither. The outlines of her figure, revealed by her dress of the simplest and cheapest materials, were also youthful. There was the same kind of charm about her too slender form, her faintly colored face and light-brown hair, that modern poets find in mediaeval statuettes; and a sweet expression, a look of Christian resignation in the dark gray eyes. She was pretty by force of contrast; if she had been happy, she would have been charming. Happiness is the poetry of woman, as the toilette is her tinsel. If the delightful excitement of a ball had made the pale face glow with color; if the delights of a luxurious life had brought the color to the wan cheeks that were slightly hollowed already; if love had put light into the sad eyes, then Victorine might have ranked among the fairest; but she lacked the two things which create woman a second time--pretty dresses and love- letters.

°°°°A book might have been made of her story. Her father was persuaded that he had sufficient reason for declining to acknowledge her, and allowed her a bare six hundred francs a year; he had further taken measures to disinherit his daughter, and had converted all his real estate into personalty, that he might leave it undivided to his son. Victorine's mother had died broken-hearted in Mme. Couture's house; and the latter, who was a near relation, had taken charge of the little orphan. Unluckily, the widow of the commissary-general to the armies of the Republic had nothing in the world but her jointure and her widow's pension, and some day she might be obliged to leave the helpless, inexperienced girl to the mercy of the world. The good soul, therefore, took Victorine to mass every Sunday, and to confession once a fortnight, thinking that, in any case, she would bring up her ward to be devout. She was right; religion offered a solution of the problem of the young girl's future. The poor child loved the father who refused to acknowledge her. Once every year she tried to see him to deliver her mother's message of forgiveness, but every year hitherto she had knocked at that door in vain; her father was inexorable. Her brother, her only means of communication, had not come to see her for four years, and had sent her no assistance; yet she prayed to God to unseal her father's eyes and to soften her brother's heart, and no accusations mingled with her prayers. Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exhausted the vocabulary of abuse, and failed to find words that did justice to the banker's iniquitous conduct; but while they heaped execrations on the millionaire, Victorine's words were as gentle as the moan of the wounded dove, and affection found expression even in the cry drawn from her by pain.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac was a thoroughly southern type; he had a fair complexion, blue eyes, black hair. In his figure, manner, and his whole bearing it was easy to see that he had either come of a noble family, or that, from his earliest childhood, he had been gently bred. If he was careful of his wardrobe, only taking last year's clothes into daily wear, still upon occasion he could issue forth as a young man of fashion. Ordinarily he wore a shabby coat and waistcoat, the limp black cravat, untidily knotted, that students affect, trousers that matched the rest of his costume, and boots that had been resoled.

°°°°Vautrin (the man of forty with the dyed whiskers) marked a transition stage between these two young people and the others. He was the kind of man that calls forth the remark: "He looks a jovial sort!" He had broad shoulders, a well-developed chest, muscular arms, and strong square-fisted hands; the joints of his fingers were covered with tufts of fiery red hair. His face was furrowed by premature wrinkles; there was a certain hardness about it in spite of his bland and insinuating manner. His bass voice was by no means unpleasant, and was in keeping with his boisterous laughter. He was always obliging, always in good spirits; if anything went wrong with one of the locks, he would soon unscrew it, take it to pieces, file it, oil and clean and set it in order, and put it back in its place again; "I am an old hand at it," he used to say. Not only so, he knew all about ships, the sea, France, foreign countries, men, business, law, great houses and prisons,--there was nothing that he did not know. If any one complained rather more than usual, he would offer his services at once. He had several times lent money to Mme. Vauquer, or to the boarders; but, somehow, those whom he obliged felt that they would sooner face death than fail to repay him; a certain resolute look, sometimes seen on his face, inspired fear of him, for all his appearance of easy good-nature. In the way he spat there was an imperturbable coolness which seemed to indicate that this was a man who would not stick at a crime to extricate himself from a false position. His eyes, like those of a pitiless judge, seemed to go to the very bottom of all questions, to read all natures, all feelings and thoughts. His habit of life was very regular; he usually went out after breakfast, returning in time for dinner, and disappeared for the rest of the evening, letting himself in about midnight with a latch key, a privilege that Mme. Vauquer accorded to no other boarder. But then he was on very good terms with the widow; he used to call her "mamma," and put his arm round her waist, a piece of flattery perhaps not appreciated to the full! The worthy woman might imagine this to be an easy feat; but, as a matter of fact, no arm but Vautrin's was long enough to encircle her.

°°°°It was a characteristic trait of his generously to pay fifteen francs a month for the cup of coffee with a dash of brandy in it, which he took after dinner. Less superficial observers than young men engulfed by the whirlpool of Parisian life, or old men, who took no interest in anything that did not directly concern them, would not have stopped short at the vaguely unsatisfactory impression that Vautrin made upon them. He knew or guessed the concerns of every one about him; but none of them had been able to penetrate his thoughts, or to discover his occupation. He had deliberately made his apparent good-nature, his unfailing readiness to oblige, and his high spirits into a barrier between himself and the rest of them, but not seldom he gave glimpses of appalling depths of character. He seemed to delight in scourging the upper classes of society with the lash of his tongue, to take pleasure in convicting it of inconsistency, in mocking at law and order with some grim jest worthy of Juvenal, as if some grudge against the social system rankled in him, as if there were some mystery carefully hidden away in his life.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer felt attracted, perhaps unconsciously, by the strength of the one man, and the good looks of the other; her stolen glances and secret thoughts were divided between them; but neither of them seemed to take any notice of her, although some day a chance might alter her position, and she would be a wealthy heiress. For that matter, there was not a soul in the house who took any trouble to investigate the various chronicles of misfortunes, real or imaginary, related by the rest. Each one regarded the others with indifference, tempered by suspicion; it was a natural result of their relative positions. Practical assistance not one could give, this they all knew, and they had long since exhausted their stock of condolence over previous discussions of their grievances. They were in something the same position as an elderly couple who have nothing left to say to each other. The routine of existence kept them in contact, but they were parts of a mechanism which wanted oil. There was not one of them but would have passed a blind man begging in the street, not one that felt moved to pity by a tale of misfortune, not one who did not see in death the solution of the all- absorbing problem of misery which left them cold to the most terrible anguish in others.

°°°°The happiest of these hapless beings was certainly Mme. Vauquer, who reigned supreme over this hospital supported by voluntary contributions. For her, the little garden, which silence, and cold, and rain, and drought combined to make as dreary as an Asian steppe, was a pleasant shaded nook; the gaunt yellow house, the musty odors of a back shop had charms for her, and for her alone. Those cells belonged to her. She fed those convicts condemned to penal servitude for life, and her authority was recognized among them. Where else in Paris would they have found wholesome food in sufficient quantity at the prices she charged them, and rooms which they were at liberty to make, if not exactly elegant or comfortable, at any rate clean and healthy? If she had committed some flagrant act of injustice, the victim would have borne it in silence.

°°°°Such a gathering contained, as might have been expected, the elements out of which a complete society might be constructed. And, as in a school, as in the world itself, there was among the eighteen men and women who met round the dinner table a poor creature, despised by all the others, condemned to be the butt of all their jokes. At the beginning of Eugene de Rastignac's second twelvemonth, this figure suddenly started out into bold relief against the background of human forms and faces among which the law student was yet to live for another two years to come. This laughing-stock was the retired vermicelli-merchant, Father Goriot, upon whose face a painter, like the historian, would have concentrated all the light in his picture.

°°°°How had it come about that the boarders regarded him with a half- malignant contempt? Why did they subject the oldest among their number to a kind of persecution, in which there was mingled some pity, but no respect for his misfortunes? Had he brought it on himself by some eccentricity or absurdity, which is less easily forgiven or forgotten than more serious defects? The question strikes at the root of many a social injustice. Perhaps it is only human nature to inflict suffering on anything that will endure suffering, whether by reason of its genuine humility, or indifference, or sheer helplessness. Do we not, one and all, like to feel our strength even at the expense of some one or of something? The poorest sample of humanity, the street arab, will pull the bell handle at every street door in bitter weather, and scramble up to write his name on the unsullied marble of a monument.

°°°°In the year 1813, at the age of sixty-nine or thereabouts, "Father Goriot" had sold his business and retired--to Mme. Vauquer's boarding house. When he first came there he had taken the rooms now occupied by Mme. Couture; he had paid twelve hundred francs a year like a man to whom five louis more or less was a mere trifle. For him Mme. Vauquer had made various improvements in the three rooms destined for his use, in consideration of a certain sum paid in advance, so it was said, for the miserable furniture, that is to say, for some yellow cotton curtains, a few chairs of stained wood covered with Utrecht velvet, several wretched colored prints in frames, and wall papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained. Possibly it was the careless generosity with which Father Goriot allowed himself to be overreached at this period of his life (they called him Monsieur Goriot very respectfully then) that gave Mme. Vauquer the meanest opinion of his business abilities; she looked on him as an imbecile where money was concerned.

°°°°Goriot had brought with him a considerable wardrobe, the gorgeous outfit of a retired tradesman who denies himself nothing. Mme. Vauquer's astonished eyes beheld no less than eighteen cambric- fronted shirts, the splendor of their fineness being enhanced by a pair of pins each bearing a large diamond, and connected by a short chain, an ornament which adorned the vermicelli-maker's shirt front. He usually wore a coat of corn-flower blue; his rotund and portly person was still further set off by a clean white waistcoat, and a gold chain and seals which dangled over that broad expanse. When his hostess accused him of being "a bit of a beau," he smiled with the vanity of a citizen whose foible is gratified. His cupboards (ormoires, as he called them in the popular dialect) were filled with a quantity of plate that he brought with him. The widow's eyes gleamed as she obligingly helped him to unpack the soup ladles, table-spoons, forks, cruet- stands, tureens, dishes, and breakfast services--all of silver, which were duly arranged upon shelves, besides a few more or less handsome pieces of plate, all weighing no inconsiderable number of ounces; he could not bring himself to part with these gifts that reminded him of past domestic festivals.

°°°°"This was my wife's present to me on the first anniversary of our wedding day," he said to Mme. Vauquer, as he put away a little silver posset dish, with two turtle-doves billing on the cover. "Poor dear! she spent on it all the money she had saved before we were married. Do you know, I would sooner scratch the earth with my nails for a living, madame, than part with that. But I shall be able to take my coffee out of it every morning for the rest of my days, thank the Lord! I am not to be pitied. There's not much fear of my starving for some time to come."

°°°°Finally, Mme. Vauquer's magpie's eye had discovered and read certain entries in the list of shareholders in the funds, and, after a rough calculation, was disposed to credit Goriot (worthy man) with something like ten thousand francs a year. From that day forward Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans), who, as a matter of fact, had seen forty-eight summers, though she would only own to thirty-nine of them--Mme. Vauquer had her own ideas. Though Goriot's eyes seemed to have shrunk in their sockets, though they were weak and watery, owing to some glandular affection which compelled him to wipe them continually, she considered him to be a very gentlemanly and pleasant-looking man. Moreover, the widow saw favorable indications of character in the well-developed calves of his legs and in his square-shaped nose, indications still further borne out by the worthy man's full-moon countenance and look of stupid good-nature. This, in all probability, was a strongly-build animal, whose brains mostly consisted in a capacity for affection. His hair, worn in ailes de pigeon, and duly powdered every morning by the barber from the Ecole Polytechnique, described five points on his low forehead, and made an elegant setting to his face. Though his manners were somewhat boorish, he was always as neat as a new pin and he took his snuff in a lordly way, like a man who knows that his snuff- box is always likely to be filled with maccaboy, so that when Mme. Vauquer lay down to rest on the day of M. Goriot's installation, her heart, like a larded partridge, sweltered before the fire of a burning desire to shake off the shroud of Vauquer and rise again as Goriot. She would marry again, sell her boarding-house, give her hand to this fine flower of citizenship, become a lady of consequence in the quarter, and ask for subscriptions for charitable purposes; she would make little Sunday excursions to Choisy, Soissy, Gentilly; she would have a box at the theatre when she liked, instead of waiting for the author's tickets that one of her boarders sometimes gave her, in July; the whole Eldorado of a little Parisian household rose up before Mme. Vauquer in her dreams. Nobody knew that she herself possessed forty thousand francs, accumulated sou by sou, that was her secret; surely as far as money was concerned she was a very tolerable match. "And in other respects, I am quite his equal," she said to herself, turning as if to assure herself of the charms of a form that the portly Sylvie found moulded in down feathers every morning.

°°°°For three months from that day Mme. Veuve Vauquer availed herself of the services of M. Goriot's coiffeur, and went to some expense over her toilette, expense justifiable on the ground that she owed it to herself and her establishment to pay some attention to appearances when such highly-respectable persons honored her house with their presence. She expended no small amount of ingenuity in a sort of weeding process of her lodgers, announcing her intention of receiving henceforward none but people who were in every way select. If a stranger presented himself, she let him know that M. Goriot, one of the best known and most highly- respected merchants in Paris, had singled out her boarding-house for a residence. She drew up a prospectus headed MAISON VAUQUER, in which it was asserted that hers was "one of the oldest and most highly recommended boarding-houses in the Latin Quarter." "From the windows of the house," thus ran the prospectus, "there is a charming view of the Vallee des Gobelins (so there is--from the third floor), and a BEAUTIFUL garden, EXTENDING down to AN AVENUE OF LINDENS at the further end." Mention was made of the bracing air of the place and its quiet situation.

°°°°It was this prospectus that attracted Mme. la Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil, a widow of six and thirty, who was awaiting the final settlement of her husband's affairs, and of another matter regarding a pension due to her as the wife of a general who had died "on the field of battle." On this Mme. Vauquer saw to her table, lighted a fire daily in the sitting-room for nearly six months, and kept the promise of her prospectus, even going to some expense to do so. And the Countess, on her side, addressed Mme. Vauquer as "my dear," and promised her two more boarders, the Baronne de Vaumerland and the widow of a colonel, the late Comte de Picquoisie, who were about to leave a boarding-house in the Marais, where the terms were higher than at the Maison Vauquer. Both these ladies, moreover, would be very well to do when the people at the War Office had come to an end of their formalities. "But Government departments are always so dilatory," the lady added.

°°°°After dinner the two widows went together up to Mme. Vauquer's room, and had a snug little chat over some cordial and various delicacies reserved for the mistress of the house. Mme. Vauquer's ideas as to Goriot were cordially approved by Mme. de l'Ambermesnil; it was a capital notion, which for that matter she had guessed from the very first; in her opinion the vermicelli maker was an excellent man.

°°°°"Ah! my dear lady, such a well-preserved man of his age, as sound as my eyesight--a man who might make a woman happy!" said the widow.

°°°°The good-natured Countess turned to the subject of Mme. Vauquer's dress, which was not in harmony with her projects. "You must put yourself on a war footing," said she.

°°°°After much serious consideration the two widows went shopping together--they purchased a hat adorned with ostrich feathers and a cap at the Palais Royal, and the Countess took her friend to the Magasin de la Petite Jeannette, where they chose a dress and a scarf. Thus equipped for the campaign, the widow looked exactly like the prize animal hung out for a sign above an a la mode beef shop; but she herself was so much pleased with the improvement, as she considered it, in her appearance, that she felt that she lay under some obligation to the Countess; and, though by no means open-handed, she begged that lady to accept a hat that cost twenty francs. The fact was that she needed the Countess' services on the delicate mission of sounding Goriot; the countess must sing her praises in his ears. Mme. de l'Ambermesnil lent herself very good-naturedly to this manoeuvre, began her operations, and succeeded in obtaining a private interview; but the overtures that she made, with a view to securing him for herself, were received with embarrassment, not to say a repulse. She left him, revolted by his coarseness.

°°°°"My angel," said she to her dear friend, "you will make nothing of that man yonder. He is absurdly suspicious, and he is a mean curmudgeon, an idiot, a fool; you would never be happy with him."

°°°°After what had passed between M. Goriot and Mme. de l'Ambermesnil, the Countess would no longer live under the same roof. She left the next day, forgot to pay for six months' board, and left behind her wardrobe, cast-off clothing to the value of five francs. Eagerly and persistently as Mme. Vauquer sought her quondam lodger, the Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil was never heard of again in Paris. The widow often talked of this deplorable business, and regretted her own too confiding disposition. As a matter of fact, she was as suspicious as a cat; but she was like many other people, who cannot trust their own kin and put themselves at the mercy of the next chance comer--an odd but common phenomenon, whose causes may readily be traced to the depths of the human heart.

°°°°Perhaps there are people who know that they have nothing more to look for from those with whom they live; they have shown the emptiness of their hearts to their housemates, and in their secret selves they are conscious that they are severely judged, and that they deserve to be judged severely; but still they feel an unconquerable craving for praises that they do not hear, or they are consumed by a desire to appear to possess, in the eyes of a new audience, the qualities which they have not, hoping to win the admiration or affection of strangers at the risk of forfeiting it again some day. Or, once more, there are other mercenary natures who never do a kindness to a friend or a relation simply because these have a claim upon them, while a service done to a stranger brings its reward to self-love. Such natures feel but little affection for those who are nearest to them; they keep their kindness for remoter circles of acquaintance, and show most to those who dwell on its utmost limits. Mme. Vauquer belonged to both these essentially mean, false, and execrable classes.

°°°°"If I had been there at the time," Vautrin would say at the end of the story, I would have shown her up, and that misfortune would not have befallen you. I know that kind of phiz!"

°°°°Like all narrow natures, Mme. Vauquer was wont to confine her attention to events, and did not go very deeply into the causes that brought them about; she likewise preferred to throw the blame of her own mistakes on other people, so she chose to consider that the honest vermicelli maker was responsible for her misfortune. It had opened her eyes, so she said, with regard to him. As soon as she saw that her blandishments were in vain, and that her outlay on her toilette was money thrown away, she was not slow to discover the reason of his indifference. It became plain to her at once that there was SOME OTHER ATTRACTION, to use her own expression. In short, it was evident that the hope she had so fondly cherished was a baseless delusion, and that she would "never make anything out of that man yonder," in the Countess' forcible phrase. The Countess seemed to have been a judge of character. Mme. Vauquer's aversion was naturally more energetic than her friendship, for her hatred was not in proportion to her love, but to her disappointed expectations. The human heart may find here and there a resting-place short of the highest height of affection, but we seldom stop in the steep, downward slope of hatred. Still, M. Goriot was a lodger, and the widow's wounded self-love could not vent itself in an explosion of wrath; like a monk harassed by the prior of his convent, she was forced to stifle her sighs of disappointment, and to gulp down her craving for revenge. Little minds find gratification for their feelings, benevolent or otherwise, by a constant exercise of petty ingenuity. The widow employed her woman's malice to devise a system of covert persecution. She began by a course of retrenchment--various luxuries which had found their way to the table appeared there no more.

°°°°"No more gherkins, no more anchovies; they have made a fool of me!" she said to Sylvie one morning, and they returned to the old bill of fare.

°°°°The thrifty frugality necessary to those who mean to make their way in the world had become an inveterate habit of life with M. Goriot. Soup, boiled beef, and a dish of vegetables had been, and always would be, the dinner he liked best, so Mme. Vauquer found it very difficult to annoy a boarder whose tastes were so simple. He was proof against her malice, and in desperation she spoke to him and of him slightingly before the other lodgers, who began to amuse themselves at his expense, and so gratified her desire for revenge.

°°°°Towards the end of the first year the widow's suspicions had reached such a pitch that she began to wonder how it was that a retired merchant with a secure income of seven or eight thousand livres, the owner of such magnificent plate and jewelry handsome enough for a kept mistress, should be living in her house. Why should he devote so small a proportion of his money to his expenses? Until the first year was nearly at an end, Goriot had dined out once or twice every week, but these occasions came less frequently, and at last he was scarcely absent from the dinner- table twice a month. It was hardly expected that Mme. Vauquer should regard the increased regularity of her boarder's habits with complacency, when those little excursions of his had been so much to her interest. She attributed the change not so much to a gradual diminution of fortune as to a spiteful wish to annoy his hostess. It is one of the most detestable habits of a Liliputian mind to credit other people with its own malignant pettiness.

°°°°Unluckily, towards the end of the second year, M. Goriot's conduct gave some color to the idle talk about him. He asked Mme. Vauquer to give him a room on the second floor, and to make a corresponding reduction in her charges. Apparently, such strict economy was called for, that he did without a fire all through the winter. Mme. Vauquer asked to be paid in advance, an arrangement to which M. Goriot consented, and thenceforward she spoke of him as "Father Goriot."

°°°°What had brought about this decline and fall? Conjecture was keen, but investigation was difficult. Father Goriot was not communicative; in the sham countess' phrase he was "a curmudgeon." Empty-headed people who babble about their own affairs because they have nothing else to occupy them, naturally conclude that if people say nothing of their doings it is because their doings will not bear being talked about; so the highly respectable merchant became a scoundrel, and the late beau was an old rogue. Opinion fluctuated. Sometimes, according to Vautrin, who came about this time to live in the Maison Vauquer, Father Goriot was a man who went on 'Change and DABBLED (to use the sufficiently expressive language of the Stock Exchange) in stocks and shares after he had ruined himself by heavy speculation. Sometimes it was held that he was one of those petty gamblers who nightly play for small stakes until they win a few francs. A theory that he was a detective in the employ of the Home Office found favor at one time, but Vautrin urged that "Goriot was not sharp enough for one of that sort." There were yet other solutions; Father Goriot was a skinflint, a shark of a money- lender, a man who lived by selling lottery tickets. He was by turns all the most mysterious brood of vice and shame and misery; yet, however vile his life might be, the feeling of repulsion which he aroused in others was not so strong that he must be banished from their society--he paid his way. Besides, Goriot had his uses, every one vented his spleen or sharpened his wit on him; he was pelted with jokes and belabored with hard words. The general consensus of opinion was in favor of a theory which seemed the most likely; this was Mme. Vauquer's view. According to her, the man so well preserved at his time of life, as sound as her eyesight, with whom a woman might be very happy, was a libertine who had strange tastes. These are the facts upon which Mme. Vauquer's slanders were based.

°°°°Early one morning, some few months after the departure of the unlucky Countess who had managed to live for six months at the widow's expense, Mme. Vauquer (not yet dressed) heard the rustle of a silk dress and a young woman's light footstep on the stair; some one was going to Goriot's room. He seemed to expect the visit, for his door stood ajar. The portly Sylvie presently came up to tell her mistress that a girl too pretty to be honest, "dressed like a goddess," and not a speck of mud on her laced cashmere boots, had glided in from the street like a snake, had found the kitchen, and asked for M. Goriot's room. Mme. Vauquer and the cook, listening, overheard several words affectionately spoken during the visit, which lasted for some time. When M. Goriot went downstairs with the lady, the stout Sylvie forthwith took her basket and followed the lover-like couple, under pretext of going to do her marketing.

°°°°"M. Goriot must be awfully rich, all the same, madame," she reported on her return, "to keep her in such style. Just imagine it! There was a splendid carriage waiting at the corner of the Place de l'Estrapade, and SHE got into it."

°°°°While they were at dinner that evening, Mme. Vauquer went to the window and drew the curtain, as the sun was shining into Goriot's eyes.

°°°°"You are beloved of fair ladies, M. Goriot--the sun seeks you out," she said, alluding to his visitor. "Peste! you have good taste; she was very pretty."

°°°°"That was my daughter," he said, with a kind of pride in his voice, and the rest chose to consider this as the fatuity of an old man who wishes to save appearances.

°°°°A month after this visit M. Goriot received another. The same daughter who had come to see him that morning came again after dinner, this time in evening dress. The boarders, in deep discussion in the dining-room, caught a glimpse of a lovely, fair-haired woman, slender, graceful, and much too distinguished- looking to be a daughter of Father Goriot's.

°°°°"Two of them!" cried the portly Sylvie, who did not recognize the lady of the first visit.

°°°°A few days later, and another young lady--a tall, well-moulded brunette, with dark hair and bright eyes--came to ask for M. Goriot.

°°°°"Three of them!" said Sylvie.

°°°°Then the second daughter, who had first come in the morning to see her father, came shortly afterwards in the evening. She wore a ball dress, and came in a carriage.

°°°°"Four of them!" commented Mme. Vauquer and her plump handmaid. Sylvie saw not a trace of resemblance between this great lady and the girl in her simple morning dress who had entered her kitchen on the occasion of her first visit.

°°°°At that time Goriot was paying twelve hundred francs a year to his landlady, and Mme. Vauquer saw nothing out of the common in the fact that a rich man had four or five mistresses; nay, she thought it very knowing of him to pass them off as his daughters. She was not at all inclined to draw a hard-and-fast line, or to take umbrage at his sending for them to the Maison Vauquer; yet, inasmuch as these visits explained her boarder's indifference to her, she went so far (at the end of the second year) as to speak of him as an "ugly old wretch." When at length her boarder declined to nine hundred francs a year, she asked him very insolently what he took her house to be, after meeting one of these ladies on he stairs. Father Goriot answered that the lady was his eldest daughter.

°°°°"So you have two or three dozen daughters, have you?" said Mme. Vauquer sharply.

°°°°"I have only two," her boarder answered meekly, like a ruined man who is broken in to all the cruel usage of misfortune.

°°°°Towards the end of the third year Father Goriot reduced his expenses still further; he went up to the third story, and now paid forty-five francs a month. He did without snuff, told his hairdresser that he no longer required his services, and gave up wearing powder. When Goriot appeared for the first time in this condition, an exclamation of astonishment broke from his hostess at the color of his hair--a dingy olive gray. He had grown sadder day by day under the influence of some hidden trouble; among all the faces round the table, his was the most woe-begone. There was no longer any doubt. Goriot was an elderly libertine, whose eyes had only been preserved by the skill of the physician from the malign influence of the remedies necessitated by the state of his health. The disgusting color of his hair was a result of his excesses and of the drugs which he had taken that he might continue his career. The poor old man's mental and physical condition afforded some grounds for the absurd rubbish talked about him. When his outfit was worn out, he replaced the fine linen by calico at fourteen sous the ell. His diamonds, his gold snuff-box, watch-chain and trinkets, disappeared one by one. He had left off wearing the corn-flower blue coat, and was sumptuously arrayed, summer as well as winter, in a coarse chestnut-brown coat, a plush waistcoat, and doeskin breeches. He grew thinner and thinner; his legs were shrunken, his cheeks, once so puffed out by contented bourgeois prosperity, were covered with wrinkles, and the outlines of the jawbones were distinctly visible; there were deep furrows in his forehead. In the fourth year of his residence in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve he was no longer like his former self. The hale vermicelli manufacturer, sixty-two years of age, who had looked scarce forty, the stout, comfortable, prosperous tradesman, with an almost bucolic air, and such a brisk demeanor that it did you good to look at him; the man with something boyish in his smile, had suddenly sunk into his dotage, and had become a feeble, vacillating septuagenarian.

°°°°The keen, bright blue eyes had grown dull, and faded to a steel- gray color; the red inflamed rims looked as though they had shed tears of blood. He excited feelings of repulsion in some, and of pity in others. The young medical students who came to the house noticed the drooping of his lower lip and the conformation of the facial angle; and, after teasing him for some time to no purpose, they declared that cretinism was setting in.

°°°°One evening after dinner Mme. Vauquer said half banteringly to him, "So those daughters of yours don't come to see you any more, eh?" meaning to imply her doubts as to his paternity; but Father Goriot shrank as if his hostess had touched him with a sword- point.

°°°°"They come sometimes," he said in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Aha! you still see them sometimes?" cried the students. "Bravo, Father Goriot!"

°°°°The old man scarcely seemed to hear the witticisms at his expense that followed on the words; he had relapsed into the dreamy state of mind that these superficial observers took for senile torpor, due to his lack of intelligence. If they had only known, they might have been deeply interested by the problem of his condition; but few problems were more obscure. It was easy, of course, to find out whether Goriot had really been a vermicelli manufacturer; the amount of his fortune was readily discoverable; but the old people, who were most inquisitive as to his concerns, never went beyond the limits of the Quarter, and lived in the lodging-house much as oysters cling to a rock. As for the rest, the current of life in Paris daily awaited them, and swept them away with it; so soon as they left the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, they forgot the existence of the old man, their butt at dinner. For those narrow souls, or for careless youth, the misery in Father Goriot's withered face and its dull apathy were quite incompatible with wealth or any sort of intelligence. As for the creatures whom he called his daughters, all Mme. Vauquer's boarders were of her opinion. With the faculty for severe logic sedulously cultivated by elderly women during long evenings of gossip till they can always find an hypothesis to fit all circumstances, she was wont to reason thus:

°°°°"If Father Goriot had daughters of his own as rich as those ladies who came here seemed to be, he would not be lodging in my house, on the third floor, at forty-five francs a month; and he would not go about dressed like a poor man."

°°°°No objection could be raised to these inferences. So by the end of the month of November 1819, at the time when the curtain rises on this drama, every one in the house had come to have a very decided opinion as to the poor old man. He had never had either wife or daughter; excesses had reduced him to this sluggish condition; he was a sort of human mollusk who should be classed among the capulidoe, so one of the dinner contingent, an employe at the Museum, who had a pretty wit of his own. Poiret was an eagle, a gentleman, compared with Goriot. Poiret would join the talk, argue, answer when he was spoken to; as a matter of fact, his talk, arguments, and responses contributed nothing to the conversation, for Poiret had a habit of repeating what the others said in different words; still, he did join in the talk; he was alive, and seemed capable of feeling; while Father Goriot (to quote the Museum official again) was invariably at zero--Reaumur.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac had just returned to Paris in a state of mind not unknown to young men who are conscious of unusual powers, and to those whose faculties are so stimulated by a difficult position, that for the time being they rise above the ordinary level.

°°°°Rastignac's first year of study for the preliminary examinations in law had left him free to see the sights of Paris and to enjoy some of its amusements. A student has not much time on his hands if he sets himself to learn the repertory of every theatre, and to study the ins and outs of the labyrinth of Paris. To know its customs; to learn the language, and become familiar with the amusements of the capital, he must explore its recesses, good and bad, follow the studies that please him best, and form some idea of the treasures contained in galleries and museums.

°°°°At this stage of his career a student grows eager and excited about all sorts of follies that seem to him to be of immense importance. He has his hero, his great man, a professor at the College de France, paid to talk down to the level of his audience. He adjusts his cravat, and strikes various attitudes for the benefit of the women in the first galleries at the Opera- Comique. As he passes through all these successive initiations, and breaks out of his sheath, the horizons of life widen around him, and at length he grasps the plan of society with the different human strata of which it is composed.

°°°°If he begins by admiring the procession of carriages on sunny afternoons in the Champs-Elysees, he soon reaches the further stage of envying their owners. Unconsciously, Eugene had served his apprenticeship before he went back to Angouleme for the long vacation after taking his degrees as bachelor of arts and bachelor of law. The illusions of childhood had vanished, so also had the ideas he brought with him from the provinces; he had returned thither with an intelligence developed, with loftier ambitions, and saw things as they were at home in the old manor house. His father and mother, his two brothers and two sisters, with an aged aunt, whose whole fortune consisted in annuities, lived on the little estate of Rastignac. The whole property brought in about three thousand francs; and though the amount varied with the season (as must always be the case in a vine- growing district), they were obliged to spare an unvarying twelve hundred francs out of their income for him. He saw how constantly the poverty, which they had generously hidden from him, weighed upon them; he could not help comparing the sisters, who had seemed so beautiful to his boyish eyes, with women in Paris, who had realized the beauty of his dreams. The uncertain future of the whole family depended upon him. It did not escape his eyes that not a crumb was wasted in the house, nor that the wine they drank was made from the second pressing; a multitude of small things, which it is useless to speak of in detail here, made him burn to distinguish himself, and his ambition to succeed increased tenfold.

°°°°He meant, like all great souls, that his success should be owing entirely to his merits; but his was pre-eminently a southern temperament, the execution of his plans was sure to be marred by the vertigo that seizes on youth when youth sees itself alone in a wide sea, uncertain how to spend its energies, whither to steer its course, how to adapt its sails to the winds. At first he determined to fling himself heart and soul into his work, but he was diverted from this purpose by the need of society and connections; then he saw how great an influence women exert in social life, and suddenly made up his mind to go out into this world to seek a protectress there. Surely a clever and high- spirited young man, whose wit and courage were set off to advantage by a graceful figure and the vigorous kind of beauty that readily strikes a woman's imagination, need not despair of finding a protectress. These ideas occurred to him in his country walks with his sisters, whom he had once joined so gaily. The girls thought him very much changed.

°°°°His aunt, Mme. de Marcillac, had been presented at court, and had moved among the brightest heights of that lofty region. Suddenly the young man's ambition discerned in those recollections of hers, which had been like nursery fairy tales to her nephews and nieces, the elements of a social success at least as important as the success which he had achieved at the Ecole de Droit. He began to ask his aunt about those relations; some of the old ties might still hold good. After much shaking of the branches of the family tree, the old lady came to the conclusion that of all persons who could be useful to her nephew among the selfish genus of rich relations, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was the least likely to refuse. To this lady, therefore, she wrote in the old-fashioned style, recommending Eugene to her; pointing out to her nephew that if he succeeded in pleasing Mme. de Beauseant, the Vicomtesse would introduce him to other relations. A few days after his return to Paris, therefore, Rastignac sent his aunt's letter to Mme. de Beauseant. The Vicomtesse replied by an invitation to a ball for the following evening. This was the position of affairs at the Maison Vauquer at the end of November 1819.

°°°°A few days later, after Mme. de Beauseant's ball, Eugene came in at two o'clock in the morning. The persevering student meant to make up for the lost time by working until daylight. It was the first time that he had attempted to spend the night in this way in that silent quarter. The spell of a factitious energy was upon him; he had beheld the pomp and splendor of the world. He had not dined at the Maison Vauquer; the boarders probably would think that he would walk home at daybreak from the dance, as he had done sometimes on former occasions, after a fete at the Prado, or a ball at the Odeon, splashing his silk stockings thereby, and ruining his pumps.

°°°°It so happened that Christophe took a look into the street before drawing the bolts of the door; and Rastignac, coming in at that moment, could go up to his room without making any noise, followed by Christophe, who made a great deal. Eugene exchanged his dress suit for a shabby overcoat and slippers, kindled a fire with some blocks of patent fuel, and prepared for his night's work in such a sort that the faint sounds he made were drowned by Christophe's heavy tramp on the stairs.

°°°°Eugene sat absorbed in thought for a few moments before plunging into his law books. He had just become aware of the fact that the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was one of the queens of fashion, that her house was thought to be the pleasantest in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. And not only so, she was, by right of her fortune, and the name she bore, one of the most conspicuous figures in that aristocratic world. Thanks to the aunt, thanks to Mme. de Marcillac's letter of introduction, the poor student had been kindly received in that house before he knew the extent of the favor thus shown to him. It was almost like a patent of nobility to be admitted to those gilded salons; he had appeared in the most exclusive circle in Paris, and now all doors were open for him. Eugene had been dazzled at first by the brilliant assembly, and had scarcely exchanged a few words with the Vicomtesse; he had been content to single out a goddess among this throng of Parisian divinities, one of those women who are sure to attract a young man's fancy.

°°°°The Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud was tall and gracefully made; she had one of the prettiest figures in Paris. Imagine a pair of great dark eyes, a magnificently moulded hand, a shapely foot. There was a fiery energy in her movements; the Marquis de Ronquerolles had called her "a thoroughbred," "a pure pedigree," these figures of speech have replaced the "heavenly angel" and Ossianic nomenclature; the old mythology of love is extinct, doomed to perish by modern dandyism. But for Rastignac, Mme. Anastasie de Restaud was the woman for whom he had sighed. He had contrived to write his name twice upon the list of partners upon her fan, and had snatched a few words with her during the first quadrille.

°°°°"Where shall I meet you again, Madame?" he asked abruptly, and the tones of his voice were full of the vehement energy that women like so well.

°°°°"Oh, everywhere!" said she, "in the Bois, at the Bouffons, in my own house."

°°°°With the impetuosity of his adventurous southern temper, he did all he could to cultivate an acquaintance with this lovely countess, making the best of his opportunities in the quadrille and during a waltz that she gave him. When he told her that he was a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's, the Countess, whom he took for a great lady, asked him to call at her house, and after her parting smile, Rastignac felt convinced that he must make this visit. He was so lucky as to light upon some one who did not laugh at his ignorance, a fatal defect among the gilded and insolent youth of that period; the coterie of Maulincourts, Maximes de Trailles, de Marsays, Ronquerolles, Ajuda-Pintos, and Vandenesses who shone there in all the glory of coxcombry among the best-dressed women of fashion in Paris--Lady Brandon, the Duchesse de Langeais, the Comtesse de Kergarouet, Mme. de Serizy, the Duchesse de Carigliano, the Comtesse Ferraud, Mme. de Lanty, the Marquise d'Aiglemont, Mme. Firmiani, the Marquise de Listomere and the Marquise d'Espard, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and the Grandlieus. Luckily, therefore, for him, the novice happened upon the Marquis de Montriveau, the lover of the Duchesse de Langeais, a general as simple as a child; from him Rastignac learned that the Comtesse lived in the Rue du Helder.

°°°°Ah, what it is to be young, eager to see the world, greedily on the watch for any chance that brings you nearer the woman of your dreams, and behold two houses open their doors to you! To set foot in the Vicomtesse de Beauseant's house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; to fall on your knees before a Comtesse de Restaud in the Chaussee d'Antin; to look at one glance across a vista of Paris drawing-rooms, conscious that, possessing sufficient good looks, you may hope to find aid and protection there in a feminine heart! To feel ambitious enough to spurn the tight-rope on which you must walk with the steady head of an acrobat for whom a fall is impossible, and to find in a charming woman the best of all balancing poles.

°°°°He sat there with his thoughts for a while, Law on the one hand, and Poverty on the other, beholding a radiant vision of a woman rise above the dull, smouldering fire. Who would not have paused and questioned the future as Eugene was doing? who would not have pictured it full of success? His wondering thoughts took wings; he was transported out of the present into that blissful future; he was sitting by Mme. de Restaud's side, when a sort of sigh, like the grunt of an overburdened St. Joseph, broke the silence of the night. It vibrated through the student, who took the sound for a death groan. He opened his door noiselessly, went out upon the landing, and saw a thin streak of light under Father Goriot's door. Eugene feared that his neighbor had been taken ill; he went over and looked through the keyhole; the old man was busily engaged in an occupation so singular and so suspicious that Rastignac thought he was only doing a piece of necessary service to society to watch the self-styled vermicelli maker's nocturnal industries.

°°°°The table was upturned, and Goriot had doubtless in some way secured a silver plate and cup to the bar before knotting a thick rope round them; he was pulling at this rope with such enormous force that they were being crushed and twisted out of shape; to all appearance he meant to convert the richly wrought metal into ingots.

°°°°"Peste! what a man!" said Rastignac, as he watched Goriot's muscular arms; there was not a sound in the room while the old man, with the aid of the rope, was kneading the silver like dough. "Was he then, indeed, a thief, or a receiver of stolen goods, who affected imbecility and decrepitude, and lived like a beggar that he might carry on his pursuits the more securely?" Eugene stood for a moment revolving these questions, then he looked again through the keyhole.

°°°°Father Goriot had unwound his coil of rope; he had covered the table with a blanket, and was now employed in rolling the flattened mass of silver into a bar, an operation which he performed with marvelous dexterity.

°°°°"Why, he must be as strong as Augustus, King of Poland!" said Eugene to himself when the bar was nearly finished.

°°°°Father Goriot looked sadly at his handiwork, tears fell from his eyes, he blew out the dip which had served him for a light while he manipulated the silver, and Eugene heard him sigh as he lay down again.

°°°°"He is mad," thought the student.

°°°°"Poor child!" Father Goriot said aloud. Rastignac, hearing those words, concluded to keep silence; he would not hastily condemn his neighbor. He was just in the doorway of his room when a strange sound from the staircase below reached his ears; it might have been made by two men coming up in list slippers. Eugene listened; two men there certainly were, he could hear their breathing. Yet there had been no sound of opening the street door, no footsteps in the passage. Suddenly, too, he saw a faint gleam of light on the second story; it came from M. Vautrin's room.

°°°°"There are a good many mysteries here for a lodging-house!" he said to himself.

°°°°He went part of the way downstairs and listened again. The rattle of gold reached his ears. In another moment the light was put out, and again he distinctly heard the breathing of two men, but no sound of a door being opened or shut. The two men went downstairs, the faint sounds growing fainter as they went.

°°°°"Who is there?" cried Mme. Vauquer out of her bedroom window.

°°°°"I, Mme. Vauquer," answered Vautrin's deep bass voice. "I am coming in."

°°°°"That is odd! Christophe drew the bolts," said Eugene, going back to his room. "You have to sit up at night, it seems, if you really mean to know all that is going on about you in Paris."

°°°°These incidents turned his thought from his ambitious dreams; he betook himself to his work, but his thought wandered back to Father Goriot's suspicious occupation; Mme. de Restaud's face swam again and again before his eyes like a vision of a brilliant future; and at last he lay down and slept with clenched fists. When a young man makes up his mind that he will work all night, the chances are that seven times out of ten he will sleep till morning. Such vigils do not begin before we are turned twenty.

°°°°The next morning Paris was wrapped in one of the dense fogs that throw the most punctual people out in their calculations as to the time; even the most business-like folk fail to keep their appointments in such weather, and ordinary mortals wake up at noon and fancy it is eight o'clock. On this morning it was half- past nine, and Mme. Vauquer still lay abed. Christophe was late, Sylvie was late, but the two sat comfortably taking their coffee as usual. It was Sylvie's custom to take the cream off the milk destined for the boarders' breakfast for her own, and to boil the remainder for some time, so that madame should not discover this illegal exaction.

°°°°"Sylvie," said Christophe, as he dipped a piece of toast into the coffee, "M. Vautrin, who is not such a bad sort, all the same, had two people come to see him again last night. If madame says anything, mind you say nothing about it."

°°°°"Has he given you something?"

°°°°"He gave me a five-franc piece this month, which is as good as saying, 'Hold your tongue.' "

°°°°"Except him and Mme. Couture, who doesn't look twice at every penny, there's no one in the house that doesn't try to get back with the left hand all that they give with the right at New Year," said Sylvie.

°°°°"And, after all," said Christophe, "what do they give you? A miserable five-franc piece. There is Father Goriot, who has cleaned his shoes himself these two years past. There is that old beggar Poiret, who goes without blacking altogether; he would sooner drink it than put it on his boots. Then there is that whipper-snapper of a student, who gives me a couple of francs, Two francs will not pay for my brushes, and he sells his old clothes, and gets more for them than they are worth. Oh! they're a shabby lot!"

°°°°"Pooh!" said Sylvie, sipping her coffee, "our places are the best in the Quarter, that I know. But about that great big chap Vautrin, Christophe; has any one told you anything about him?"

°°°°"Yes. I met a gentleman in the street a few days ago; he said to me, 'There's a gentleman in your place, isn't there? a tall man that dyes his whiskers?' I told him, 'No, sir; they aren't dyed. A gay fellow like him hasn't the time to do it.' And when I told M. Vautrin about it afterwards, he said, 'Quite right, my boy. That is the way to answer them. There is nothing more unpleasant than to have your little weaknesses known; it might spoil many a match.' "

°°°°"Well, and for my part," said Sylvie, "a man tried to humbug me at the market wanting to know if I had seen him put on his shirt. Such bosh! There," she cried, interrupting herself, "that's a quarter to ten striking at the Val-de-Grace, and not a soul stirring!"

°°°°"Pooh! they are all gone out. Mme. Couture and the girl went out at eight o'clock to take the wafer at Saint-Etienne. Father Goriot started off somewhere with a parcel, and the student won't be back from his lecture till ten o'clock. I saw them go while I was sweeping the stairs; Father Goriot knocked up against me, and his parcel was as hard as iron. What is the old fellow up to, I wonder? He is as good as a plaything for the rest of them; they can never let him alone; but he is a good man, all the same, and worth more than all of them put together. He doesn't give you much himself, but he sometimes sends you with a message to ladies who fork out famous tips; they are dressed grandly, too."

°°°°"His daughters, as he calls them, eh? There are a dozen of them."

°°°°"I have never been to more than two--the two who came here."

°°°°"There is madame moving overhead; I shall have to go, or she will raise a fine racket. Just keep an eye on the milk, Christophe; don't let the cat get at it."

°°°°Sylvie went up to her mistress' room.

°°°°"Sylvie! How is this? It's nearly ten o'clock, and you let me sleep like a dormouse! Such a thing has never happened before."

°°°°"It's the fog; it is that thick, you could cut it with a knife."

°°°°"But how about breakfast?"

°°°°"Bah! the boarders are possessed, I'm sure. They all cleared out before there was a wink of daylight."

°°°°"Do speak properly, Sylvie," Mme. Vauquer retorted; "say a blink of daylight."

°°°°"Ah, well, madame, whichever you please. Anyhow, you can have breakfast at ten o'clock. La Michonnette and Poiret have neither of them stirred. There are only those two upstairs, and they are sleeping like the logs they are."

°°°°"But, Sylvie, you put their names together as if----"

°°°°"As if what?" said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. "The two of them make a pair."

°°°°"It is a strange thing, isn't it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last night after Christophe had bolted the door?"

°°°°"Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?"

°°°°"Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears on the table, those at five a penny."

°°°°A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all haste.

°°°°"Mistigris!" she cried.

°°°°The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

°°°°"Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!" she said. "Sylvie! Sylvie!"

°°°°"Yes, madame; what is it?"

°°°°"Just see what the cat has done!"

°°°°"It is all that stupid Christophe's fault. I told him to stop and lay the table. What has become of him? Don't you worry, madame; Father Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won't know the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats."

°°°°"I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?" said Mme. Vauquer, setting the plates round the table.

°°°°"Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"I have overslept myself," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same."

°°°°The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the sitting-room, singing loudly:

°°°°" 'Tis the same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance . .

°°°°"Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!" he cried at the sight of his hostess, and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

°°°°"There! have done----"

°°°°" 'Impertinence!' Say it!" he answered. "Come, say it! Now, isn't that what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah! I am a nice man, am I not?

°°°°"For the locks of brown and the golden hair   A sighing lover . . .

°°°°"Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

°°°°. . . . led by chance."

°°°°"What?" asked the widow.

°°°°"Father Goriot in the goldsmith's shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there, and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that's not used to the trade."

°°°°"Really? You don't say so?"

°°°°"Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair. He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went into a money-lender's house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father's bones, a Turk, a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob HIM, for he puts all his coin into the Bank."

°°°°"Then what was Father Goriot doing there?"

°°°°"Doing?" said Vautrin. "Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----"

°°°°"There he is!" cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Christophe," cried Father Goriot's voice, "come upstairs with me."

°°°°Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

°°°°"Where are you going?" Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

°°°°"Out on an errand for M. Goriot."

°°°°"What may that be?" said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe's hand. "Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud," he read. "Where are you going with it?" he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

°°°°"To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands myself."

°°°°"What is there inside it?" said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the light. "A banknote? No." He peered into the envelope. "A receipted account!" he cried. "My word! 'tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you, old chap," he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe's head, and spinning the man round like a thimble; "you will have a famous tip."

°°°°By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme. Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

°°°°"The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance."

°°°°When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

°°°°"Where have you been this morning, fair lady?" said Mme. Vauquer, turning to Mme. Couture.

°°°°"We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She is trembling like a leaf," Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

°°°°"Warm yourself, Victorine," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften your father's heart," said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the orphan girl; "but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl needs a dowry nowadays."

°°°°"Poor child!" said Mme. Vauquer. "Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself."

°°°°Victorine's eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

°°°°"If we could only see him!" said the Commissary-General's widow; "if I could speak to him myself and give him his wife's last letter! I have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my handwriting----"

°°°°" 'Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!' " exclaimed Vautrin, breaking in upon her. "So that is how you are, is it? In a few days' time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall see."

°°°°"Oh! sir," said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin, who showed no sign of being touched by it, "if you know of any way of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his affection and my mother's honor are more to me than all the money in the world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----"

°°°°"The same old story everywhere," sang Vautrin, with a satirical intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven people thus assembled bade each other good- morning, and took their places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student's footstep was heard outside.

°°°°"Ah! here you are, M. Eugene," said Sylvie; "every one is breakfasting at home to-day."

°°°°The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside Goriot.

°°°°"I have just met with a queer adventure," he said, as he helped himself abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer's eyes gauged as usual.

°°°°"An adventure?" queried Poiret.

°°°°"Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?" Vautrin asked of Poiret. "M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing."

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

°°°°"Tell us about your adventure!" demanded M. Vautrin.

°°°°"Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a king---"

°°°°"Fisher," put in Vautrin, interrupting.

°°°°"What do you mean, sir?" said Eugene sharply.

°°°°"I said 'fisher,' because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than kings."

°°°°"Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a king," said Poiret the ditto-ist, "because----"

°°°°"In fact"--the law-student cut him short--"I danced with one of the handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this divine countess about nine o'clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how my heart beat! I began to think----"

°°°°"That she was coming here," said Vautrin, with a keen look at the student. "I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman's heart, you will find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder."

°°°°The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

°°°°"Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!" cried Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

°°°°"It is just as I guessed," said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme. Vauquer's ear.

°°°°Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own thoughts than he did at that moment.

°°°°"Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! there you are!" answered Vautrin. "Old Father Goriot there knew it quite well! and why should I not know it too?"

°°°°"M. Goriot?" the student cried.

°°°°"What is it?" asked the old man. "So she was very beautiful, was she, yesterday night?"

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"Look at the old wretch," said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; "how his eyes light up!"

°°°°"Then does he really keep her?" said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to the student.

°°°°"Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty," Eugene answered. Father Goriot watched him with eager eyes. "If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there, my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list, and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a galloping horse, or a woman dancing."

°°°°"So the wheel turns," said Vautrin; "yesterday night at a duchess' ball, this morning in a money-lender's office, on the lowest rung of the ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers' hearts to find something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside down. Just a Parisienne through and through!"

°°°°Father Goriot's face, which had shone at the student's words like the sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of Vautrin's.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. Vauquer, "but where is your adventure? Did you speak to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?"

°°°°"She did not see me," said Eugene. "But only think of meeting one of the prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o'clock! She could not have reached home after the ball till two o'clock this morning. Wasn't it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of adventures."

°°°°"Pshaw! much funnier things than THAT happen here!" exclaimed Vautrin.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

°°°°"Well, did you see?" said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest of the circle. "He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain."

°°°°"Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de Restaud is anything to Father Goriot," cried the student.

°°°°"Well, and if you don't," broke in Vautrin, "we are not set on convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed to be like the sound of a trumpet to a trooper's horse. "Aha!" said Vautrin, stopping in his speech to give her a searching glance, "so we have had our little experiences, have we?"

°°°°The old maid lowered her eyes like a nun who sees a statue.

°°°°"Well," he went on, "when folk of that kind get a notion into their heads, they cannot drop it. They must drink the water from some particular spring--it is stagnant as often as not; but they will sell their wives and families, they will sell their own souls to the devil to get it. For some this spring is play, or the stock-exchange, or music, or a collection of pictures or insects; for others it is some woman who can give them the dainties they like. You might offer these last all the women on earth--they would turn up their noses; they will have the only one who can gratify their passion. It often happens that the woman does not care for them at all, and treats them cruelly; they buy their morsels of satisfaction very dear; but no matter, the fools are never tired of it; they will take their last blanket to the pawnbroker's to give their last five-franc piece to her. Father Goriot here is one of that sort. He is discreet, so the Countess exploits him--just the way of the gay world. The poor old fellow thinks of her and of nothing else. In all other respects you see he is a stupid animal; but get him on that subject, and his eyes sparkle like diamonds. That secret is not difficult to guess. He took some plate himself this morning to the melting-pot, and I saw him at Daddy Gobseck's in the Rue des Gres. And now, mark what follows--he came back here, and gave a letter for the Comtesse de Restaud to that noodle of a Christophe, who showed us the address; there was a receipted bill inside it. It is clear that it was an urgent matter if the Countess also went herself to the old money lender. Father Goriot has financed her handsomely. There is no need to tack a tale together; the thing is self-evident. So that shows you, sir student, that all the time your Countess was smiling, dancing, flirting, swaying her peach-flower crowned head, with her gown gathered into her hand, her slippers were pinching her, as they say; she was thinking of her protested bills, or her lover's protested bills."

°°°°"You have made me wild to know the truth," cried Eugene; "I will go to call on Mme. de Restaud to-morrow."

°°°°"Yes," echoed Poiret; "you must go and call on Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"And perhaps you will find Father Goriot there, who will take payment for the assistance he politely rendered."

°°°°Eugene looked disgusted. "Why, then, this Paris of yours is a slough."

°°°°"And an uncommonly queer slough, too," replied Vautrin. "The mud splashes you as you drive through it in your carriage--you are a respectable person; you go afoot and are splashed--you are a scoundrel. You are so unlucky as to walk off with something or other belonging to somebody else, and they exhibit you as a curiosity in the Place du Palais-de-Justice; you steal a million, and you are pointed out in every salon as a model of virtue. And you pay thirty millions for the police and the courts of justice, for the maintenance of law and order! A pretty slate of things it is!"

°°°°"What," cried Mme. Vauquer, "has Father Goriot really melted down his silver posset-dish?"

°°°°"There were two turtle-doves on the lid, were there not?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that there were."

°°°°"Then, was he fond of it?" said Eugene. "He cried while he was breaking up the cup and plate. I happened to see him by accident."

°°°°"It was dear to him as his own life," answered the widow.

°°°°"There! you see how infatuated the old fellow is!" cried Vautrin. "The woman yonder can coax the soul out of him"

°°°°The student went up to his room. Vautrin went out, and a few moments later Mme. Couture and Victorine drove away in a cab which Sylvie had called for them. Poiret gave his arm to Mlle. Michonneau, and they went together to spend the two sunniest hours of the day in the Jardin des Plantes.

°°°°"Well, those two are as good as married," was the portly Sylvie's comment. "They are going out together to-day for the first time. They are such a couple of dry sticks that if they happen to strike against each other they will draw sparks like flint and steel."

°°°°"Keep clear of Mlle. Michonneau's shawl, then, said Mme. Vauquer, laughing; "it would flare up like tinder."

°°°°At four o'clock that evening, when Goriot came in, he saw, by the light of two smoky lamps, that Victorine's eyes were red. Mme. Vauquer was listening to the history of the visit made that morning to M. Taillefer; it had been made in vain. Taillefer was tired of the annual application made by his daughter and her elderly friend; he gave them a personal interview in order to arrive at an understanding with them.

°°°°"My dear lady," said Mme. Couture, addressing Mme. Vauquer, "just imagine it; he did not even ask Victorine to sit down, she was standing the whole time. He said to me quite coolly, without putting himself in a passion, that we might spare ourselves the trouble of going there; that the young lady (he would not call her his daughter) was injuring her cause by importuning him (IMPORTUNING! once a year, the wretch!); that as Victorine's mother had nothing when he married her, Victorine ought not to expect anything from him; in fact, he said the most cruel things, that made the poor child burst out crying. The little thing threw herself at her father's feet and spoke up bravely; she said that she only persevered in her visits for her mother's sake; that she would obey him without a murmur, but that she begged him to read her poor dead mother's farewell letter. She took it up and gave it to him, saying the most beautiful things in the world, most beautifully expressed; I do not know where she learned them; God

°°°°must have put them into her head, for the poor child was inspired to speak so nicely that it made me cry like a fool to hear her talk. And what do you think the monster was doing all the time? Cutting his nails! He took the letter that poor Mme. Taillefer had soaked with tears, and flung it on to the chimney-piece. 'That is all right,' he said. He held out his hands to raise his daughter, but she covered them with kisses, and he drew them away again. Scandalous, isn't it? And his great booby of a son came in and took no notice of his sister."

°°°°"What inhuman wretches they must be!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"And then they both went out of the room," Mme. Couture went on, without heeding the worthy vermicelli maker's exclamation; "father and son bowed to me, and asked me to excuse them on account of urgent business! That is the history of our call. Well, he has seen his daughter at any rate. How he can refuse to acknowledge her I cannot think, for they are as alike as two peas."

°°°°The boarders dropped in one after another, interchanging greetings and empty jokes that certain classes of Parisians regard as humorous and witty. Dulness is their prevailing ingredient, and the whole point consists in mispronouncing a word or a gesture. This kind of argot is always changing. The essence of the jest consists in some catchword suggested by a political event, an incident in the police courts, a street song, or a bit of burlesque at some theatre, and forgotten in a month. Anything and everything serves to keep up a game of battledore and shuttlecock with words and ideas. The diorama, a recent invention, which carried an optical illusion a degree further than panoramas, had given rise to a mania among art students for ending every word with RAMA. The Maison Vauquer had caught the infection from a young artist among the boarders.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur-r-r Poiret," said the employe from the Museum, "how is your health-orama?" Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned to Mme. Couture and Victorine with a "Ladies, you seem melancholy."

°°°°"Is dinner ready?" cried Horace Bianchon, a medical student, and a friend of Rastignac's; "my stomach is sinking usque ad talones."

°°°°"There is an uncommon frozerama outside," said Vautrin. "Make room there, Father Goriot! Confound it, your foot covers the whole front of the stove."

°°°°"Illustrious M. Vautrin," put in Bianchon, "why do you say frozerama? It is incorrect; it should be frozenrama."

°°°°"No, it shouldn't," said the official from the Museum; "frozerama is right by the same rule that you say 'My feet are froze.' "

°°°°"Ah! ah!"

°°°°"Here is his Excellency the Marquis de Rastignac, Doctor of the Law of Contraries," cried Bianchon, seizing Eugene by the throat, and almost throttling him.

°°°°"Hallo there! hallo!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau came noiselessly in, bowed to the rest of the party, and took her place beside the three women without saying a word.

°°°°"That old bat always makes me shudder," said Bianchon in a low voice, indicating Mlle. Michonneau to Vautrin. "I have studied Gall's system, and I am sure she has the bump of Judas."

°°°°"Then you have seen a case before?" said Vautrin.

°°°°"Who has not?" answered Bianchon. "Upon my word, that ghastly old maid looks just like one of the long worms that will gnaw a beam through, give them time enough."

°°°°"That is the way, young man," returned he of the forty years and the dyed whiskers:

°°°°"The rose has lived the life of a rose--   A morning's space."

°°°°"Aha! here is a magnificent soupe-au-rama," cried Poiret as Christophe came in bearing the soup with cautious heed.

°°°°"I beg your pardon, sir," said Mme. Vauquer; "it is soupe aux choux."

°°°°All the young men roared with laughter.

°°°°"Had you there, Poiret!"

°°°°"Poir-r-r-rette! she had you there!"

°°°°"Score two points to Mamma Vauquer," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Did any of you notice the fog this morning?" asked the official.

°°°°"It was a frantic fog," said Bianchon, "a fog unparalleled, doleful, melancholy, sea-green, asthmatical--a Goriot of a fog!"

°°°°"A Goriorama," said the art student, "because you couldn't see a thing in it."

°°°°"Hey! Milord Gaoriotte, they air talking about yoo-o-ou!"

°°°°Father Goriot, seated at the lower end of the table, close to the door through which the servant entered, raised his face; he had smelt at a scrap of bread that lay under his table napkin, an old trick acquired in his commercial capacity, that still showed itself at times.

°°°°"Well," Madame Vauquer cried in sharp tones, that rang above the rattle of spoons and plates and the sound of other voices, "and is there anything the matter with the bread?"

°°°°"Nothing whatever, madame," he answered; "on the contrary, it is made of the best quality of corn; flour from Etampes."

°°°°"How could you tell?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"By the color, by the flavor."

°°°°"You knew the flavor by the smell, I suppose," said Mme. Vauquer. "You have grown so economical, you will find out how to live on the smell of cooking at last."

°°°°"Take out a patent for it, then," cried the Museum official; "you would make a handsome fortune."

°°°°"Never mind him," said the artist; "he does that sort of thing to delude us into thinking that he was a vermicelli maker."

°°°°"Your nose is a corn-sampler, it appears?" inquired the official.

°°°°"Corn WHAT?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"Corn-el."

°°°°"Corn-et."

°°°°"Corn-elian."

°°°°"Corn-ice."

°°°°"Corn-ucopia."

°°°°"Corn-crake."

°°°°"Corn-cockle."

°°°°"Corn-orama."

°°°°The eight responses came like a rolling fire from every part of the room, and the laughter that followed was the more uproarious because poor Father Goriot stared at the others with a puzzled look, like a foreigner trying to catch the meaning of words in a language which he does not understand.

°°°°"Corn? . . ." he said, turning to Vautrin, his next neighbor.

°°°°"Corn on your foot, old man!" said Vautrin, and he drove Father Goriot's cap down over his eyes by a blow on the crown.

°°°°The poor old man thus suddenly attacked was for a moment too bewildered to do anything. Christophe carried off his plate, thinking that he had finished his soup, so that when Goriot had pushed back his cap from his eyes his spoon encountered the table. Every one burst out laughing. "You are a disagreeable joker, sir," said the old man, "and if you take any further liberties with me----"

°°°°"Well, what then, old boy?" Vautrin interrupted.

°°°°"Well, then, you shall pay dearly for it some day----"

°°°°"Down below, eh?" said the artist, "in the little dark corner where they put naughty boys."

°°°°"Well, mademoiselle," Vautrin said, turning to Victorine, "you are eating nothing. So papa was refractory, was he?"

°°°°"A monster!" said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"Mademoiselle might make application for aliment pending her suit; she is not eating anything. Eh! eh! just see how Father Goriot is staring at Mlle. Victorine."

°°°°The old man had forgotten his dinner, he was so absorbed in gazing at the poor girl; the sorrow in her face was unmistakable,--the slighted love of a child whose father would not recognize her.

°°°°"We are mistaken about Father Goriot, my dear boy," said Eugene in a low voice. "He is not an idiot, nor wanting in energy. Try your Gall system on him, and let me know what you think. I saw him crush a silver dish last night as if it had been made of wax; there seems to be something extra-ordinary going on in his mind just now, to judge by his face. His life is so mysterious that it must be worth studying. Oh! you may laugh, Bianchon; I am not joking."

°°°°"The man is a subject, is he?" said Bianchon; "all right! I will dissect him, if he will give me the chance."

°°°°"No; feel his bumps."

°°°°"Hm!--his stupidity might perhaps be contagious."

°°°°The next day Rastignac dressed himself very elegantly, and about three o'clock in the afternoon went to call on Mme. de Restaud. On the way thither he indulged in the wild intoxicating dreams which fill a young head so full of delicious excitement. Young men at his age take no account of obstacles nor of dangers; they see success in every direction; imagination has free play, and turns their lives into a romance; they are saddened or discouraged by the collapse of one of the visionary schemes that have no existence save in their heated fancy. If youth were not ignorant and timid, civilization would be impossible.

°°°°Eugene took unheard-of pains to keep himself in a spotless condition, but on his way through the streets he began to think about Mme. de Restaud and what he should say to her. He equipped himself with wit, rehearsed repartees in the course of an imaginary conversation, and prepared certain neat speeches a la Talleyrand, conjuring up a series of small events which should prepare the way for the declaration on which he had based his future; and during these musings the law student was bespattered with mud, and by the time he reached the Palais Royal he was obliged to have his boots blacked and his trousers brushed.

°°°°"If I were rich," he said, as he changed the five-franc piece he had brought with him in case anything might happen, "I would take a cab, then I could think at my ease."

°°°°At last he reached the Rue du Helder, and asked for the Comtesse de Restaud. He bore the contemptuous glances of the servants, who had seen him cross the court on foot, with the cold fury of a man who knows that he will succeed some day. He understood the meaning of their glances at once, for he had felt his inferiority as soon as he entered the court, where a smart cab was waiting. All the delights of life in Paris seemed to be implied by this visible and manifest sign of luxury and extravagance. A fine horse, in magnificent harness, was pawing the ground, and all at once the law student felt out of humor with himself. Every compartment in his brain which he had thought to find so full of wit was bolted fast; he grew positively stupid. He sent up his name to the Countess, and waited in the ante-chamber, standing on one foot before a window that looked out upon the court; mechanically he leaned his elbow against the sash, and stared before him. The time seemed long; he would have left the house but for the southern tenacity of purpose which works miracles when it is single-minded.

°°°°"Madame is in her boudoir, and cannot see any one at present, sir," said the servant. "She gave me no answer; but if you will go into the dining-room, there is some one already there."

°°°°Rastignac was impressed with a sense of the formidable power of the lackey who can accuse or condemn his masters by a word; he coolly opened the door by which the man had just entered the ante-chamber, meaning, no doubt, to show these insolent flunkeys that he was familiar with the house; but he found that he had thoughtlessly precipitated himself into a small room full of dressers, where lamps were standing, and hot-water pipes, on which towels were being dried; a dark passage and a back staircase lay beyond it. Stifled laughter from the ante-chamber added to his confusion.

°°°°"This way to the drawing-room, sir," said the servant, with the exaggerated respect which seemed to be one more jest at his expense.

°°°°Eugene turned so quickly that he stumbled against a bath. By good luck, he managed to keep his hat on his head, and saved it from immersion in the water; but just as he turned, a door opened at the further end of the dark passage, dimly lighted by a small lamp. Rastignac heard voices and the sound of a kiss; one of the speakers was Mme. de Restaud, the other was Father Goriot. Eugene followed the servant through the dining-room into the drawing- room; he went to a window that looked out into the courtyard, and stood there for a while. He meant to know whether this Goriot was really the Goriot that he knew. His heart beat unwontedly fast; he remembered Vautrin's hideous insinuations. A well-dressed young man suddenly emerged from the room almost as Eugene entered it, saying impatiently to the servant who stood at the door: "I am going, Maurice. Tell Madame la Comtesse that I waited more than half an hour for her."

°°°°Whereupon this insolent being, who, doubtless, had a right to be insolent, sang an Italian trill, and went towards the window where Eugene was standing, moved thereto quite as much by a desire to see the student's face as by a wish to look out into the courtyard.

°°°°"But M. le Comte had better wait a moment longer; madame is disengaged," said Maurice, as he returned to the ante-chamber.

°°°°Just at that moment Father Goriot appeared close to the gate; he had emerged from a door at the foot of the back staircase. The worthy soul was preparing to open his umbrella regardless of the fact that the great gate had opened to admit a tilbury, in which a young man with a ribbon at his button-hole was seated. Father Goriot had scarcely time to start back and save himself. The horse took fright at the umbrella, swerved, and dashed forward towards the flight of steps. The young man looked round in annoyance, saw Father Goriot, and greeted him as he went out with constrained courtesy, such as people usually show to a money- lender so long as they require his services, or the sort of respect they feel it necessary to show for some one whose reputation has been blown upon, so that they blush to acknowledge his acquaintance. Father Goriot gave him a little friendly nod and a good-natured smile. All this happened with lightning speed. Eugene was so deeply interested that he forgot that he was not alone till he suddenly heard the Countess' voice.

°°°°"Oh! Maxime, were you going away?" she said reproachfully, with a shade of pique in her manner. The Countess had not seen the incident nor the entrance of the tilbury. Rastignac turned abruptly and saw her standing before him, coquettishly dressed in a loose white cashmere gown with knots of rose-colored ribbon here and there; her hair was carelessly coiled about her head, as is the wont of Parisian women in the morning; there was a soft fragrance about her--doubtless she was fresh from a bath;--her graceful form seemed more flexible, her beauty more luxuriant. Her eyes glistened. A young man can see everything at a glance; he feels the radiant influence of woman as a plant discerns and absorbs its nutriment from the air; he did not need to touch her hands to feel their cool freshness. He saw faint rose tints through the cashmere of the dressing gown; it had fallen slightly open, giving glimpses of a bare throat, on which the student's eyes rested. The Countess had no need of the adventitious aid of corsets; her girdle defined the outlines of her slender waist; her throat was a challenge to love; her feet, thrust into slippers, were daintily small. As Maxime took her hand and kissed it, Eugene became aware of Maxime's existence, and the Countess saw Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! is that you M. de Rastignac? I am very glad to see you," she said, but there was something in her manner that a shrewd observer would have taken as a hint to depart.

°°°°Maxime, as the Countess Anastasie had called the young man with the haughty insolence of bearing, looked from Eugene to the lady, and from the lady to Eugene; it was sufficiently evident that he wished to be rid of the latter. An exact and faithful rendering of the glance might be given in the words: "Look here, my dear; I hope you intend to send this little whipper-snapper about his business."

°°°°The Countess consulted the young man's face with an intent submissiveness that betrays all the secrets of a woman's heart, and Rastignac all at once began to hate him violently. To begin with, the sight of the fair carefully arranged curls on the other's comely head had convinced him that his own crop was hideous; Maxime's boots, moreover, were elegant and spotless, while his own, in spite of all his care, bore some traces of his recent walk; and, finally, Maxime's overcoat fitted the outline of his figure gracefully, he looked like a pretty woman, while Eugene was wearing a black coat at half-past two. The quick- witted child of the Charente felt the disadvantage at which he was placed beside this tall, slender dandy, with the clear gaze and the pale face, one of those men who would ruin orphan children without scruple. Mme. de Restaud fled into the next room without waiting for Eugene to speak; shaking out the skirts of her dressing-gown in her flight, so that she looked like a white butterfly, and Maxime hurried after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant's ball; he guessed the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he said to himself, "This is my rival; I mean to cut him out."

°°°°Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls's eye twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and so sulkily, that Anastasie's fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, "Why do you not go?" a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make their exit.

°°°°Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

°°°°"Madame," he began, "I hastened to call upon you----"

°°°°He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess; he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime with a cordial "Good morning," that astonished Eugene not a little. The young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

°°°°"M. de Restaud," said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law student.

°°°°Eugene bowed profoundly.

°°°°"This gentleman," she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband, "is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last ball."

°°°°Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs! These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house, produced a magical effect. The Count's stiff manner relaxed at once as he returned the student's bow.

°°°°"Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance," he said.

°°°°Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a fairy's wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open again; Rastignac's carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer's lodging- house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

°°°°"I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct," the Comte de Restaud said, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, they are extinct," answered the law student. "My great- uncle, the Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family. They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault, Mme. de Beauseant's grandfather on the mother's side. We are the younger branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King's service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated."

°°°°"Was not your great-uncle in command of the Vengeur before 1789?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the Warwick."

°°°°Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who should say, "If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that fellow, it is all over with us." Anastasie understood the glance that M. de Trailles gave her. With a woman's admirable tact, she began to smile and said:

°°°°"Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the Warwick and the Vengeur."

°°°°She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the boudoir. The morganatic couple (to use a convenient German expression which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

°°°°"Anastasie!" he cried pettishly, "just stay a moment, dear; you know very well that----"

°°°°"I am coming back in a minute," she interrupted; "I have a commission for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it."

°°°°She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her husband's voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands' characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, "You are busy, I do not want to interrupt you; good-day," and he went.

°°°°"Just wait a moment, Maxime!" the Count called after him.

°°°°"Come and dine with us," said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure that Rastignac had taken his leave.

°°°°The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover, for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate, hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair typical Parisian.

°°°°"Anastasie!" the Count called again to his wife.

°°°°"Poor Maxime!" she said, addressing the young man. "Come, we must resign ourselves. This evening----"

°°°°"I hope, Nasie," he said in her ear, "that you will give orders not to admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you will compel me to kill him."

°°°°"Are you mad, Maxime?" she said. "A young lad of a student is, on the contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him."

°°°°Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip, and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had been closed after him.

°°°°"What do you think, dear?" cried the Count, her husband, "this gentleman's family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted."

°°°°"Delighted to find that we have acquaintances in common," said the Countess, with a preoccupied manner.

°°°°"More than you think," said Eugene, in a low voice.

°°°°"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

°°°°"Why, only just now," said the student, "I saw a gentleman go out at the gate, Father Goriot, my next door neighbor in the house where I am lodging."

°°°°At the sound of this name, and the prefix that embellished it, the Count, who was stirring the fire, let the tongs fall as though they had burned his fingers, and rose to his feet.

°°°°"Sir," he cried, "you might have called him 'Monsieur Goriot'!"

°°°°The Countess turned pale at first at the sight of her husband's vexation, then she reddened; clearly she was embarrassed, her answer was made in a tone that she tried to make natural, and with an air of assumed carelessness:

°°°°"You could not know any one who is dearer to us both . . ."

°°°°She broke off, glanced at the piano as if some fancy had crossed her mind, and asked, "Are you fond of music, M. de Rastignac?"

°°°°"Exceedingly," answered Eugene, flushing, and disconcerted by a dim suspicion that he had somehow been guilty of a clumsy piece of folly.

°°°°"Do you sing?" she cried, going to the piano, and, sitting down before it, she swept her fingers over the keyboard from end to end. R-r-r-rah!

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°The Comte de Restaud walked to and fro.

°°°°"That is a pity; you are without one great means of success.--Ca- ro, ca-a-ro, ca-a-a-ro, non du-bi-ta-re," sang the Countess.

°°°°Eugene had a second time waved a magic wand when he uttered Goriot's name, but the effect seemed to be entirely opposite to that produced by the formula "related to Mme. de Beauseant." His position was not unlike that of some visitor permitted as a favor to inspect a private collection of curiosities, when by inadvertence he comes into collision with a glass case full of sculptured figures, and three or four heads, imperfectly secured, fall at the shock. He wished the earth would open and swallow him. Mme. de Restaud's expression was reserved and chilly, her eyes had grown indifferent, and sedulously avoided meeting those of the unlucky student of law.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "you wish to talk with M. de Restaud; permit me to wish you good-day----"

°°°°The Countess interrupted him by a gesture, saying hastily, "Whenever you come to see us, both M. de Restaud and I shall be delighted to see you."

°°°°Eugene made a profound bow and took his leave, followed by M. de Restaud, who insisted, in spite of his remonstrances, on accompanying him into the hall.

°°°°"Neither your mistress nor I are at home to that gentleman when he calls," the Count said to Maurice.

°°°°As Eugene set foot on the steps, he saw that it was raining.

°°°°"Come," said he to himself, "somehow I have just made a mess of it, I do not know how. And now I am going to spoil my hat and coat into the bargain. I ought to stop in my corner, grind away at law, and never look to be anything but a boorish country magistrate. How can I go into society, when to manage properly you want a lot of cabs, varnished boots, gold watch chains, and all sorts of things; you have to wear white doeskin gloves that cost six francs in the morning, and primrose kid gloves every evening? A fig for that old humbug of a Goriot!"

°°°°When he reached the street door, the driver of a hackney coach, who had probably just deposited a wedding party at their door, and asked nothing better than a chance of making a little money for himself without his employer's knowledge, saw that Eugene had no umbrella, remarked his black coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, and varnished boots, and stopped and looked at him inquiringly. Eugene, in the blind desperation that drives a young man to plunge deeper and deeper into an abyss, as if he might hope to find a fortunate issue in its lowest depths, nodded in reply to the driver's signal, and stepped into the cab; a few stray petals of orange blossom and scraps of wire bore witness to its recent occupation by a wedding party.

°°°°"Where am I to drive, sir?" demanded the man, who, by this time, had taken off his white gloves.

°°°°"Confound it!" Eugene said to himself, "I am in for it now, and at least I will not spend cab-hire for nothing!--Drive to the Hotel Beauseant," he said aloud.

°°°°"Which?" asked the man, a portentous word that reduced Eugene to confusion. This young man of fashion, species incerta, did not know that there were two Hotels Beauseant; he was not aware how rich he was in relations who did not care about him.

°°°°"The Vicomte de Beauseant, Rue----"

°°°°"De Grenelle," interrupted the driver, with a jerk of his head. "You see, there are the hotels of the Marquis and Comte de Beauseant in the Rue Saint-Dominique," he added, drawing up the step.

°°°°"I know all about that," said Eugene, severely.--"Everybody is laughing at me to-day, it seems!" he said to himself, as he deposited his hat on the opposite seat. "This escapade will cost me a king's ransom, but, at any rate, I shall call on my so- called cousin in a thoroughly aristocratic fashion. Goriot has cost me ten francs already, the old scoundrel. My word! I will tell Mme. de Beauseant about my adventure; perhaps it may amuse her. Doubtless she will know the secret of the criminal relation between that handsome woman and the old rat without a tail. It would be better to find favor in my cousin's eyes than to come in contact with that shameless woman, who seems to me to have very expensive tastes. Surely the beautiful Vicomtesse's personal interest would turn the scale for me, when the mere mention of her name produces such an effect. Let us look higher. If you set yourself to carry the heights of heaven, you must face God."

°°°°The innumerable thoughts that surged through his brain might be summed up in these phrases. He grew calmer, and recovered something of his assurance as he watched the falling rain. He told himself that though he was about to squander two of the precious five-franc pieces that remained to him, the money was well laid out in preserving his coat, boots, and hat; and his cabman's cry of "Gate, if you please," almost put him in spirits. A Swiss, in scarlet and gold, appeared, the great door groaned on its hinges, and Rastignac, with sweet satisfaction, beheld his equipage pass under the archway and stop before the flight of steps beneath the awning. The driver, in a blue-and-red greatcoat, dismounted and let down the step. As Eugene stepped out of the cab, he heard smothered laughter from the peristyle. Three or four lackeys were making merry over the festal appearance of the vehicle. In another moment the law student was enlightened as to the cause of their hilarity; he felt the full force of the contrast between his equipage and one of the smartest broughams in Paris; a coachman, with powdered hair, seemed to find it difficult to hold a pair of spirited horses, who stood chafing the bit. In Mme. de Restaud's courtyard, in the Chaussee d'Antin, he had seen the neat turnout of a young man of six-and-twenty; in the Faubourg Saint-Germain he found the luxurious equipage of a man of rank; thirty thousand francs would not have purchased it.

°°°°"Who can be here?" said Eugene to himself. He began to understand, though somewhat tardily, that he must not expect to find many women in Paris who were not already appropriated, and that the capture of one of these queens would be likely to cost something more than bloodshed. "Confound it all! I expect my cousin also has her Maxime."

°°°°He went up the steps, feeling that he was a blighted being. The glass door was opened for him; the servants were as solemn as jackasses under the curry comb. So far, Eugene had only been in the ballroom on the ground floor of the Hotel Beauseant; the fete had followed so closely on the invitation, that he had not had time to call on his cousin, and had therefore never seen Mme. de Beauseant's apartments; he was about to behold for the first time a great lady among the wonderful and elegant surroundings that reveal her character and reflect her daily life. He was the more curious, because Mme. de Restaud's drawing-room had provided him with a standard of comparison.

°°°°At half-past four the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was visible. Five minutes earlier she would not have received her cousin, but Eugene knew nothing of the recognized routine of various houses in Paris. He was conducted up the wide, white-painted, crimson- carpeted staircase, between the gilded balusters and masses of flowering plants, to Mme. de Beauseant's apartments. He did not know the rumor current about Mme. de Beauseant, one of the biographies told, with variations, in whispers, every evening in the salons of Paris.

°°°°For three years past her name had been spoken of in connection with that of one of the most wealthy and distinguished Portuguese nobles, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto. It was one of those innocent liaisons which possess so much charm for the two thus attached to each other that they find the presence of a third person intolerable. The Vicomte de Beauseant, therefore, had himself set an example to the rest of the world by respecting, with as good a grace as might be, this morganatic union. Any one who came to call on the Vicomtesse in the early days of this friendship was sure to find the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto there. As, under the circumstances, Mme. de Beauseant could not very well shut her door against these visitors, she gave them such a cold reception, and showed so much interest in the study of the ceiling, that no one could fail to understand how much he bored her; and when it became known in Paris that Mme. de Beauseant was bored by callers between two and four o'clock, she was left in perfect solitude during that interval. She went to the Bouffons or to the Opera with M. de Beauseant and M. d'Ajuda-Pinto; and M. de Beauseant, like a well-bred man of the world, always left his wife and the Portuguese as soon as he had installed them. But M. d'Ajuda-Pinto must marry, and a Mlle. de Rochefide was the young lady. In the whole fashionable world there was but one person who as yet knew nothing of the arrangement, and that was Mme. de Beauseant. Some of her friends had hinted at the possibility, and she had laughed at them, believing that envy had prompted those ladies to try to make mischief. And now, though the bans were about to be published, and although the handsome Portuguese had come that day to break the news to the Vicomtesse, he had not found courage as yet to say one word about his treachery. How was it? Nothing is doubtless more difficult than the notification of an ultimatum of this kind. There are men who feel more at their ease when they stand up before another man who threatens their lives with sword or pistol than in the presence of a woman who, after two hours of lamentations and reproaches, falls into a dead swoon and requires salts. At this moment, therefore, M. d'Ajuda-Pinto was on thorns, and anxious to take his leave. He told himself that in some way or other the news would reach Mme. de Beauseant; he would write, it would be much better to do it by letter, and not to utter the words that should stab her to the heart.

°°°°So when the servant announced M. Eugene de Rastignac, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto trembled with joy. To be sure, a loving woman shows even more ingenuity in inventing doubts of her lover than in varying the monotony of his happiness; and when she is about to be forsaken, she instinctively interprets every gesture as rapidly as Virgil's courser detected the presence of his companion by snuffing the breeze. It was impossible, therefore, that Mme. de Beauseant should not detect that involuntary thrill of satisfaction; slight though it was, it was appalling in its artlessness.

°°°°Eugene had yet to learn that no one in Paris should present himself in any house without first making himself acquainted with the whole history of its owner, and of its owner's wife and family, so that he may avoid making any of the terrible blunders which in Poland draw forth the picturesque exclamation, "Harness five bullocks to your cart!" probably because you will need them all to pull you out of the quagmire into which a false step has plunged you. If, down to the present day, our language has no name for these conversational disasters, it is probably because they are believed to be impossible, the publicity given in Paris to every scandal is so prodigious. After the awkward incident at Mme. de Restaud's, no one but Eugene could have reappeared in his character of bullock-driver in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room. But if Mme. de Restaud and M. de Trailles had found him horribly in the way, M. d'Ajuda hailed his coming with relief.

°°°°"Good-bye," said the Portuguese, hurrying to the door, as Eugene made his entrance into a dainty little pink-and-gray drawing- room, where luxury seemed nothing more than good taste.

°°°°"Until this evening," said Mme. de Beauseant, turning her head to give the Marquis a glance. "We are going to the Bouffons, are we not?"

°°°°"I cannot go," he said, with his fingers on the door handle.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant rose and beckoned to him to return. She did not pay the slightest attention to Eugene, who stood there dazzled by the sparkling marvels around him; he began to think that this was some story out of the Arabian Nights made real, and did not know where to hide himself, when the woman before him seemed to be unconscious of his existence. The Vicomtesse had raised the forefinger of her right hand, and gracefully signed to the Marquis to seat himself beside her. The Marquis felt the imperious sway of passion in her gesture; he came back towards her. Eugene watched him, not without a feeling of envy.

°°°°"That is the owner of the brougham!" he said to himself. "But is it necessary to have a pair of spirited horses, servants in livery, and torrents of gold to draw a glance from a woman here in Paris?"

°°°°The demon of luxury gnawed at his heart, greed burned in his veins, his throat was parched with the thirst of gold.

°°°°He had a hundred and thirty francs every quarter. His father, mother, brothers, sisters, and aunt did not spend two hundred francs a month among them. This swift comparison between his present condition and the aims he had in view helped to benumb his faculties.

°°°°"Why not?" the Vicomtesse was saying, as she smiled at the Portuguese. "Why cannot you come to the Italiens?"

°°°°"Affairs! I am to dine with the English Ambassador."

°°°°"Throw him over."

°°°°When a man once enters on a course of deception, he is compelled to add lie to lie. M. d'Ajuda therefore said, smiling, "Do you lay your commands on me?"

°°°°"Yes, certainly."

°°°°"That was what I wanted to have you say to me," he answered, dissembling his feelings in a glance which would have reassured any other woman.

°°°°He took the Vicomtesse's hand, kissed it, and went.

°°°°Eugene ran his fingers through his hair, and constrained himself to bow. He thought that now Mme. de Beauseant would give him her attention; but suddenly she sprang forward, rushed to a window in the gallery, and watched M. d'Ajuda step into his carriage; she listened to the order that he gave, and heard the Swiss repeat it to the coachman:

°°°°"To M. de Rochefide's house."

°°°°Those words, and the way in which M. d'Ajuda flung himself back in the carriage, were like a lightning flash and a thunderbolt for her; she walked back again with a deadly fear gnawing at her heart. The most terrible catastrophes only happen among the heights. The Vicomtesse went to her own room, sat down at a table, and took up a sheet of dainty notepaper.

°°°°"When, instead of dining with the English Ambassador,"   she wrote, "you go to the Rochefides, you owe me an   explanation, which I am waiting to hear."

°°°°She retraced several of the letters, for her hand was trembling so that they were indistinct; then she signed the note with an initial C for "Claire de Bourgogne," and rang the bell.

°°°°"Jacques," she said to the servant, who appeared immediately, "take this note to M. de Rochefide's house at half-past seven and ask for the Marquis d'Ajuda. If M. d'Ajuda is there, leave the note without waiting for an answer; if he is not there, bring the note back to me."

°°°°"Madame la Vicomtess, there is a visitor in the drawing-room."

°°°°"Ah! yes, of course," she said, opening the door.

°°°°Eugene was beginning to feel very uncomfortable, but at last the Vicomtesse appeared; she spoke to him, and the tremulous tones of her voice vibrated through his heart.

°°°°"Pardon me, monsieur," she said; "I had a letter to write. Now I am quite at liberty."

°°°°She scarcely knew what she was saying, for even as she spoke she thought, "Ah! he means to marry Mlle. de Rochefide? But is he still free? This evening the marriage shall be broken off, or else . . . But before to-morrow I shall know."

°°°°"Cousin . . ." the student replied.

°°°°"Eh?" said the Countess, with an insolent glance that sent a cold shudder through Eugene; he understood what that "Eh?" meant; he had learned a great deal in three hours, and his wits were on the alert. He reddened:

°°°°"Madame . . ." he began; he hesitated a moment, and then went on. "Pardon me; I am in such need of protection that the nearest scrap of relationship could do me no harm."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant smiled but there was sadness in her smile; even now she felt forebodings of the coming pain, the air she breathed was heavy with the storm that was about to burst.

°°°°"If you knew how my family are situated," he went on, "you would love to play the part of a beneficent fairy godmother who graciously clears the obstacles from the path of her protege."

°°°°"Well, cousin," she said, laughing, "and how can I be of service to you?"

°°°°"But do I know even that? I am distantly related to you, and this obscure and remote relationship is even now a perfect godsend to me. You have confused my ideas; I cannot remember the things that I meant to say to you. I know no one else here in Paris. . . . Ah! if I could only ask you to counsel me, ask you to look upon me as a poor child who would fain cling to the hem of your dress, who would lay down his life for you."

°°°°"Would you kill a man for me?"

°°°°"Two," said Eugene.

°°°°"You, child. Yes, you are a child," she said, keeping back the tears that came to her eyes; "you would love sincerely."

°°°°"Oh!" he cried, flinging up his head.

°°°°The audacity of the student's answer interested the Vicomtesse in him. The southern brain was beginning to scheme for the first time. Between Mme. de Restaud's blue boudoir and Mme. de Beauseant's rose-colored drawing-room he had made a three years' advance in a kind of law which is not a recognized study in Paris, although it is a sort of higher jurisprudence, and, when well understood, is a highroad to success of every kind.

°°°°"Ah! that is what I meant to say!" said Eugene. "I met Mme. de Restaud at your ball, and this morning I went to see her.

°°°°"You must have been very much in the way," said Mme. de Beauseant, smiling as she spoke.

°°°°"Yes, indeed. I am a novice, and my blunders will set every one against me, if you do not give me your counsel. I believe that in Paris it is very difficult to meet with a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion who would be willing to teach me, what you women can explain so well--life. I shall find a M. de Trailles everywhere. So I have come to you to ask you to give me a key to a puzzle, to entreat you to tell me what sort of blunder I made this morning. I mentioned an old man----"

°°°°"Madame la Duchess de Langeais," Jacques cut the student short; Eugene gave expression to his intense annoyance by a gesture.

°°°°"If you mean to succeed," said the Vicomtesse in a low voice, "in the first place you must not be so demonstrative."

°°°°"Ah! good morning, dear," she continued, and rising and crossing the room, she grasped the Duchess' hands as affectionately as if they had been sisters; the Duchess responded in the prettiest and most gracious way.

°°°°"Two intimate friends!" said Rastignac to himself. "Henceforward I shall have two protectresses; those two women are great friends, no doubt, and this newcomer will doubtless interest herself in her friend's cousin."

°°°°"To what happy inspiration do I owe this piece of good fortune, dear Antoinette?" asked Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°"Well, I saw M. d'Ajuda-Pinto at M. de Rochefide's door, so I thought that if I came I should find you alone."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant's mouth did not tighten, her color did not rise, her expression did not alter, or rather, her brow seemed to clear as the Duchess uttered those deadly words.

°°°°"If I had known that you were engaged----" the speaker added, glancing at Eugene.

°°°°"This gentleman is M. Eugene de Rastignac, one of my cousins," said the Vicomtesse. "Have you any news of General de Montriveau?" she continued. "Serizy told me yesterday that he never goes anywhere now; has he been to see you to-day?"

°°°°It was believed that the Duchess was desperately in love with M. de Montriveau, and that he was a faithless lover; she felt the question in her very heart, and her face flushed as she answered:

°°°°"He was at the Elysee yesterday."

°°°°"In attendance?"

°°°°"Claire," returned the Duchess, and hatred overflowed in the glances she threw at Mme. de Beauseant; "of course you know that M. d'Ajuda-Pinto is going to marry Mlle. de Rochefide; the bans will be published to-morrow."

°°°°This thrust was too cruel; the Vicomtesse's face grew white, but she answered, laughing, "One of those rumors that fools amuse themselves with. What should induce M. d'Ajuda to take one of the noblest names in Portugal to the Rochefides? The Rochefides were only ennobled yesterday."

°°°°"But Bertha will have two hundred thousand livres a year, they say."

°°°°"M. d'Ajuda is too wealthy to marry for money."

°°°°"But, my dear, Mlle. de Rochefide is a charming girl."

°°°°"Indeed?"

°°°°"And, as a matter of fact, he is dining with them to-day; the thing is settled. It is very surprising to me that you should know so little about it."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant turned to Rastignac. "What was the blunder that you made, monsieur?" she asked. "The poor boy is only just launched into the world, Antoinette, so that he understands nothing of all this that we are speaking of. Be merciful to him, and let us finish our talk to-morrow. Everything will be announced to-morrow, you know, and your kind informal communication can be accompanied by official confirmation."

°°°°The Duchess gave Eugene one of those insolent glances that measure a man from head to foot, and leave him crushed and annihilated.

°°°°"Madame, I have unwittingly plunged a dagger into Mme. de Restaud's heart; unwittingly--therein lies my offence," said the student of law, whose keen brain had served him sufficiently well, for he had detected the biting epigrams that lurked beneath this friendly talk. "You continue to receive, possibly you fear, those who know the amount of pain that they deliberately inflict; but a clumsy blunderer who has no idea how deeply he wounds is looked upon as a fool who does not know how to make use of his opportunities, and every one despise him."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant gave the student a glance, one of those glances in which a great soul can mingle dignity and gratitude. It was like balm to the law student, who was still smarting under the Duchess' insolent scrutiny; she had looked at him as an auctioneer might look at some article to appraise its value.

°°°°"Imagine, too, that I had just made some progress with the Comte de Restaud; for I should tell you, madame," he went on, turning to the Duchess with a mixture of humility and malice in his manner, "that as yet I am only a poor devil of a student, very much alone in the world, and very poor----"

°°°°"You should not tell us that, M. de Rastignac. We women never care about anything that no one else will take."

°°°°"Bah!" said Eugene. "I am only two-and-twenty, and I must make up my mind to the drawbacks of my time of life. Besides, I am confessing my sins, and it would be impossible to kneel in a more charming confessional; you commit your sins in one drawing-room, and receive absolution for them in another."

°°°°The Duchess' expression grew colder, she did not like the flippant tone of these remarks, and showed that she considered them to be in bad taste by turning to the Vicomtesse with--"This gentleman has only just come----"

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant began to laugh outright at her cousin and at the Duchess both.

°°°°"He has only just come to Paris, dear, and is in search of some one who will give him lessons in good taste."

°°°°"Mme. la Duchesse," said Eugene, "is it not natural to wish to be initiated into the mysteries which charm us?" ("Come, now," he said to himself, "my language is superfinely elegant, I'm sure.")

°°°°"But Mme. de Restaud is herself, I believe, M. de Trailles' pupil," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Of that I had no idea, madame," answered the law student, "so I rashly came between them. In fact, I got on very well with the lady's husband, and his wife tolerated me for a time until I took it into my head to tell them that I knew some one of whom I had just caught a glimpse as he went out by a back staircase, a man who had given the Countess a kiss at the end of a passage."

°°°°"Who was it?" both women asked together.

°°°°"An old man who lives at the rate of two louis a month in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, where I, a poor student, lodge likewise. He is a truly unfortunate creature, everybody laughs at him--we all call him 'Father Goriot.' "

°°°°"Why, child that you are," cried the Vicomtesse, "Mme. de Restaud was a Mlle. Goriot!"

°°°°"The daughter of a vermicelli manufacturer," the Duchess added; "and when the little creature went to Court, the daughter of a pastry-cook was presented on the same day. Do you remember, Claire? The King began to laugh, and made some joke in Latin about flour. People--what was it?--people----"

°°°°"Ejusdem farinae," said Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that was it," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Oh! is that her father?" the law student continued, aghast.

°°°°"Yes, certainly; the old man had two daughters; he dotes on them, so to speak, though they will scarcely acknowledge him."

°°°°"Didn't the second daughter marry a banker with a German name?" the Vicomtesse asked, turning to Mme. de Langeais, "a Baron de Nucingen? And her name is Delphine, is it not? Isn't she a fair- haired woman who has a side-box at the Opera? She comes sometimes to the Bouffons, and laughs loudly to attract attention."

°°°°The Duchess smiled and said:

°°°°"I wonder at you, dear. Why do you take so much interest in people of that kind? One must have been as madly in love as Restaud was, to be infatuated with Mlle. Anastasie and her flour sacks. Oh! he will not find her a good bargain! She is in M. de Trailles' hands, and he will ruin her."

°°°°"And they do not acknowledge their father!" Eugene repeated.

°°°°"Oh! well, yes, their father, the father, a father," replied the Vicomtesse, "a kind father who gave them each five or six hundred thousand francs, it is said, to secure their happiness by marrying them well; while he only kept eight or ten thousand livres a year for himself, thinking that his daughters would always be his daughters, thinking that in them he would live his life twice over again, that in their houses he should find two homes, where he would be loved and looked up to, and made much of. And in two years' time both his sons-in-law had turned him out of their houses as if he were one of the lowest outcasts."

°°°°Tears came into Eugene's eyes. He was still under the spell of youthful beliefs, he had just left home, pure and sacred feelings had been stirred within him, and this was his first day on the battlefield of civilization in Paris. Genuine feeling is so infectious that for a moment the three looked at each other in silence.

°°°°"Eh, mon Dieu!" said Mme. de Langeais; "yes, it seems very horrible, and yet we see such things every day. Is there not a reason for it? Tell me, dear, have you ever really thought what a son-in-law is? A son-in-law is the man for whom we bring up, you and I, a dear little one, bound to us very closely in innumerable ways; for seventeen years she will be the joy of her family, its 'white soul,' as Lamartine says, and suddenly she will become its scourge. When HE comes and takes her from us, his love from the very beginning is like an axe laid to the root of all the old affection in our darling's heart, and all the ties that bound her to her family are severed. But yesterday our little daughter thought of no one but her mother and father, as we had no thought that was not for her; by to-morrow she will have become a hostile stranger. The tragedy is always going on under our eyes. On the one hand you see a father who has sacrificed himself to his son, and his daughter-in-law shows him the last degree of insolence. On the other hand, it is the son-in-law who turns his wife's mother out of the house. I sometimes hear it said that there is nothing dramatic about society in these days; but the Drama of the Son-in-law is appalling, to say nothing of our marriages, which have come to be very poor farces. I can explain how it all came about in the old vermicelli maker's case. I think I recollect that Foriot----"

°°°°"Goriot, madame."

°°°°"Yes, that Moriot was once President of his Section during the Revolution. He was in the secret of the famous scarcity of grain, and laid the foundation of his fortune in those days by selling flour for ten times its cost. He had as much flour as he wanted. My grandmother's steward sold him immense quantities. No doubt Noriot shared the plunder with the Committee of Public Salvation, as that sort of person always did. I recollect the steward telling my grandmother that she might live at Grandvilliers in complete security, because her corn was as good as a certificate of civism. Well, then, this Loriot, who sold corn to those butchers, has never had but one passion, they say--he idolizes his daughters. He settled one of them under Restaud's roof, and grafted the other into the Nucingen family tree, the Baron de Nucingen being a rich banker who had turned Royalist. You can quite understand that so long as Bonaparte was Emperor, the two sons-in-law could manage to put up with the old Ninety-three; but after the restoration of the Bourbons, M. de Restaud felt bored by the old man's society, and the banker was still more tired of it. His daughters were still fond of him; they wanted 'to keep the goat and the cabbage,' so they used to see Joriot whenever there was no one there, under pretence of affection. 'Come to- day, papa, we shall have you all to ourselves, and that will be much nicer!' and all that sort of thing. As for me, dear, I believe that love has second-sight: poor Ninety-three; his heart must have bled. He saw that his daughters were ashamed of him, that if they loved their husbands his visits must make mischief. So he immolated himself. He made the sacrifice because he was a father; he went into voluntary exile. His daughters were satisfied, so he thought that he had done the best thing he could; but it was a family crime, and father and daughters were accomplices. You see this sort of thing everywhere. What could this old Doriot have been but a splash of mud in his daughters' drawing-rooms? He would only have been in the way, and bored other people, besides being bored himself. And this that happened between father and daughters may happen to the prettiest woman in

°°°°Paris and the man she loves the best; if her love grows tiresome, he will go; he will descend to the basest trickery to leave her. It is the same with all love and friendship. Our heart is a treasury; if you pour out all its wealth at once, you are bankrupt. We show no more mercy to the affection that reveals its utmost extent than we do to another kind of prodigal who has not a penny left. Their father had given them all he had. For twenty years he had given his whole heart to them; then, one day, he gave them all his fortune too. The lemon was squeezed; the girls left the rest in the gutter."

°°°°"The world is very base," said the Vicomtesse, plucking at the threads of her shawl. She did not raise her head as she spoke; the words that Mme. de Langeais had meant for her in the course of her story had cut her to the quick.

°°°°"Base? Oh, no," answered the Duchess; "the world goes its own way, that is all. If I speak in this way, it is only to show that I am not duped by it. I think as you do," she said, pressing the Vicomtesse's hand. "The world is a slough; let us try to live on the heights above it."

°°°°She rose to her feet and kissed Mme. de Beauseant on the forehead as she said: "You look very charming to-day, dear. I have never seen such a lovely color in your cheeks before."

°°°°Then she went out with a slight inclination of the head to the cousin.

°°°°"Father Goriot is sublime!" said Eugene to himself, as he remembered how he had watched his neighbor work the silver vessel into a shapeless mass that night.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant did not hear him; she was absorbed in her own thoughts. For several minutes the silence remained unbroken till the law student became almost paralyzed with embarrassment, and was equally afraid to go or stay or speak a word.

°°°°"The world is basely ungrateful and ill-natured," said the Vicomtesse at last. "No sooner does a trouble befall you than a friend is ready to bring the tidings and to probe your heart with the point of a dagger while calling on you to admire the handle. Epigrams and sarcasms already! Ah! I will defend myself!"

°°°°She raised her head like the great lady that she was, and lightnings flashed from her proud eyes.

°°°°"Ah!" she said, as she saw Eugene, "are you there?"

°°°°"Still," he said piteously.

°°°°"Well, then, M. de Rastignac, deal with the world as it deserves. You are determined to succeed? I will help you. You shall sound the depths of corruption in woman; you shall measure the extent of man's pitiful vanity. Deeply as I am versed in such learning, there were pages in the book of life that I had not read. Now I know all. The more cold-blooded your calculations, the further you will go. Strike ruthlessly; you will be feared. Men and women for you must be nothing more than post-horses; take a fresh relay, and leave the last to drop by the roadside; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition. You will be nothing here, you see, unless a woman interests herself in you; and she must be young and wealthy, and a woman of the world. Yet, if you have a heart, lock it carefully away like a treasure; do not let any one suspect it, or you will be lost; you would cease to be the executioner, you would take the victim's place. And if ever you should love, never let your secret escape you! Trust no one until you are very sure of the heart to which you open your heart. Learn to mistrust every one; take every precaution for the sake of the love which does not exist as yet. Listen, Miguel"-- the name slipped from her so naturally that she did not notice her mistake--"there is something still more appalling than the ingratitude of daughters who have cast off their old father and wish that he were dead, and that is a rivalry between two sisters. Restaud comes of a good family, his wife has been received into their circle; she has been presented at court; and her sister, her wealthy sister, Mme. Delphine de Nucingen, the wife of a great capitalist, is consumed with envy, and ready to die of spleen. There is gulf set between the sisters--indeed, they are sisters no longer--the two women who refuse to acknowledge their father do not acknowledge each other. So Mme. de Nucingen would lap up all the mud that lies between the Rue Saint-Lazare and the Rue de Grenelle to gain admittance to my salon. She fancied that she should gain her end through de Marsay; she has made herself de Marsay's slave, and she bores him. De Marsay cares very little about her. If you will introduce her to me, you will be her darling, her Benjamin; she will idolize you. If, after that, you can love her, do so; if not, make her useful. I will ask her to come once or twice to one of my great crushes, but I will never receive her here in the morning. I will bow to her when I see her, and that will be quite sufficient. You have shut the Comtesse de Restaud's door against you by mentioning Father Goriot's name. Yes, my good friend, you may call at her house twenty times, and every time out of the twenty you will find that she is not at home. The servants have their orders, and will not admit you. Very well, then, now let Father Goriot gain the right of entry into her sister's house for you. The beautiful Mme. de Nucingen will give the signal for a battle. As soon as she singles you out, other women will begin to lose their heads about you, and her enemies and rivals and intimate friends will all try to take you from her. There are women who will fall in love with a man because another woman has chosen him; like the city madams, poor things, who copy our millinery, and hope thereby to acquire our manners. You will have a success, and in Paris success is everything; it is the key of power. If the women credit you with wit and talent, the men will follow suit so long as you do not undeceive them yourself. There will be nothing you may not aspire to; you will go everywhere, and you will find out what the world is--an assemblage of fools and knaves. But you must be neither the one nor the other. I am giving you my name like Ariadne's clue of thread to take with you into the labyrinth; make no unworthy use of it," she said, with a queenly glance and curve of her throat; "give it back to me unsullied. And now, go; leave me. We women also have our battles to fight."

°°°°"And if you should ever need some one who would gladly set a match to a train for you----"

°°°°"Well?" she asked.

°°°°He tapped his heart, smiled in answer to his cousin's smile, and went.

°°°°It was five o'clock, and Eugene was hungry; he was afraid lest he should not be in time for dinner, a misgiving which made him feel that it was pleasant to be borne so quickly across Paris. This sensation of physical comfort left his mind free to grapple with the thoughts that assailed him. A mortification usually sends a young man of his age into a furious rage; he shakes his fist at society, and vows vengeance when his belief in himself is shaken. Just then Rastignac was overwhelmed by the words, "You have shut the Countess' door against you."

°°°°"I shall call!" he said to himself, "and if Mme. de Beauseant is right, if I never find her at home--I . . . well, Mme. de Restaud shall meet me in every salon in Paris. I will learn to fence and have some pistol practice, and kill that Maxime of hers!"

°°°°"And money?" cried an inward monitor. "How about money, where is that to come from?" And all at once the wealth displayed in the Countess de Restaud's drawing-room rose before his eyes. That was the luxury which Goriot's daughter had loved too well, the gilding, the ostentatious splendor, the unintelligent luxury of the parvenu, the riotous extravagance of a courtesan. Then the attractive vision suddenly went under an eclipse as he remembered the stately grandeur of the Hotel de Beauseant. As his fancy wandered among these lofty regions in the great world of Paris, innumerable dark thoughts gathered in his heart; his ideas widened, and his conscience grew more elastic. He saw the world as it is; saw how the rich lived beyond the jurisdiction of law and public opinion, and found in success the ultima ratio mundi.

°°°°"Vautrin is right, success is virtue!" he said to himself.

°°°°Arrived in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, he rushed up to his room for ten francs wherewith to satisfy the demands of the cabman, and went in to dinner. He glanced round the squalid room, saw the eighteen poverty-stricken creatures about to feed like cattle in their stalls, and the sight filled him with loathing. The transition was too sudden, and the contrast was so violent that it could not but act as a powerful stimulant; his ambition developed and grew beyond all social bounds. On the one hand, he beheld a vision of social life in its most charming and refined forms, of quick-pulsed youth, of fair, impassioned faces invested with all the charm of poetry, framed in a marvelous setting of luxury or art; and, on the other hand, he saw a sombre picture, the miry verge beyond these faces, in which passion was extinct and nothing was left of the drama but the cords and pulleys and bare mechanism. Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, the words uttered in anger by the forsaken lady, her petulant offer, came to his mind, and poverty was a ready expositor. Rastignac determined to open two parallel trenches so as to insure success; he would be a learned doctor of law and a man of fashion. Clearly he was still a child! Those two lines are asymptotes, and will never meet.

°°°°"You are very dull, my lord Marquis," said Vautrin, with one of the shrewd glances that seem to read the innermost secrets of another mind.

°°°°"I am not in the humor to stand jokes from people who call me 'my lord Marquis,' " answered Eugene. "A marquis here in Paris, if he is not the veriest sham, ought to have a hundred thousand livres a year at least; and a lodger in the Maison Vauquer is not exactly Fortune's favorite."

°°°°Vautrin's glance at Rastignac was half-paternal, half- contemptuous. "Puppy!" it seemed to say; "I should make one mouthful of him!" Then he answered:

°°°°"You are in a bad humor; perhaps your visit to the beautiful Comtesse de Restaud was not a success."

°°°°"She has shut her door against me because I told her that her father dined at our table," cried Rastignac.

°°°°Glances were exchanged all round the room; Father Goriot looked down.

°°°°"You have sent some snuff into my eye," he said to his neighbor, turning a little aside to rub his hand over his face.

°°°°"Any one who molests Father Goriot will have henceforward to reckon with me," said Eugene, looking at the old man's neighbor; "he is worth all the rest of us put together.--I am not speaking of the ladies," he added, turning in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer.

°°°°Eugene's remarks produced a sensation, and his tone silenced the dinner-table. Vautrin alone spoke. "If you are going to champion Father Goriot, and set up for his responsible editor into the bargain, you had need be a crack shot and know how to handle the foils," he said, banteringly.

°°°°"So I intend," said Eugene.

°°°°"Then you are taking the field today?"

°°°°"Perhaps," Rastignac answered. "But I owe no account of myself to any one, especially as I do not try to find out what other people do of a night."

°°°°Vautrin looked askance at Rastignac.

°°°°"If you do not mean to be deceived by the puppets, my boy, you must go behind and see the whole show, and not peep through holes in the curtain. That is enough," he added, seeing that Eugene was about to fly into a passion. "We can have a little talk whenever you like."

°°°°There was a general feeling of gloom and constraint. Father Goriot was so deeply dejected by the student's remark that he did not notice the change in the disposition of his fellow-lodgers, nor know that he had met with a champion capable of putting an end to the persecution.

°°°°"Then, M. Goriot sitting there is the father of a countess," said Mme. Vauquer in a low voice.

°°°°"And of a baroness," answered Rastignac.

°°°°"That is about all he is capable of," said Bianchon to Rastignac; "I have taken a look at his head; there is only one bump--the bump of Paternity; he must be an ETERNAL FATHER."

°°°°Eugene was too intent on his thoughts to laugh at Bianchon's joke. He determined to profit by Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, and was asking himself how he could obtain the necessary money. He grew grave. The wide savannas of the world stretched before his eyes; all things lay before him, nothing was his. Dinner came to an end, the others went, and he was left in the dining-room.

°°°°"So you have seen my daughter?" Goriot spoke tremulously, and the sound of his voice broke in upon Eugene's dreams. The young man took the elder's hand, and looked at him with something like kindness in his eyes.

°°°°"You are a good and noble man," he said. "We will have some talk about your daughters by and by."

°°°°He rose without waiting for Goriot's answer, and went to his room. There he wrote the following letter to his mother:--

°°°°"My Dear Mother,--Can you nourish your child from your breast again? I am in a position to make a rapid fortune, but I want twelve hundred francs--I must have them at all costs. Say nothing about this to my father; perhaps he might make objections, and unless I have the money, I may be led to put an end to myself, and so escape the clutches of despair. I will tell you everything when I see you. I will not begin to try to describe my present situation; it would take volumes to put the whole story clearly and fully. I have not been gambling, my kind mother, I owe no one a penny; but if you would preserve the life that you gave me, you must send me the sum I mention. As a matter of fact, I go to see the Vicomtesse de Beauseant; she is using her influence for me; I am obliged to go into society, and I have not a penny to lay out on clean gloves. I can manage to exist on bread and water, or go without food, if need be, but I cannot do without the tools with which they cultivate the vineyards in this country. I must resolutely make up my mind at once to make my way, or stick in the mire for the rest of my days. I know that all your hopes are set on me, and I want to realize them quickly. Sell some of your old jewelry, my kind mother; I will give you other jewels very soon. I know enough of our affairs at home to know all that such a sacrifice means, and you must not think that I would lightly ask you to make it; I should be a monster if I could. You must think of my entreaty as a cry forced from me by imperative necessity. Our whole future lies in the subsidy with which I must begin my first campaign, for life in Paris is one continual battle. If you cannot otherwise procure the whole of the money, and are forced to sell our aunt's lace, tell her that I will send her some still handsomer," and so forth.

°°°°He wrote to ask each of his sisters for their savings--would they despoil themselves for him, and keep the sacrifice a secret from the family? To his request he knew that they would not fail to respond gladly, and he added to it an appeal to their delicacy by touching the chord of honor that vibrates so loudly in young and high-strung natures.

°°°°Yet when he had written the letters, he could not help feeling misgivings in spite of his youthful ambition; his heart beat fast, and he trembled. He knew the spotless nobleness of the lives buried away in the lonely manor house; he knew what trouble and what joy his request would cause his sisters, and how happy they would be as they talked at the bottom of the orchard of that dear brother of theirs in Paris. Visions rose before his eyes; a sudden strong light revealed his sisters secretly counting over their little store, devising some girlish stratagem by which the money could be sent to him incognito, essaying, for the first time in their lives, a piece of deceit that reached the sublime in its unselfishness.

°°°°"A sister's heart is a diamond for purity, a deep sea of tenderness!" he said to himself. He felt ashamed of those letters.

°°°°What power there must be in the petitions put up by such hearts; how pure the fervor that bears their souls to Heaven in prayer! What exquisite joy they would find in self-sacrifice! What a pang for his mother's heart if she could not send him all that he asked for! And this noble affection, these sacrifices made at such terrible cost, were to serve as the ladder by which he meant to climb to Delphine de Nucingen. A few tears, like the last grains of incense flung upon the sacred alter fire of the hearth, fell from his eyes. He walked up and down, and despair mingled with his emotion. Father Goriot saw him through the half-open door.

°°°°"What is the matter, sir?" he asked from the threshold.

°°°°"Ah! my good neighbor, I am as much a son and brother as you are a father. You do well to fear for the Comtesse Anastasie; there is one M. Maxime de Trailles, who will be her ruin."

°°°°Father Goriot withdrew, stammering some words, but Eugene failed to catch their meaning.

°°°°The next morning Rastignac went out to post his letters. Up to the last moment he wavered and doubted, but he ended by flinging them into the box. "I shall succeed!" he said to himself. So says the gambler; so says the great captain; but the three words that have been the salvation of some few, have been the ruin of many more.

°°°°A few days after this Eugene called at Mme. de Restaud's house; she was not at home. Three times he tried the experiment, and three times he found her doors closed against him, though he was careful to choose an hour when M. de Trailles was not there. The Vicomtesse was right.

°°°°The student studied no longer. He put in an appearance at lectures simply to answer to his name, and after thus attesting his presence, departed forthwith. He had been through a reasoning process familiar to most students. He had seen the advisability of deferring his studies to the last moment before going up for his examinations; he made up his mind to cram his second and third years' work into the third year, when he meant to begin to work in earnest, and to complete his studies in law with one great effort. In the meantime he had fifteen months in which to navigate the ocean of Paris, to spread the nets and set the lines that would bring him a protectress and a fortune. Twice during that week he saw Mme. de Beauseant; he did not go to her house until he had seen the Marquis d'Ajuda drive away.

°°°°Victory for yet a few more days was with the great lady, the most poetic figure in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; and the marriage of the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto with Mlle. de Rochefide was postponed. The dread of losing her happiness filled those days with a fever of joy unknown before, but the end was only so much the nearer. The Marquis d'Ajuda and the Rochefides agreed that this quarrel and reconciliation was a very fortunate thing; Mme. de Beauseant (so they hoped) would gradually become reconciled to the idea of the marriage, and in the end would be brought to sacrifice d'Ajuda's morning visits to the exigencies of a man's career, exigencies which she must have foreseen. In spite of the most solemn promises, daily renewed, M. d'Ajuda was playing a part, and the Vicomtesse was eager to be deceived. "Instead of taking a leap heroically from the window, she is falling headlong down the staircase," said her most intimate friend, the Duchesse de Langeais. Yet this after-glow of happiness lasted long enough for the Vicomtesse to be of service to her young cousin. She had a half-superstitious affection for him. Eugene had shown her sympathy and devotion at a crisis when a woman sees no pity, no real comfort in any eyes; when if a man is ready with soothing flatteries, it is because he has an interested motive.

°°°°Rastignac made up his mind that he must learn the whole of Goriot's previous history; he would come to his bearings before attempting to board the Maison de Nucingen. The results of his inquiries may be given briefly as follows:--

°°°°In the days before the Revolution, Jean-Joachim Goriot was simply a workman in the employ of a vermicelli maker. He was a skilful, thrifty workman, sufficiently enterprising to buy his master's business when the latter fell a chance victim to the disturbances of 1789. Goriot established himself in the Rue de la Jussienne, close to the Corn Exchange. His plain good sense led him to accept the position of President of the Section, so as to secure for his business the protection of those in power at that dangerous epoch. This prudent step had led to success; the foundations of his fortune were laid in the time of the Scarcity (real or artificial), when the price of grain of all kinds rose enormously in Paris. People used to fight for bread at the bakers' doors; while other persons went to the grocers' shops and bought Italian paste foods without brawling over it. It was during this year that Goriot made the money, which, at a later time, was to give him all the advantage of the great capitalist over the small buyer; he had, moreover, the usual luck of average ability; his mediocrity was the salvation of him. He excited no one's envy, it was not even suspected that he was rich till the peril of being rich was over, and all his intelligence was concentrated, not on political, but on commercial speculations. Goriot was an authority second to none on all questions relating to corn, flour, and "middlings"; and the production, storage, and quality of grain. He could estimate the yield of the harvest, and foresee market prices; he bought his cereals in Sicily, and imported Russian wheat. Any one who had heard him hold forth on the regulations that control the importation and exportation of grain, who had seen his grasp of the subject, his clear insight into the principles involved, his appreciation of weak points in the way that the system worked, would have thought that here was the stuff of which a minister is made. Patient, active, and persevering, energetic and prompt in action, he surveyed his business horizon with an eagle eye. Nothing there took him by surprise; he foresaw all things, knew all that was happening, and kept his own counsel; he was a diplomatist in his quick comprehension of a situation; and in the routine of business he was as patient and plodding as a soldier on the march. But beyond this business horizon he could not see. He used to spend his hours of leisure on the threshold of his shop, leaning against the framework of the door. Take him from his dark little counting-house, and he became once more the rough, slow-witted workman, a man who cannot understand a piece of reasoning, who is indifferent to all intellectual pleasures, and falls asleep at the play, a Parisian Dolibom in short, against whose stupidity other minds are powerless.

°°°°Natures of this kind are nearly all alike; in almost all of them you will find some hidden depth of sublime affection. Two all- absorbing affections filled the vermicelli maker's heart to the exclusion of every other feeling; into them he seemed to put all the forces of his nature, as he put the whole power of his brain into the corn trade. He had regarded his wife, the only daughter of a rich farmer of La Brie, with a devout admiration; his love for her had been boundless. Goriot had felt the charm of a lovely and sensitive nature, which, in its delicate strength, was the very opposite of his own. Is there any instinct more deeply implanted in the heart of man than the pride of protection, a protection which is constantly exerted for a fragile and defenceless creature? Join love thereto, the warmth of gratitude that all generous souls feel for the source of their pleasures, and you have the explanation of many strange incongruities in human nature.

°°°°After seven years of unclouded happiness, Goriot lost his wife. It was very unfortunate for him. She was beginning to gain an ascendency over him in other ways; possibly she might have brought that barren soil under cultivation, she might have widened his ideas and given other directions to his thoughts. But when she was dead, the instinct of fatherhood developed in him till it almost became a mania. All the affection balked by death seemed to turn to his daughters, and he found full satisfaction for his heart in loving them. More or less brilliant proposals were made to him from time to time; wealthy merchants or farmers with daughters vied with each other in offering inducements to him to marry again; but he determined to remain a widower. His father-in-law, the only man for whom he felt a decided friendship, gave out that Goriot had made a vow to be faithful to his wife's memory. The frequenters of the Corn Exchange, who could not comprehend this sublime piece of folly, joked about it among themselves, and found a ridiculous nickname for him. One of them ventured (after a glass over a bargain) to call him by it, and a blow from the vermicelli maker's fist sent him headlong into a gutter in the Rue Oblin. He could think of nothing else when his children were concerned; his love for them made him fidgety and anxious; and this was so well known, that one day a competitor, who wished to get rid of him to secure the field to himself, told Goriot that Delphine had just been knocked down by a cab. The vermicelli maker turned ghastly pale, left the Exchange at once, and did not return for several days afterwards; he was ill in consequence of the shock and the subsequent relief on discovering that it was a false alarm. This time, however, the offender did not escape with a bruised shoulder; at a critical moment in the man's affairs, Goriot drove him into bankruptcy, and forced him to disappear from the Corn Exchange.

°°°°As might have been expected, the two girls were spoiled. With an income of sixty thousand francs, Goriot scarcely spent twelve hundred on himself, and found all his happiness in satisfying the whims of the two girls. The best masters were engaged, that Anastasie and Delphine might be endowed with all the accomplishments which distinguish a good education. They had a chaperon--luckily for them, she was a woman who had good sense and good taste;--they learned to ride; they had a carriage for their use; they lived as the mistress of a rich old lord might live; they had only to express a wish, their father would hasten to give them their most extravagant desires, and asked nothing of them in return but a kiss. Goriot had raised the two girls to the level of the angels; and, quite naturally, he himself was left beneath them. Poor man! he loved them even for the pain that they gave him.

°°°°When the girls were old enough to be married, they were left free to choose for themselves. Each had half her father's fortune as her dowry; and when the Comte de Restaud came to woo Anastasie for her beauty, her social aspirations led her to leave her father's house for a more exalted sphere. Delphine wished for money; she married Nucingen, a banker of German extraction, who became a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire. Goriot remained a vermicelli maker as before. His daughters and his sons-in-law began to demur; they did not like to see him still engaged in trade, though his whole life was bound up with his business. For five years he stood out against their entreaties, then he yielded, and consented to retire on the amount realized by the sale of his business and the savings of the last few years. It was this capital that Mme. Vauquer, in the early days of his residence with her, had calculated would bring in eight or ten thousand livres in a year. He had taken refuge in her lodging- house, driven there by despair when he knew that his daughters were compelled by their husbands not only to refuse to receive him as an inmate in their houses, but even to see him no more except in private.

°°°°This was all the information which Rastignac gained from a M. Muret who had purchased Goriot's business, information which confirmed the Duchesse de Langeais' suppositions, and herewith the preliminary explanation of this obscure but terrible Parisian tragedy comes to an end.

°°°°Towards the end of the first week in December Rastignac received two letters--one from his mother, and one from his eldest sister. His heart beat fast, half with happiness, half with fear, at the sight of the familiar handwriting. Those two little scraps of paper contained life or death for his hopes. But while he felt a shiver of dread as he remembered their dire poverty at home, he knew their love for him so well that he could not help fearing that he was draining their very life-blood. His mother's letter ran as follows:--

°°°°"My Dear Child,--I am sending you the money that you asked for. Make a good use of it. Even to save your life I could not raise so large a sum a second time without your father's knowledge, and there would be trouble about it. We should be obliged to mortgage the land. It is impossible to judge of the merits of schemes of which I am ignorant; but what sort of schemes can they be, that you should fear to tell me about them? Volumes of explanation would not have been needed; we mothers can understand at a word, and that word would have spared me the anguish of uncertainty. I do not know how to hide the painful impression that your letter has made upon me, my dear son. What can you have felt when you were moved to send this chill of dread through my heart? It must have been very painful to you to write the letter that gave me so much pain as I read it. To what courses are you committed? You are going to appear to be something that you are not, and your whole life and success depends upon this? You are about to see a society into which you cannot enter without rushing into expense that you cannot afford, without losing precious time that is needed for your studies. Ah! my dear Eugene, believe your mother, crooked ways cannot lead to great ends. Patience and endurance are the two qualities most needed in your position. I am not scolding you; I do not want any tinge of bitterness to spoil our offering. I am only talking like a mother whose trust in you is as great as her foresight for you. You know the steps that you must take, and I, for my part, know the purity of heart, and how good your intentions are; so I can say to you without a doubt, 'Go forward, beloved!' If I tremble, it is because I am a mother, but my prayers and blessings will be with you at every step. Be very careful, dear boy. You must have a man's prudence, for it lies with you to shape the destinies of five others who are dear to you, and must look to you. Yes, our fortunes depend upon you, and your success is ours. We all pray to God to be with you in all that you do. Your aunt Marcillac has been most generous beyond words in this matter; she saw at once how it was, even down to your gloves. 'But I have a weakness for the eldest!' she said gaily. You must love your aunt very much, dear Eugene. I shall wait till you have succeeded before telling you all that she has done for you, or her money would burn your fingers. You, who are young, do not know what it is to part with something that is a piece of your past! But what would we not sacrifice for your sakes? Your aunt says that I am to send you a kiss on the forehead from her, and that kiss is to bring you luck again and again, she says. She would have written you herself, the dear kind-hearted woman, but she is troubled with the gout in her fingers just now. Your father is very well. The vintage of 1819 has turned out better than we expected. Good-bye, dear boy; I will say nothing about your sisters, because Laure is writing to you, and I must let her have the pleasure of giving you all the home news. Heaven send that you may succeed! Oh! yes, dear Eugene, you must succeed. I have come, through you, to a knowledge of a pain so sharp that I do not think I could endure it a second time. I have come to know what it is to be poor, and to long for money for my children's sake. There, good-bye! Do not leave us for long without news of you; and here, at the last, take a kiss from your mother."

°°°°By the time Eugene had finished the letter he was in tears. He thought of Father Goriot crushing his silver keepsake into a shapeless mass before he sold it to meet his daughter's bill of exchange.

°°°°"Your mother has broken up her jewels for you," he said to himself; "your aunt shed tears over those relics of hers before she sold them for your sake. What right have you to heap execrations on Anastasie? You have followed her example; you have selfishly sacrificed others to your own future, and she sacrifices her father to her lover; and of you two, which is the worse?"

°°°°He was ready to renounce his attempts; he could not bear to take that money. The fires of remorse burned in his heart, and gave him intolerable pain, the generous secret remorse which men seldom take into account when they sit in judgment upon their fellow-men; but perhaps the angels in heaven, beholding it, pardon the criminal whom our justice condemns. Rastignac opened his sister's letter; its simplicity and kindness revived his heart.

°°°°"Your letter came just at the right time, dear brother. Agathe and I had thought of so many different ways of spending our money, that we did not know what to buy with it; and now you have come in, and, like the servant who upset all the watches that belonged to the King of Spain, you have restored harmony; for, really and truly, we did not know which of all the things we wanted we wanted most, and we were always quarreling about it, never thinking, dear Eugene, of a way of spending our money which would satisfy us completely. Agathe jumped for you. Indeed, we have been like two mad things all day, 'to such a prodigious degree' (as aunt would say), that mother said, with her severe expression, 'Whatever can be the matter with you, mesdemoiselles?' I think if we had been scolded a little, we should have been still better pleased. A woman ought to be very glad to suffer for one she loves! I, however, in my inmost soul, was doleful and cross in the midst of all my joy. I shall make a bad wife, I am afraid, I am too fond of spending. I had bought two sashes and a nice little stiletto for piercing eyelet-holes in my stays, trifles that I really did not want, so that I have less than that slow-coach Agathe, who is so economical, and hoards her money like a magpie. She had two hundred francs! And I have only one hundred and fifty! I am nicely punished; I could throw my sash down the well; it will be painful to me to wear it now. Poor dear, I have robbed you. And Agathe was so nice about it. She said, 'Let us send the three hundred and fifty francs in our two names!' But I could not help telling you everything just as it happened.

°°°°"Do you know how we managed to keep your commandments? We took our glittering hoard, we went out for a walk, and when once fairly on the highway we ran all the way to Ruffec, where we handed over the coin, without more ado, to M. Grimbert of the Messageries Royales. We came back again like swallows on the wing. 'Don't you think that happiness has made us lighter?' Agathe said. We said all sorts of things, which I shall not tell you, Monsieur le Parisien, because they were all about you. Oh, we love you dearly, dear brother; it was all summed up in those few words. As for keeping the secret, little masqueraders like us are capable of anything (according to our aunt), even of holding our tongues. Our mother has been on a mysterious journey to Angouleme, and the aunt went with her, not without solemn councils, from which we were shut out, and M. le Baron likewise. They are silent as to the weighty political considerations that prompted their mission, and conjectures are rife in the State of Rastignac. The Infantas are embroidering a muslin robe with open- work sprigs for her Majesty the Queen; the work progresses in the most profound secrecy. There be but two more breadths to finish. A decree has gone forth that no wall shall be built on the side of Verteuil, but that a hedge shall be planted instead thereof. Our subjects may sustain some disappointment of fruit and espaliers, but strangers will enjoy a fair prospect. Should the heir-presumptive lack pocket-handkerchiefs, be it known unto him that the dowager Lady of Marcillac, exploring the recesses of her drawers and boxes (known respectively as Pompeii and Herculaneum), having brought to light a fair piece of cambric whereof she wotted not, the Princesses Agathe and Laure place at their brother's disposal their thread, their needles, and hands somewhat of the reddest. The two young Princes, Don Henri and Don Gabriel, retain their fatal habits of stuffing themselves with grape-jelly, of teasing their sisters, of taking their pleasure by going a-bird-nesting, and of cutting switches for themselves from the osier-beds, maugre the laws of the realm. Moreover, they list not to learn naught, wherefore the Papal Nuncio (called of the commonalty, M. le Cure) threateneth them with excommunication, since that they neglect the sacred canons of grammatical construction for the construction of other canon, deadly engines made of the stems of elder.

°°°°"Farewell, dear brother, never did letter carry so many wishes for your success, so much love fully satisfied. You will have a great deal to tell us when you come home! You will tell me everything, won't you? I am the oldest. From something the aunt let fall, we think you must have had some success.

°°°°"Something was said of a lady, but nothing more was said . . .

°°°°"Of course not, in our family! Oh, by-the-by, Eugene, would you rather that we made that piece of cambric into shirts for you instead of pocket-handkerchiefs? If you want some really nice shirts at once, we ought to lose no time in beginning upon them; and if the fashion is different now in Paris, send us one for a pattern; we want more particularly to know about the cuffs. Good- bye! Good-bye! Take my kiss on the left side of your forehead, on the temple that belongs to me, and to no one else in the world. I am leaving the other side of the sheet for Agathe, who has solemnly promised not to read a word that I have written; but, all the same, I mean to sit by her side while she writes, so as to be quite sure that she keeps her word.--Your loving sister, "Laure de Rastignac."

°°°°"Yes!" said Eugene to himself. "Yes! Success at all costs now! Riches could not repay such devotion as this. I wish I could give them every sort of happiness! Fifteen hundred and fifty francs," he went on after a pause. "Every shot must go to the mark! Laure is right. Trust a woman! I have only calico shirts. Where some one else's welfare is concerned, a young girl becomes as ingenious as a thief. Guileless where she herself is in question, and full of foresight for me,--she is like a heavenly angel forgiving the strange incomprehensible sins of earth."

°°°°The world lay before him. His tailor had been summoned and sounded, and had finally surrendered. When Rastignac met M. de Trailles, he had seen at once how great a part the tailor plays in a young man's career; a tailor is either a deadly enemy or a staunch friend, with an invoice for a bond of friendship; between these two extremes there is, alack! no middle term. In this representative of his craft Eugene discovered a man who understood that his was a sort of paternal function for young men at their entrance into life, who regarded himself as a stepping- stone between a young man's present and future. And Rastignac in gratitude made the man's fortune by an epigram of a kind in which he excelled at a later period of his life.

°°°°"I have twice known a pair of trousers turned out by him make a match of twenty thousand livres a year!"

°°°°Fifteen hundred francs, and as many suits of clothes as he chose to order! At that moment the poor child of the South felt no more doubts of any kind. The young man went down to breakfast with the indefinable air which the consciousness of the possession of money gives to youth. No sooner are the coins slipped into a student's pocket than his wealth, in imagination at least, is piled into a fantastic column, which affords him a moral support. He begins to hold up his head as he walks; he is conscious that he has a means of bringing his powers to bear on a given point; he looks you straight in the face; his gestures are quick and decided; only yesterday he was diffident and shy, any one might have pushed him aside; to-morrow, he will take the wall of a prime minister. A miracle has been wrought in him. Nothing is beyond the reach of his ambition, and his ambition soars at random; he is light-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic; in short, the fledgling bird has discovered that he has wings. A poor student snatches at every chance pleasure much as a dog runs all sorts of risks to steal a bone, cracking it and sucking the marrow as he flies from pursuit; but a young man who can rattle a few runaway gold coins in his pocket can take his pleasure deliberately, can taste the whole of the sweets of secure possession; he soars far above earth; he has forgotten what the word POVERTY means; all Paris is his. Those are days when the whole world shines radiant with light, when everything glows and sparkles before the eyes of youth, days that bring joyous energy that is never brought into harness, days of debts and of painful fears that go hand in hand with every delight. Those who do not know the left bank of the Seine between the Rue Saint-Jacques and the Rue des Saints-Peres know nothing of life.

°°°°"Ah! if the women of Paris but knew," said Rastignac, as he devoured Mme. Vauquer's stewed pears (at five for a penny), "they would come here in search of a lover."

°°°°Just then a porter from the Messageries Royales appeared at the door of the room; they had previously heard the bell ring as the wicket opened to admit him. The man asked for M. Eugene de Rastignac, holding out two bags for him to take, and a form of receipt for his signature. Vautrin's keen glance cut Eugene like a lash.

°°°°"Now you will be able to pay for those fencing lessons and go to the shooting gallery," he said.

°°°°"Your ship has come in," said Mme. Vauquer, eyeing the bags.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau did not dare to look at the money, for fear her eyes should betray her cupidity.

°°°°"You have a kind mother," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"You have a kind mother, sir," echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, mamma has been drained dry," said Vautrin, "and now you can have your fling, go into society, and fish for heiresses, and dance with countesses who have peach blossom in their hair. But take my advice, young man, and don't neglect your pistol practice."

°°°°Vautrin struck an attitude, as if he were facing an antagonist. Rastignac, meaning to give the porter a tip, felt in his pockets and found nothing. Vautrin flung down a franc piece on the table.

°°°°"Your credit is good," he remarked, eyeing the student, and Rastignac was forced to thank him, though, since the sharp encounter of wits at dinner that day, after Eugene came in from calling on Mme. de Beauseant, he had made up his mind that Vautrin was insufferable. For a week, in fact, they had both kept silence in each other's presence, and watched each other. The student tried in vain to account to himself for this attitude.

°°°°An idea, of course, gains in force by the energy with which it is expressed; it strikes where the brain sends it, by a law as mathematically exact as the law that determines the course of a shell from a mortar. The amount of impression it makes is not to be determined so exactly. Sometimes, in an impressible nature, the idea works havoc, but there are, no less, natures so robustly protected, that this sort of projectile falls flat and harmless on skulls of triple brass, as cannon-shot against solid masonry; then there are flaccid and spongy-fibred natures into which ideas from without sink like spent bullets into the earthworks of a redoubt. Rastignac's head was something of the powder-magazine order; the least shock sufficed to bring about an explosion. He was too quick, too young, not to be readily accessible to ideas; and open to that subtle influence of thought and feeling in others which causes so many strange phenomena that make an impression upon us of which we are all unconscious at the time. Nothing escaped his mental vision; he was lynx-eyed; in him the mental powers of perception, which seem like duplicates of the senses, had the mysterious power of swift projection that astonishes us in intellects of a high order--slingers who are quick to detect the weak spot in any armor.

°°°°In the past month Eugene's good qualities and defects had rapidly developed with his character. Intercourse with the world and the endeavor to satisfy his growing desires had brought out his defects. But Rastignac came from the South side of the Loire, and had the good qualities of his countrymen. He had the impetuous courage of the South, that rushes to the attack of a difficulty, as well as the southern impatience of delay or suspense. These traits are held to be defects in the North; they made the fortune of Murat, but they likewise cut short his career. The moral would appear to be that when the dash and boldness of the South side of the Loire meets, in a southern temperament, with the guile of the North, the character is complete, and such a man will gain (and keep) the crown of Sweden.

°°°°Rastignac, therefore, could not stand the fire from Vautrin's batteries for long without discovering whether this was a friend or a foe. He felt as if this strange being was reading his inmost soul, and dissecting his feelings, while Vautrin himself was so close and secretive that he seemed to have something of the profound and unmoved serenity of a sphinx, seeing and hearing all things and saying nothing. Eugene, conscious of that money in his pocket, grew rebellious.

°°°°"Be so good as to wait a moment," he said to Vautrin, as the latter rose, after slowly emptying his coffee-cup, sip by sip.

°°°°"What for?" inquired the older man, as he put on his large- brimmed hat and took up the sword-cane that he was wont to twirl like a man who will face three or four footpads without flinching.

°°°°"I will repay you in a minute," returned Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he spoke, counted out a hundred and forty francs, and pushed them towards Mme. Vauquer. "Short reckonings make good friends" he added, turning to the widow; "that clears our accounts till the end of the year. Can you give me change for a five-franc piece?"

°°°°"Good friends make short reckonings," echoed Poiret, with a glance at Vautrin.

°°°°"Here is your franc," said Rastignac, holding out the coin to the sphinx in the black wig.

°°°°"Any one might think that you were afraid to owe me a trifle," exclaimed this latter, with a searching glance that seemed to read the young man's inmost thoughts; there was a satirical and cynical smile on Vautrin's face such as Eugene had seen scores of times already; every time he saw it, it exasperated him almost beyond endurance.

°°°°"Well . . . so I am," he answered. He held both the bags in his hand, and had risen to go up to his room.

°°°°Vautrin made as if he were going out through the sitting-room, and the student turned to go through the second door that opened into the square lobby at the foot of the staircase.

°°°°"Do you know, Monsieur le Marquis de Rastignacorama, that what you were saying just now was not exactly polite?" Vautrin remarked, as he rattled his sword-cane across the panels of the sitting-room door, and came up to the student.

°°°°Rastignac looked coolly at Vautrin, drew him to the foot of the staircase, and shut the dining-room door. They were standing in the little square lobby between the kitchen and the dining-room; the place was lighted by an iron-barred fanlight above a door that gave access into the garden. Sylvie came out of her kitchen, and Eugene chose that moment to say:

°°°°MONSIEUR Vautrin, I am not a marquis, and my name is not Rastignacorama."

°°°°"They will fight," said Mlle. Michonneau, in an indifferent tone.

°°°°"Fight!" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Not they," replied Mme. Vauquer, lovingly fingering her pile of coins.

°°°°"But there they are under the lime-trees," cried Mlle. Victorine, who had risen so that she might see out into the garden. "Poor young man! he was in the right, after all."

°°°°"We must go upstairs, my pet," said Mme. Couture; "it is no business of ours."

°°°°At the door, however, Mme. Couture and Victorine found their progress barred by the portly form of Sylvie the cook.

°°°°"What ever can have happened?" she said. "M. Vautrin said to M. Eugene, 'Let us have an explanation!' then he took him by the arm, and there they are, out among the artichokes."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking. "Mamma Vauquer," he said smiling, "don't frighten yourself at all. I am only going to try my pistols under the lime-trees."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur," cried Victorine, clasping her hands as she spoke, "why do you want to kill M. Eugene?"

°°°°Vautrin stepped back a pace or two, and gazed at Victorine.

°°°°"Oh! this is something fresh!" he exclaimed in a bantering tone, that brought the color into the poor girl's face. "That young fellow yonder is very nice, isn't he?" he went on. "You have given me a notion, my pretty child; I will make you both happy."

°°°°Mme. Couture laid her hand on the arm of her ward, and drew the girl away, as she said in her ear:

°°°°"Why, Victorine, I cannot imagine what has come over you this morning."

°°°°"I don't want any shots fired in my garden," said Mme. Vauquer. "You will frighten the neighborhood and bring the police up here all in a moment."

°°°°"Come, keep cool, Mamma Vauquer," answered Vautrin. "There, there; it's all right; we will go to the shooting-gallery."

°°°°He went back to Rastignac, laying his hand familiarly on the young man's arm.

°°°°"When I have given you ocular demonstration of the fact that I can put a bullet through the ace on a card five times running at thirty-five paces," he said, "that won't take away your appetite, I suppose? You look to me to be inclined to be a trifle quarrelsome this morning, and as if you would rush on your death like a blockhead."

°°°°"Do you draw back?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Don't try to raise my temperature," answered Vautrin, "it is not cold this morning. Let us go and sit over there," he added, pointing to the green-painted garden seats; "no one can overhear us. I want a little talk with you. You are not a bad sort of youngster, and I have no quarrel with you. I like you, take Trump--(confound it!)--take Vautrin's word for it. What makes me like you? I will tell you by-and-by. Meantime, I can tell you that I know you as well as if I had made you myself, as I will prove to you in a minute. Put down your bags," he continued, pointing to the round table.

°°°°Rastignac deposited his money on the table, and sat down. He was consumed with curiosity, which the sudden change in the manner of the man before him had excited to the highest pitch. Here was a strange being who, a moment ago, had talked of killing him, and now posed as his protector.

°°°°"You would like to know who I really am, what I was, and what I do now," Vautrin went on. "You want to know too much, youngster. Come! come! keep cool! You will hear more astonishing things than that. I have had my misfortunes. Just hear me out first, and you shall have your turn afterwards. Here is my past in three words. Who am I? Vautrin. What do I do? Just what I please. Let us change the subject. You want to know my character. I am good- natured to those who do me a good turn, or to those whose hearts speak to mine. These last may do anything they like with me; they may bruise my shins, and I shall not tell them to 'mind what they are about'; but, nom d'une pipe, the devil himself is not an uglier customer than I can be if people annoy me, or if I don't happen to take to them; and you may just as well know at once that I think no more of killing a man than of that," and he spat before him as he spoke. "Only when it is absolutely necessary to do so, I do my best to kill him properly. I am what you call an artist. I have read Benvenuto Cellini's Memoirs, such as you see me; and, what is more, in Italian: A fine-spirited fellow he was! From him I learned to follow the example set us by Providence, who strikes us down at random, and to admire the beautiful whenever and wherever it is found. And, setting other questions aside, is it not a glorious part to play, when you pit yourself against mankind, and the luck is on your side? I have thought a good deal about the constitution of your present social Dis- order. A duel is downright childish, my boy! utter nonsense and folly! When one of two living men must be got out of the way, none but an idiot would leave chance to decide which it is to be; and in a duel it is a toss-up--heads or tails--and there you are! Now I, for instance, can hit the ace in the middle of a card five times running, send one bullet after another through the same hole, and at thirty-five paces, moreover! With that little accomplishment you might think yourself certain of killing your man, mightn't you. Well, I have fired, at twenty paces, and missed, and the rogue who had never handled a pistol in his life-- look here!"--(he unbuttoned his waistcoat and exposed his chest, covered, like a bear's back, with a shaggy fell; the student gave a startled shudder)--"he was a raw lad, but he made his mark on me," the extraordinary man went on, drawing Rastignac's fingers over a deep scar on his breast. But that happened when I myself was a mere boy; I was one-and-twenty then (your age), and I had some beliefs left--in a woman's love, and in a pack of rubbish that you will be over head and ears in directly. You and I were to have fought just now, weren't we? You might have killed me. Suppose that I were put under the earth, where would you be? You would have to clear out of this, go to Switzerland, draw on papa's purse--and he has none too much in it as it is. I mean to open your eyes to your real position, that is what I am going to do: but I shall do it from the point of view of a man who, after studying the world very closely, sees that there are but two alternatives--stupid obedience or revolt. I obey nobody; is that clear? Now, do you know how much you will want at the pace you are going? A million; and promptly, too, or that little head of ours will be swaying to and fro in the drag-nets at Saint-Cloud, while we are gone to find out whether or no there is a Supreme Being. I will put you in the way of that million."

°°°°He stopped for a moment and looked at Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! you do not look so sourly at papa Vautrin now! At the mention of the million you look like a young girl when somebody has said, 'I will come for you this evening!' and she betakes herself to her toilette as a cat licks its whiskers over a saucer of milk. All right. Come, now, let us go into the question, young man; all between ourselves, you know. We have a papa and mamma down yonder, a great-aunt, two sisters (aged eighteen and seventeen), two young brothers (one fifteen, and the other ten), that is about the roll-call of the crew. The aunt brings up the two sisters; the cure comes and teaches the boys Latin. Boiled chestnuts are oftener on the table than white bread. Papa makes a suit of clothes last a long while; if mamma has a different dress winter and summer, it is about as much as she has; the sisters manage as best they can. I know all about it; I have lived in the south.

°°°°"That is how things are at home. They send you twelve hundred francs a year, and the whole property only brings in three thousand francs all told. We have a cook and a manservant; papa is a baron, and we must keep up appearances. Then we have our ambitions; we are connected with the Beauseants, and we go afoot through the streets; we want to be rich, and we have not a penny; we eat Mme. Vauquer's messes, and we like grand dinners in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; we sleep on a truckle-bed, and dream of a mansion! I do not blame you for wanting these things. What sort of men do the women run after? Men of ambition. Men of ambition have stronger frames, their blood is richer in iron, their hearts are warmer than those of ordinary men. Women feel that when their power is greatest, they look their best, and that those are their happiest hours; they like power in men, and prefer the strongest even if it is a power that may be their own destruction. I am going to make an inventory of your desires in order to put the question at issue before you. Here it is:--

°°°°"We are as hungry as a wolf, and those newly-cut teeth of ours are sharp; what are we to do to keep the pot boiling? In the first place, we have the Code to browse upon; it is not amusing, and we are none the wiser for it, but that cannot be helped. So far so good. We mean to make an advocate of ourselves with a prospect of one day being made President of a Court of Assize, when we shall send poor devils, our betters, to the galleys with a T.F.* [*Travaux forces.] on their shoulders, so that the rich may be convinced that they can sleep in peace. There is no fun in that; and you are a long while coming to it; for, to begin with, there are two years of nauseous drudgery in Paris, we see all the lollipops that we long for out of our reach. It is tiresome to want things and never to have them. If you were a pallid creature of the mollusk order, you would have nothing to fear, but it is different when you have the hot blood of a lion and are ready to get into a score of scrapes every day of your life. This is the ghastliest form of torture known in this inferno of God's making, and you will give in to it. Or suppose that you are a good boy, drink nothing stronger than milk, and bemoan your hard lot; you, with your generous nature, will endure hardships that would drive a dog mad, and make a start, after long waiting, as deputy to some rascal or other in a hole of a place where the Government will fling you a thousand francs a year like the scraps that are thrown to the butcher's dog. Bark at thieves, plead the cause of the rich, send men of heart to the guillotine, that is your work! Many thanks! If you have no influence, you may rot in your provincial tribunal. At thirty you will be a Justice with twelve hundred francs a year (if you have not flung off the gown for good before then). By the time you are forty you may look to marry a miller's daughter, an heiress with some six thousand livres a year. Much obliged! If you have influence, you may possibly be a Public Prosecutor by the time you are thirty; with a salary of a thousand crowns, you could look to marry the mayor's daughter. Some petty piece of political trickery, such as mistaking Villele for Manuel in a bulletin (the names rhyme, and that quiets your conscience), and you will probably be a Procureur General by the time you are forty, with a chance of becoming a deputy. Please to observe, my dear boy, that our conscience will have been a little damaged in the process, and that we shall endure twenty years of drudgery and hidden poverty, and that our sisters are wearing Dian's livery. I have the honor to call your attention to another fact: to wit, that there are but twenty Procureurs Generaux at a time in all France, while there are some twenty thousand of you young men who aspire to that elevated position; that there are some mountebanks among you who would sell their family to screw their fortunes a peg higher. If this sort of thing sickens you, try another course. The Baron de Rastignac thinks of becoming an advocate, does he? There's a nice prospect for you! Ten years of drudgery straight away. You are obliged to live at the rate of a thousand francs a month; you must have a library of law books, live in chambers, go into society, go down on your knees to ask a solicitor for briefs, lick the dust off the floor of the Palais de Justice. If this kind of business led to anything, I should not say no; but just give me the names of five advocates here in Paris who by the time that they are fifty are making fifty thousand francs a year! Bah! I would sooner turn pirate on the high seas than have my soul shrivel up inside me like that. How will you find the capital? There is but one way, marry a woman who has money. There is no fun in it. Have you a mind to marry? You hang a stone around your neck; for if you marry for money, what becomes of our exalted notions of honor and so forth? You might as well fly in the face of social conventions at once. Is it nothing to crawl like a serpent before your wife, to lick her mother's feet, to descend to dirty actions that would sicken swine--faugh!--never mind if you at least make your fortune. But you will be as doleful as a dripstone if you marry for money. It is better to wrestle with men than to wrangle at home with your wife. You are at the crossway of the roads of life, my boy; choose your way.

°°°°"But you have chosen already. You have gone to see your cousin of Beauseant, and you have had an inkling of luxury; you have been to Mme. de Restaud's house, and in Father Goriot's daughter you have seen a glimpse of the Parisienne for the first time. That day you came back with a word written on your forehead. I knew it, I could read it--'SUCCESS!' Yes, success at any price. 'Bravo,' said I to myself, 'here is the sort of fellow for me.' You wanted money. Where was it all to come from? You have drained your sisters' little hoard (all brothers sponge more or less on their sisters). Those fifteen hundred francs of yours (got together, God knows how! in a country where there are more chestnuts than five-franc pieces) will slip away like soldiers after pillage. And, then, what will you do? Shall you begin to work? Work, or what you understand by work at this moment, means, for a man of Poiret's calibre, an old age in Mamma Vauquer's lodging-house. There are fifty thousand young men in your position at this moment, all bent as you are on solving one and the same problem--how to acquire a fortune rapidly. You are but a unit in that aggregate. You can guess, therefore, what efforts you must make, how desperate the struggle is. There are not fifty thousand good positions for you; you must fight and devour one another like spiders in a pot. Do you know how a man makes his way here? By brilliant genius or by skilful corruption. You must either cut your way through these masses of men like a cannon ball, or steal among them like a plague. Honesty is nothing to the purpose. Men bow before the power of genius; they hate it, and try to slander it, because genius does not divide the spoil; but if genius persists, they bow before it. To sum it all up in a phrase, if they fail to smother genius in the mud, they fall on their knees and worship it. Corruption is a great power in the world, and talent is scarce. So corruption is the weapon of superfluous mediocrity; you will be made to feel the point of it everywhere. You will see women who spend more than ten thousand francs a year on dress, while their husband's salary (his whole income) is six thousand francs. You will see officials buying estates on twelve thousand francs a year. You will see women who sell themselves body and soul to drive in a carriage belonging to the son of a peer of France, who has a right to drive in the middle rank at Longchamp. You have seen that poor simpleton of a Goriot obliged to meet a bill with his daughter's name at the back of it, though her husband has fifty thousand francs a year. I defy you to walk a couple of yards anywhere in Paris without stumbling on some infernal complication. I'll bet my head to a head of that salad that you will stir up a hornet's nest by taking a fancy to the first young, rich, and pretty woman you meet. They are all dodging the law, all at loggerheads with their husbands. If I were to begin to tell you all that vanity or necessity (virtue is not often mixed up in it, you may be sure), all that vanity and necessity drive them to do for lovers, finery, housekeeping, or children, I should never come to an end. So an honest man is the common enemy.

°°°°"But do you know what an honest man is? Here, in Paris, an honest man is the man who keeps his own counsel, and will not divide the plunder. I am not speaking now of those poor bond-slaves who do the work of the world without a reward for their toil--God Almighty's outcasts, I call them. Among them, I grant you, is virtue in all the flower of its stupidity, but poverty is no less their portion. At this moment, I think I see the long faces those good folk would pull if God played a practical joke on them and stayed away at the Last Judgment.

°°°°"Well, then, if you mean to make a fortune quickly, you must either be rich to begin with, or make people believe that you are rich. It is no use playing here except for high stakes; once take to low play, it is all up with you. If in the scores of professions that are open to you, there are ten men who rise very rapidly, people are sure to call them thieves. You can draw your own conclusions. Such is life. It is no cleaner than a kitchen; it reeks like a kitchen; and if you mean to cook your dinner, you must expect to soil your hands; the real art is in getting them clean again, and therein lies the whole morality of our epoch. If I take this tone in speaking of the world to you, I have the right to do so; I know it well. Do you think that I am blaming it? Far from it; the world has always been as it is now. Moralists' strictures will never change it. Mankind are not perfect, but one age is more or less hypocritical than another, and then simpletons say that its morality is high or low. I do not think that the rich are any worse than the poor; man is much the same, high or low, or wherever he is. In a million of these human cattle there may be half a score of bold spirits who rise above the rest, above the laws; I am one of them. And you, if you are cleverer than your fellows, make straight to your end, and hold your head high. But you must lay your account with envy and slander and mediocrity, and every man's hand will be against you. Napoleon met with a Minister of War, Aubry by name, who all but sent him to the colonies.

°°°°"Feel your pulse. Think whether you can get up morning after morning, strengthened in yesterday's purpose. In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline. Listen attentively. You see, I have an idea of my own. My idea is to live a patriarchal life on a vast estate, say a hundred thousand acres, somewhere in the Southern States of America. I mean to be a planter, to have slaves, to make a few snug millions by selling my cattle, timber, and tobacco; I want to live an absolute monarch, and to do just as I please; to lead such a life as no one here in these squalid dens of lath and plaster ever imagines. I am a great poet; I do not write my poems, I feel them, and act them. At this moment I have fifty thousand francs, which might possibly buy forty negroes. I want two hundred thousand francs, because I want to have two hundred negroes to carry out my notions of the patriarachal life properly. Negroes, you see, are like a sort of family ready grown, and there are no inquisitive public prosecutors out there to interfere with you. That investment in ebony ought to mean three or four million francs in ten years' time. If I am successful, no one will ask me who I am. I shall be Mr. Four Millions, an American citizen. I shall be fifty years old by then, and sound and hearty still; I shall enjoy life after my own fashion. In two words, if I find you an heiress with a million, will you give me two hundred thousand francs? Twenty per cent commission, eh? Is that too much? Your little wife will be very much in love with you. Once married, you will show signs of uneasiness and remorse; for a couple of weeks you will be depressed. Then, some night after sundry grimacings, comes the confession, between two kisses, 'Two hundred thousand francs of debts, my darling!' This sort of farce is played every day in Paris, and by young men of the highest fashion. When a young wife has given her heart, she will not refuse her purse. Perhaps you are thinking that you will lose the money for good? Not you. You will make two hundred thousand francs again by some stroke of business. With your capital and your brains you should be able to accumulate as large a fortune as you could wish. ERGO, in six months you will have made your own fortune, and our old friend Vautrin's, and made an amiable woman very happy, to say nothing of your people at home, who must blow on their fingers to warm them, in the winter, for lack of firewood. You need not be surprised at my proposal, nor at the demand I make. Forty-seven out of every sixty great matches here in Paris are made after just such a bargain as this. The Chamber of Notaries compels my gentleman to----"

°°°°"What must I do?" said Rastignac, eagerly interrupting Vautrin's speech.

°°°°"Next to nothing," returned the other, with a slight involuntary movement, the suppressed exultation of the angler when he feels a bite at the end of his line. "Follow me carefully! The heart of a girl whose life is wretched and unhappy is a sponge that will thirstily absorb love; a dry sponge that swells at the first drop of sentiment. If you pay court to a young girl whose existence is a compound of loneliness, despair, and poverty, and who has no suspicion that she will come into a fortune, good Lord! it is quint and quatorze at piquet; it is knowing the numbers of the lottery before-hand; it is speculating in the funds when you have news from a sure source; it is building up a marriage on an indestructible foundation. The girl may come in for millions, and she will fling them, as if they were so many pebbles, at your feet. 'Take it, my beloved! Take it, Alfred, Adolphe, Eugene!' or whoever it was that showed his sense by sacrificing himself for her. And as for sacrificing himself, this is how I understand it. You sell a coat that is getting shabby, so that you can take her to the Cadran bleu, treat her to mushrooms on toast, and then go to the Ambigu-Comique in the evening; you pawn your watch to buy her a shawl. I need not remind you of the fiddle-faddle sentimentality that goes down so well with all women; you spill a few drops of water on your stationery, for instance; those are the tears you shed while far away from her. You look to me as if you were perfectly acquainted with the argot of the heart. Paris, you see, is like a forest in the New World, where you have to deal with a score of varieties of savages--Illinois and Hurons, who live on the proceed of their social hunting. You are a hunter of millions; you set your snares; you use lures and nets; there are many ways of hunting. Some hunt heiresses, others a legacy; some fish for souls, yet others sell their clients, bound hand and foot. Every one who comes back from the chase with his game- bag well filled meets with a warm welcome in good society. In justice to this hospitable part of the world, it must be said that you have to do with the most easy and good-natured of great cities. If the proud aristocracies of the rest of Europe refuse admittance among their ranks to a disreputable millionaire, Paris stretches out a hand to him, goes to his banquets, eats his dinners, and hobnobs with his infamy."

°°°°"But where is such a girl to be found?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Under your eyes; she is yours already."

°°°°"Mlle. Victorine?"

°°°°"Precisely."

°°°°"And what was that you said?"

°°°°"She is in love with you already, your little Baronne de Rastignac!"

°°°°"She has not a penny," Eugene continued, much mystified.

°°°°"Ah! now we are coming to it! Just another word or two, and it will all be clear enough. Her father, Taillefer, is an old scoundrel; it is said that he murdered one of his friends at the time of the Revolution. He is one of your comedians that sets up to have opinions of his own. He is a banker--senior partner in the house of Frederic Taillefer and Company. He has one son, and means to leave all he has to the boy, to the prejudice of Victorine. For my part, I don't like to see injustice of this sort. I am like Don Quixote, I have a fancy for defending the weak against the strong. If it should please God to take that youth away from him, Taillefer would have only his daughter left; he would want to leave his money to some one or other; an absurd notion, but it is only human nature, and he is not likely to have any more children, as I know. Victorine is gentle and amiable; she will soon twist her father round her fingers, and set his head spinning like a German top by plying him with sentiment! She will be too much touched by your devotion to forget you; you will marry her. I mean to play Providence for you, and Providence is to do my will. I have a friend whom I have attached closely to myself, a colonel in the Army of the Loire, who has just been transferred into the garde royale. He has taken my advice and turned ultra-royalist; he is not one of those fools who never change their opinions. Of all pieces of advice, my cherub, I would give you this--don't stick to your opinions any more than to your words. If any one asks you for them, let him have them-- at a price. A man who prides himself on going in a straight line through life is an idiot who believes in infallibility. There are no such things as principles; there are only events, and there are no laws but those of expediency: a man of talent accepts events and the circumstances in which he finds himself, and turns everything to his own ends. If laws and principles were fixed and invariable, nations would not change them as readily as we change our shirts. The individual is not obliged to be more particular than the nation. A man whose services to France have been of the very slightest is a fetich looked on with superstitious awe because he has always seen everything in red; but he is good, at the most, to be put into the Museum of Arts and Crafts, among the automatic machines, and labeled La Fayette; while the prince at whom everybody flings a stone, the man who despises humanity so much that he spits as many oaths as he is asked for in the face of humanity, saved France from being torn in pieces at the Congress of Vienna; and they who should have given him laurels fling mud at him. Oh! I know something of affairs, I can tell you; I have the secrets of many men! Enough. When I find three minds in agreement as to the application of a principle, I shall have a fixed and immovable opinion--I shall have to wait a long while first. In the Tribunals you will not find three judges of the same opinion on a single point of law. To return to the man I was telling you of. He would crucify Jesus Christ again, if I bade him. At a word from his old chum Vautrin he will pick a quarrel with a scamp that will not send so much as five francs to his sister, poor girl, and" (here Vautrin rose to his feet and stood like a fencing-master about to lunge)--"turn him off into the dark!" he added.

°°°°"How frightful!" said Eugene. "You do not really mean it? M. Vautrin, you are joking!"

°°°°"There! there! Keep cool!" said the other. "Don't behave like a baby. But if you find any amusement in it, be indignant, flare up! Say that I am a scoundrel, a rascal, a rogue, a bandit; but do not call me a blackleg nor a spy! There, out with it, fire away! I forgive you; it is quite natural at your age. I was like that myself once. Only remember this, you will do worse things yourself some day. You will flirt with some pretty woman and take her money. You have thought of that, of course," said Vautrin, "for how are you to succeed unless love is laid under contribution? There are no two ways about virtue, my dear student; it either is, or it is not. Talk of doing penance for your sins! It is a nice system of business, when you pay for your crime by an act of contrition! You seduce a woman that you may set your foot on such and such a rung of the social ladder; you sow dissension among the children of a family; you descend, in short, to every base action that can be committed at home or abroad, to gain your own ends for your own pleasure or your profit; and can you imagine that these are acts of faith, hope, or charity? How is it that a dandy, who in a night has robbed a boy of half his fortune, gets only a couple of months in prison; while a poor devil who steals a banknote for a thousand francs, with aggravating circumstances, is condemned to penal servitude? Those are your laws. Not a single provision but lands you in some absurdity. That man with yellow gloves and a golden tongue commits many a murder; he sheds no blood, but he drains his victim's veins as surely; a desperado forces open a door with a crowbar, dark deeds both of them! You yourself will do every one of those things that I suggest to you to-day, bar the bloodshed. Do you believe that there is any absolute standard in this world? Despise mankind and find out the meshes that you can slip through in the net of the Code. The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out, because it was properly executed."

°°°°"Silence, sir! I will not hear any more; you make me doubt myself. At this moment my sentiments are all my science."

°°°°"Just as you please, my fine fellow; I did think you were so weak-minded," said Vautrin, "I shall say no more about it. One last word, however," and he looked hard at the student--"you have my secret," he said.

°°°°"A young man who refuses your offer knows that he must forget it."

°°°°"Quite right, quite right; I am glad to hear you say so. Somebody else might not be so scrupulous, you see. Keep in mind what I want to do for you. I will give you a fortnight. The offer is still open."

°°°°"What a head of iron the man has!" said Eugene to himself, as he watched Vautrin walk unconcernedly away with his cane under his arm. "Yet Mme. de Beauseant said as much more gracefully; he has only stated the case in cruder language. He would tear my heart with claws of steel. What made me think of going to Mme. de Nucingen? He guessed my motives before I knew them myself. To sum it up, that outlaw has told me more about virtue than all I have learned from men and books. If virtue admits of no compromises, I have certainly robbed my sisters," he said, throwing down the bags on the table.

°°°°He sat down again and fell, unconscious of his surroundings, into deep thought.

°°°°"To be faithful to an ideal of virtue! A heroic martyrdom! Pshaw! every one believes in virtue, but who is virtuous? Nations have made an idol of Liberty, but what nation on the face of the earth is free? My youth is still like a blue and cloudless sky. If I set myself to obtain wealth or power, does it mean that I must make up my mind to lie, and fawn, and cringe, and swagger, and flatter, and dissemble? To consent to be the servant of others who have likewise fawned, and lied, and flattered? Must I cringe to them before I can hope to be their accomplice? Well, then, I decline. I mean to work nobly and with a single heart. I will work day and night; I will owe my fortune to nothing but my own exertions. It may be the slowest of all roads to success, but I shall lay my head on the pillow at night untroubled by evil thoughts. Is there a greater thing than this--to look back over your life and know that it is stainless as a lily? I and my life are like a young man and his betrothed. Vautrin has put before me all that comes after ten years of marriage. The devil! my head is swimming. I do not want to think at all; the heart is a sure guide."

°°°°Eugene was roused from his musings by the voice of the stout Sylvie, who announced that the tailor had come, and Eugene therefore made his appearance before the man with the two money bags, and was not ill pleased that it should be so. When he had tried on his dress suit, he put on his new morning costume, which completely metamorphosed him.

°°°°"I am quite equal to M. de Trailles," he said to himself. "In short, I look like a gentleman."

°°°°"You asked me, sir, if I knew the houses where Mme. de Nucingen goes," Father Goriot's voice spoke from the doorway of Eugene's room."

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Very well then, she is going to the Marechale Carigliano's ball on Monday. If you can manage to be there, I shall hear from you whether my two girls enjoyed themselves, and how they were dressed, and all about it in fact."

°°°°"How did you find that out, my good Goriot?" said Eugene, putting a chair by the fire for his visitor.

°°°°"Her maid told me. I hear all about their doings from Therese and Constance," he added gleefully.

°°°°The old man looked like a lover who is still young enough to be made happy by the discovery of some little stratagem which brings him information of his lady-love without her knowledge.

°°°°"YOU will see them both!" he said, giving artless expression to a pang of jealousy.

°°°°"I do not know," answered Eugene. "I will go to Mme. de Beauseant and ask her for an introduction to the Marechale."

°°°°Eugene felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought of appearing before the Vicomtesse, dressed as henceforward he always meant to be. The "abysses of the human heart," in the moralists' phrase, are only insidious thoughts, involuntary promptings of personal interest. The instinct of enjoyment turns the scale; those rapid changes of purpose which have furnished the text for so much rhetoric are calculations prompted by the hope of pleasure. Rastignac beholding himself well dressed and impeccable as to gloves and boots, forgot his virtuous resolutions. Youth, moreover, when bent upon wrongdoing does not dare to behold himself in the mirror of consciousness; mature age has seen itself; and therein lies the whole difference between these two phases of life.

°°°°A friendship between Eugene and his neighbor, Father Goriot, had been growing up for several days past. This secret friendship and the antipathy that the student had begun to entertain for Vautrin arose from the same psychological causes. The bold philosopher who shall investigate the effects of mental action upon the physical world will doubtless find more than one proof of the material nature of our sentiments in other animals. What physiognomist is as quick to discern character as a dog is to discover from a stranger's face whether this is a friend or no? Those by-words--"atoms," "affinities"--are facts surviving in modern languages for the confusion of philosophic wiseacres who amuse themselves by winnowing the chaff of language to find its grammatical roots. We FEEL that we are loved. Our sentiments make themselves felt in everything, even at a great distance. A letter is a living soul, and so faithful an echo of the voice that speaks in it, that finer natures look upon a letter as one of love's most precious treasures. Father Goriot's affection was of the instinctive order, a canine affection raised to a sublime pitch; he had scented compassion in the air, and the kindly respect and youthful sympathy in the student's heart. This friendship had, however, scarcely reached the stage at which confidences are made. Though Eugene had spoken of his wish to meet Mme. de Nucingen, it was not because he counted on the old man to introduce him to her house, for he hoped that his own audacity might stand him in good stead. All that Father Goriot had said as yet about his daughters had referred to the remarks that the student had made so freely in public on that day of the two visits.

°°°°"How could you think that Mme. de Restaud bore you a grudge for mentioning my name?" he had said on the day following that scene at dinner. "My daughters are very fond of me; I am a happy father; but my sons-in-law have behaved badly to me, and rather than make trouble between my darlings and their husbands, I choose to see my daughters secretly. Fathers who can see their daughters at any time have no idea of all the pleasure that all this mystery gives me; I cannot always see mine when I wish, do you understand? So when it is fine I walk out in the Champs- Elysees, after finding out from their waiting-maids whether my daughters mean to go out. I wait near the entrance; my heart beats fast when the carriages begin to come; I admire them in their dresses, and as they pass they give me a little smile, and it seems as if everything was lighted up for me by a ray of bright sunlight. I wait, for they always go back the same way, and then I see them again; the fresh air has done them good and brought color into their cheeks; all about me people say, 'What a beautiful woman that is!' and it does my heart good to hear them.

°°°°"Are they not my own flesh and blood? I love the very horses that draw them; I envy the little lap-dog on their knees. Their happiness is my life. Every one loves after his own fashion, and mine does no one any harm; why should people trouble their heads about me? I am happy in my own way. Is there any law against going to see my girls in the evening when they are going out to a ball? And what a disappointment it is when I get there too late, and am told that 'Madame has gone out!' Once I waited till three o'clock in the morning for Nasie; I had not seen her for two whole days. I was so pleased, that it was almost too much for me! Please do not speak of me unless it is to say how good my daughters are to me. They are always wanting to heap presents upon me, but I will not have it. 'Just keep your money,' I tell them. 'What should I do with it? I want nothing.' And what am I, sir, after all? An old carcase, whose soul is always where my daughters are. When you have seen Mme. de Nucingen, tell me which you like the most," said the old man after a moment's pause, while Eugene put the last touches to his toilette. The student was about to go out to walk in the Garden of the Tuileries until the hour when he could venture to appear in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room.

°°°°That walk was a turning-point in Eugene's career. Several women noticed him; he looked so handsome, so young, and so well dressed. This almost admiring attention gave a new turn to his thoughts. He forgot his sisters and the aunt who had robbed herself for him; he no longer remembered his own virtuous scruples. He had seen hovering above his head the fiend so easy to mistake for an angel, the Devil with rainbow wings, who scatters rubies, and aims his golden shafts at palace fronts, who invests women with purple, and thrones with a glory that dazzles the eyes of fools till they forget the simple origins of royal dominion; he had heard the rustle of that Vanity whose tinsel seems to us to be the symbol of power. However cynical Vautrin's words had been, they had made an impression on his mind, as the sordid features of the old crone who whispers, "A lover, and gold in torrents," remain engraven on a young girl's memory.

°°°°Eugene lounged about the walks till it was nearly five o'clock, then he went to Mme. de Beauseant, and received one of the terrible blows against which young hearts are defenceless. Hitherto the Vicomtesse had received him with the kindly urbanity, the bland grace of manner that is the result of fine breeding, but is only complete when it comes from the heart.

°°°°Today Mme. de Beauseant bowed constrainedly, and spoke curtly:

°°°°"M. de Rastignac, I cannot possibly see you, at least not at this moment. I am engaged . . ."

°°°°An observer, and Rastignac instantly became an observer, could read the whole history, the character and customs of caste, in the phrase, in the tones of her voice, in her glance and bearing. He caught a glimpse of the iron hand beneath the velvet glove-- the personality, the egoism beneath the manner, the wood beneath the varnish. In short, he heard that unmistakable I THE KING that issues from the plumed canopy of the throne, and finds its last echo under the crest of the simplest gentleman.

°°°°Eugene had trusted too implicitly to the generosity of a woman; he could not believe in her haughtiness. Like all the unfortunate, he had subscribed, in all good faith, the generous compact which should bind the benefactor to the recipient, and the first article in that bond, between two large-hearted natures, is a perfect equality. The kindness which knits two souls together is as rare, as divine, and as little understood as the passion of love, for both love and kindness are the lavish generosity of noble natures. Rastignac was set upon going to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball, so he swallowed down this rebuff.

°°°°"Madame," he faltered out, "I would not have come to trouble you about a trifling matter; be so kind as to permit me to see you later, I can wait."

°°°°"Very well, come and dine with me," she said, a little confused by the harsh way in which she had spoken, for this lady was as genuinely kind-hearted as she was high-born.

°°°°Eugene was touched by this sudden relenting, but none the less he said to himself as he went away, "Crawl in the dust, put up with every kind of treatment. What must the rest of the world be like when one of the kindest of women forgets all her promises of befriending me in a moment, and tosses me aside like an old shoe? So it is every one for himself? It is true that her house is not a shop, and I have put myself in the wrong by needing her help. You should cut your way through the world like a cannon ball, as Vautrin said."

°°°°But the student's bitter thoughts were soon dissipated by the pleasure which he promised himself in this dinner with the Vicomtesse. Fate seemed to determine that the smallest accidents in his life should combine to urge him into a career, which the terrible sphinx of the Maison Vauquer had described as a field of battle where you must either slay or be slain, and cheat to avoid being cheated. You leave your conscience and your heart at the barriers, and wear a mask on entering into this game of grim earnest, where, as in ancient Sparta, you must snatch your prize without being detected if you would deserve the crown.

°°°°On his return he found the Vicomtesse gracious and kindly, as she had always been to him. They went together to the dining-room, where the Vicomte was waiting for his wife. In the time of the Restoration the luxury of the table was carried, as is well known, to the highest degree, and M. de Beauseant, like many jaded men of the world, had few pleasures left but those of good cheer; in this matter, in fact, he was a gourmand of the schools of Louis XVIII. and of the Duc d'Escars, and luxury was supplemented by splendor. Eugene, dining for the first time in a house where the traditions of grandeur had descended through many generations, had never seen any spectacle like this that now met his eyes. In the time of the Empire, balls had always ended with a supper, because the officers who took part in them must be fortified for immediate service, and even in Paris might be called upon to leave the ballroom for the battlefield. This arrangement had gone out of fashion under the Monarchy, and Eugene had so far only been asked to dances. The self-possession which pre-eminently distinguished him in later life already stood him in good stead, and he did not betray his amazement. Yet as he saw for the first time the finely wrought silver plate, the completeness of every detail, the sumptuous dinner, noiselessly served, it was difficult for such an ardent imagination not to prefer this life of studied and refined luxury to the hardships of the life which he had chosen only that morning.

°°°°His thoughts went back for a moment to the lodging-house, and with a feeling of profound loathing, he vowed to himself that at New Year he would go; prompted at least as much by a desire to live among cleaner surroundings as by a wish to shake off Vautrin, whose huge hand he seemed to feel on his shoulder at that moment. When you consider the numberless forms, clamorous or mute, that corruption takes in Paris, common-sense begins to wonder what mental aberration prompted the State to establish great colleges and schools there, and assemble young men in the capital; how it is that pretty women are respected, or that the gold coin displayed in the money-changer's wooden saucers does not take to itself wings in the twinkling of an eye; and when you come to think further, how comparatively few cases of crime there are, and to count up the misdemeanors committed by youth, is there not a certain amount of respect due to these patient Tantaluses who wrestle with themselves and nearly always come off victorious? The struggles of the poor student in Paris, if skilfully drawn, would furnish a most dramatic picture of modern civilization.

°°°°In vain Mme. de Beauseant looked at Eugene as if asking him to speak; the student was tongue-tied in the Vicomte's presence.

°°°°"Are you going to take me to the Italiens this evening?" the Vicomtesse asked her husband.

°°°°"You cannot doubt that I should obey you with pleasure," he answered, and there was a sarcastic tinge in his politeness which Eugene did not detect, "but I ought to go to meet some one at the Varietes."

°°°°"His mistress," said she to herself.

°°°°"Then, is not Ajuda coming for you this evening?" inquired the Vicomte.

°°°°"No," she answered, petulantly.

°°°°"Very well, then, if you really must have an arm, take that of M. de Rastignac."

°°°°The Vicomtess turned to Eugene with a smile.

°°°°"That would be a very compromising step for you," she said.

°°°°" 'A Frenchman loves danger, because in danger there is glory,' to quote M. de Chateaubriand," said Rastignac, with a bow.

°°°°A few moments later he was sitting beside Mme. de Beauseant in a brougham, that whirled them through the streets of Paris to a fashionable theatre. It seemed to him that some fairy magic had suddenly transported him into a box facing the stage. All the lorgnettes of the house were pointed at him as he entered, and at the Vicomtesse in her charming toilette. He went from enchantment to enchantment.

°°°°"You must talk to me, you know," said Mme. de Beauseant. "Ah! look! There is Mme. de Nucingen in the third box from ours. Her sister and M. de Trailles are on the other side."

°°°°The Vicomtesse glanced as she spoke at the box where Mlle. de Rochefide should have been; M. d'Ajuda was not there, and Mme. de Beauseant's face lighted up in a marvelous way.

°°°°"She is charming," said Eugene, after looking at Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"She has white eyelashes."

°°°°"Yes, but she has such a pretty slender figure!"

°°°°"Her hands are large."

°°°°"Such beautiful eyes!"

°°°°"Her face is long."

°°°°"Yes, but length gives distinction."

°°°°"It is lucky for her that she has some distinction in her face. Just see how she fidgets with her opera-glass! The Goriot blood shows itself in every movement," said the Vicomtesse, much to Eugene's astonishment.

°°°°Indeed, Mme. de Beauseant seemed to be engaged in making a survey of the house, and to be unconscious of Mme. Nucingen's existence; but no movement made by the latter was lost upon the Vicomtesse. The house was full of the loveliest women in Paris, so that Delphine de Nucingen was not a little flattered to receive the undivided attention of Mme. de Beauseant's young, handsome, and well-dressed cousin, who seemed to have no eyes for any one else.

°°°°"If you look at her so persistently, you will make people talk, M. de Rastignac. You will never succeed if you fling yourself at any one's head like that."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Eugene, "you have protected me indeed so far, and now if you would complete your work, I only ask of you a favor which will cost you but little, and be of very great service to me. I have lost my heart."

°°°°"Already!"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"And to that woman!"

°°°°"How could I aspire to find any one else to listen to me?" he asked, with a keen glance at his cousin. "Her Grace the Duchesse de Carigliano is a friend of the Duchesse de Berri," he went on, after a pause; "you are sure to see her, will you be so kind as to present me to her, and to take me to her ball on Monday? I shall meet Mme. de Nucingen there, and enter into my first skirmish."

°°°°"Willingly," she said. "If you have a liking for her already, your affairs of the heart are like to prosper. That is de Marsay over there in the Princesse Galathionne's box. Mme. de Nucingen is racked with jealousy. There is no better time for approaching a woman, especially if she happens to be a banker's wife. All those ladies of the Chaussee-d'Antin love revenge."

°°°°"Then, what would you do yourself in such a case?"

°°°°"I should suffer in silence."

°°°°At this point the Marquis d'Ajuda appeared in Mme. de Beauseant's box.

°°°°"I have made a muddle of my affairs to come to you," he said, "and I am telling you about it, so that it may not be a sacrifice."

°°°°Eugene saw the glow of joy on the Vicomtesse's face, and knew that this was love, and learned the difference between love and the affectations of Parisian coquetry. He admired his cousin, grew mute, and yielded his place to M. d'Ajuda with a sigh.

°°°°"How noble, how sublime a woman is when she loves like that!" he said to himself. "And HE could forsake her for a doll! Oh! how could any one forsake her?"

°°°°There was a boy's passionate indignation in his heart. He could have flung himself at Mme. de Beauseant's feet; he longed for the power of the devil if he could snatch her away and hide her in his heart, as an eagle snatches up some white yeanling from the plains and bears it to its eyrie. It was humiliating to him to think that in all this gallery of fair pictures he had not one picture of his own. "To have a mistress and an almost royal position is a sign of power," he said to himself. And he looked at Mme. de Nucingen as a man measures another who has insulted him.

°°°°The Vicomtesse turned to him, and the expression of her eyes thanked him a thousand times for his discretion. The first act came to an end just then.

°°°°"Do you know Mme. de Nucingen well enough to present M. de Rastignac to her?" she asked of the Marquis d'Ajuda.

°°°°"She will be delighted," said the Marquis. The handsome Portuguese rose as he spoke and took the student's arm, and in another moment Eugene found himself in Mme. de Nucingen's box.

°°°°"Madame," said the Marquis, "I have the honor of presenting to you the Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac; he is a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's. You have made so deep an impression upon him, that I thought I would fill up the measure of his happiness by bringing him nearer to his divinity."

°°°°Words spoken half jestingly to cover their somewhat disrespectful import; but such an implication, if carefully disguised, never gives offence to a woman. Mme. de Nucingen smiled, and offered Eugene the place which her husband had just left.

°°°°"I do not venture to suggest that you should stay with me, monsieur," she said. "Those who are so fortunate as to be in Mme. de Beauseant's company do not desire to leave it."

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, lowering his voice, "I think that to please my cousin I should remain with you. Before my lord Marquis came we were speaking of you and of your exceedingly distinguished appearance," he added aloud.

°°°°M. d'Ajuda turned and left them.

°°°°"Are you really going to stay with me, monsieur?" asked the Baroness. "Then we shall make each other's acquaintance. Mme. de Restaud told me about you, and has made me anxious to meet you."

°°°°"She must be very insincere, then, for she has shut her door on me."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Madame, I will tell you honestly the reason why; but I must crave your indulgence before confiding such a secret to you. I am your father's neighbor; I had no idea that Mme. de Restaud was his daughter. I was rash enough to mention his name; I meant no harm, but I annoyed your sister and her husband very much. You cannot think how severely the Duchesse de Langeais and my cousin blamed this apostasy on a daughter's part, as a piece of bad taste. I told them all about it, and they both burst out laughing. Then Mme. de Beauseant made some comparison between you and your sister, speaking in high terms of you, and saying how very fond you were of my neighbor, M. Goriot. And, indeed, how could you help loving him? He adores you so passionately that I am jealous already. We talked about you this morning for two hours. So this evening I was quite full of all that your father had told me, and while I was dining with my cousin I said that you could not be as beautiful as affectionate. Mme. de Beauseant meant to gratify such warm admiration, I think, when she brought me here, telling me, in her gracious way, that I should see you."

°°°°"Then, even now, I owe you a debt of gratitude, monsieur," said the banker's wife. "We shall be quite old friends in a little while."

°°°°"Although a friendship with you could not be like an ordinary friendship," said Rastignac; "I should never wish to be your friend."

°°°°Such stereotyped phrases as these, in the mouths of beginners, possess an unfailing charm for women, and are insipid only when read coldly; for a young man's tone, glance and attitude give a surpassing eloquence to the banal phrases. Mme. de Nucingen thought that Rastignac was adorable. Then, woman-like, being at a loss how to reply to the student's outspoken admiration, she answered a previous remark.

°°°°"Yes, it is very wrong of my sister to treat our poor father as she does," she said; "he has been a Providence to us. It was not until M. de Nucingen positively ordered me only to receive him in the mornings that I yielded the point. But I have been unhappy about it for a long while; I have shed many tears over it. This violence to my feelings, with my husband's brutal treatment, have been two causes of my unhappy married life. There is certainly no woman in Paris whose lot seems more enviable than mine, and yet, in reality, there is not one so much to be pitied. You will think I must be out of my senses to talk to you like this; but you know my father, and I cannot regard you as a stranger."

°°°°"You will find no one," said Eugene, "who longs as eagerly as I do to be yours. What do all women seek? Happiness." (He answered his own question in low, vibrating tones.) "And if happiness for a woman means that she is to be loved and adored, to have a friend to whom she can pour out her wishes, her fancies, her sorrows and joys; to whom she can lay bare her heart and soul, and all her fair defects and her gracious virtues, without fear of a betrayal; believe me, the devotion and the warmth that never fails can only be found in the heart of a young man who, at a bare sign from you, would go to his death, who neither knows nor cares to know anything as yet of the world, because you will be all the world to him. I myself, you see (you will laugh at my simplicity), have just come from a remote country district; I am quite new to this world of Paris; I have only known true and loving hearts; and I made up my mind that here I should find no love. Then I chanced to meet my cousin, and to see my cousin's heart from very near; I have divined the inexhaustible treasures of passion, and, like Cherubino, I am the lover of all women, until the day comes when I find THE woman to whom I may devote myself. As soon as I saw you, as soon as I came into the theatre this evening, I felt myself borne towards you as if by the current of a stream. I had so often thought of you already, but I had never dreamed that you would be so beautiful! Mme. de Beauseant told me that I must not look so much at you. She does not know the charm of your red lips, your fair face, nor see how soft your eyes are. . . . I also am beginning to talk nonsense; but let me talk."

°°°°Nothing pleases a woman better than to listen to such whispered words as these; the most puritanical among them listens even when she ought not to reply to them; and Rastignac, having once begun, continued to pour out his story, dropping his voice, that she might lean and listen; and Mme. de Nucingen, smiling, glanced from time to time at de Marsay, who still sat in the Princesse Galathionne's box.

°°°°Rastignac did not leave Mme. de Nucingen till her husband came to take her home.

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, "I shall have the pleasure of calling upon you before the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball."

°°°°"If Matame infites you to come," said the Baron, a thickset Alsatian, with indications of a sinister cunning in his full-moon countenance, "you are quide sure of being well receifed."

°°°°"My affairs seem to be in a promising way," said Eugene to himself.--" 'Can you love me?' I asked her, and she did not resent it. The bit is in the horse's mouth, and I have only to mount and ride;" and with that he went to pay his respects to Mme. de Beauseant, who was leaving the theatre on d'Ajuda's arm.

°°°°The student did not know that the Baroness' thoughts had been wandering; that she was even then expecting a letter from de Marsay, one of those letters that bring about a rupture that rends the soul; so, happy in his delusion, Eugene went with the Vicomtesse to the peristyle, where people were waiting till their carriages were announced.

°°°°"That cousin of yours is hardly recognizable for the same man," said the Portuguese laughingly to the Vicomtesse, when Eugene had taken leave of them. "He will break the bank. He is as supple as an eel; he will go a long way, of that I am sure. Who else could have picked out a woman for him, as you did, just when she needed consolation?"

°°°°"But it is not certain that she does not still love the faithless lover," said Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°The student meanwhile walked back from the Theatre-Italien to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, making the most delightful plans as he went. He had noticed how closely Mme. de Restaud had scrutinized him when he sat beside Mme. de Nucingen, and inferred that the Countess' doors would not be closed in the future. Four important houses were now open to him--for he meant to stand well with the Marechale; he had four supporters in the inmost circle of society in Paris. Even now it was clear to him that, once involved in this intricate social machinery, he must attach himself to a spoke of the wheel that was to turn and raise his fortunes; he would not examine himself too curiously as to the methods, but he was certain of the end, and conscious of the power to gain and keep his hold.

°°°°"If Mme. de Nucingen takes an interest in me, I will teach her how to manage her husband. That husband of hers is a great speculator; he might put me in the way of making a fortune by a single stroke."

°°°°He did not say this bluntly in so many words; as yet, indeed, he was not sufficient of a diplomatist to sum up a situation, to see its possibilities at a glance, and calculate the chances in his favor. These were nothing but hazy ideas that floated over his mental horizon; they were less cynical than Vautrin's notions; but if they had been tried in the crucible of conscience, no very pure result would have issued from the test. It is by a succession of such like transactions that men sink at last to the level of the relaxed morality of this epoch, when there have never been so few of those who square their courses with their theories, so few of those noble characters who do not yield to temptation, for whom the slightest deviation from the line of rectitude is a crime. To these magnificent types of uncompromising Right we owe two masterpieces--the Alceste of Moliere, and, in our own day, the characters of Jeanie Deans and her father in Sir Walter Scott's novel. Perhaps a work which should chronicle the opposite course, which should trace out all the devious courses through which a man of the world, a man of ambitions, drags his conscience, just steering clear of crime that he may gain his end and yet save appearances, such a chronicle would be no less edifying and no less dramatic.

°°°°Rastignac went home. He was fascinated by Mme. de Nucingen; he seemed to see her before him, slender and graceful as a swallow. He recalled the intoxicating sweetness of her eyes, her fair hair, the delicate silken tissue of the skin, beneath which it almost seemed to him that he could see the blood coursing; the tones of her voice still exerted a spell over him; he had forgotten nothing; his walk perhaps heated his imagination by sending a glow of warmth through his veins. He knocked unceremoniously at Goriot's door.

°°°°"I have seen Mme. Delphine, neighbor," said he.

°°°°"Where?"

°°°°"At the Italiens."

°°°°"Did she enjoy it?. . . . Just come inside," and the old man left his bed, unlocked the door, and promptly returned again.

°°°°It was the first time that Eugene had been in Father Goriot's room, and he could not control his feeling of amazement at the contrast between the den in which the father lived and the costume of the daughter whom he had just beheld. The window was curtainless, the walls were damp, in places the varnished wall- paper had come away and gave glimpses of the grimy yellow plaster beneath. The wretched bed on which the old man lay boasted but one thin blanket, and a wadded quilt made out of large pieces of Mme. Vauquer's old dresses. The floor was damp and gritty. Opposite the window stood a chest of drawers made of rosewood, one of the old-fashioned kind with a curving front and brass handles, shaped like rings of twisted vine stems covered with flowers and leaves. On a venerable piece of furniture with a wooden shelf stood a ewer and basin and shaving apparatus. A pair of shoes stood in one corner; a night-table by the bed had neither a door nor marble slab. There was not a trace of a fire in the empty grate; the square walnut table with the crossbar against which Father Goriot had crushed and twisted his posset- dish stood near the hearth. The old man's hat was lying on a broken-down bureau. An armchair stuffed with straw and a couple of chairs completed the list of ramshackle furniture. From the tester of the bed, tied to the ceiling by a piece of rag, hung a strip of some cheap material in large red and black checks. No poor drudge in a garret could be worse lodged than Father Goriot in Mme. Vauquer's lodging-house. The mere sight of the room sent a chill through you and a sense of oppression; it was like the worst cell in a prison. Luckily, Goriot could not see the effect that his surroundings produced on Eugene as the latter deposited his candle on the night-table. The old man turned round, keeping the bedclothes huddled up to his chin.

°°°°"Well," he said, "and which do you like the best, Mme. de Restaud or Mme. de Nucingen?"

°°°°"I like Mme. Delphine the best," said the law student, "because she loves you the best."

°°°°At the words so heartily spoken the old man's hand slipped out from under the bedclothes and grasped Eugene's.

°°°°"Thank you, thank you," he said, gratefully. "Then what did she say about me?"

°°°°The student repeated the Baroness' remarks with some embellishments of his own, the old man listening the while as though he heard a voice from Heaven.

°°°°"Dear child!" he said. "Yes, yes, she is very fond of me. But you must not believe all that she tells you about Anastasie. The two sisters are jealous of each other, you see, another proof of their affection. Mme. de Restaud is very fond of me too. I know she is. A father sees his children as God sees all of us; he looks into the very depths of their hearts; he knows their intentions; and both of them are so loving. Oh! if I only had good sons-in-law, I should be too happy, and I dare say there is no perfect happiness here below. If I might live with them-- simply hear their voices, know that they are there, see them go and come as I used to do at home when they were still with me; why, my heart bounds at the thought. . . . Were they nicely dressed?"

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene. "But, M. Goriot, how is it that your daughters have such fine houses, while you live in such a den as this?"

°°°°"Dear me, why should I want anything better?" he replied, with seeming carelessness. "I can't quite explain to you how it is; I am not used to stringing words together properly, but it all lies there----" he said, tapping his heart. "My real life is in my two girls, you see; and so long as they are happy, and smartly dressed, and have soft carpets under their feet, what does it matter what clothes I wear or where I lie down of a night? I shall never feel cold so long as they are warm; I shall never feel dull if they are laughing. I have no troubles but theirs. When you, too, are a father, and you hear your children's little voices, you will say to yourself, 'That has all come from me.' You will feel that those little ones are akin to every drop in your veins, that they are the very flower of your life (and what else are they?); you will cleave so closely to them that you seem to feel every movement that they make. Everywhere I hear their voices sounding in my ears. If they are sad, the look in their eyes freezes my blood. Some day you will find out that there is far more happiness in another's happiness than in your own. It is something that I cannot explain, something within that sends a glow of warmth all through you. In short, I live my life three times over. Shall I tell you something funny? Well, then, since I have been a father, I have come to understand God. He is everywhere in the world, because the whole world comes from Him. And it is just the same with my children, monsieur. Only, I love my daughters better than God loves the world, for the world is not so beautiful as God Himself is, but my children are more beautiful than I am. Their lives are so bound up with mine that I felt somehow that you would see them this evening. Great Heaven! If any man would make my little Delphine as happy as a wife is when she is loved, I would black his boots and run on his errands. That miserable M. de Marsay is a cur; I know all about him from her maid. A longing to wring his neck comes over me now and then. He does not love her! does not love a pearl of a woman, with a voice like a nightingale and shaped like a model. Where can her eyes have been when she married that great lump of an Alsatian? They ought both of them to have married young men, good-looking and good-tempered--but, after all, they had their own way."

°°°°Father Goriot was sublime. Eugene had never yet seen his face light up as it did now with the passionate fervor of a father's love. It is worthy of remark that strong feeling has a very subtle and pervasive power; the roughest nature, in the endeavor to express a deep and sincere affection, communicates to others the influence that has put resonance into the voice, and eloquence into every gesture, wrought a change in the very features of the speaker; for under the inspiration of passion the stupidest human being attains to the highest eloquence of ideas, if not of language, and seems to move in some sphere of light. In the old man's tones and gesture there was something just then of the same spell that a great actor exerts over his audience. But does not the poet in us find expression in our affections?

°°°°"Well," said Eugene, "perhaps you will not be sorry to hear that she is pretty sure to break with de Marsay before long. That sprig of fashion has left her for the Princesse Galathionne. For my part, I fell in love with Mme. Delphine this evening."

°°°°"Stuff!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"I did indeed, and she did not regard me with aversion. For a whole hour we talked of love, and I am to go to call on her on Saturday, the day after to-morrow."

°°°°"Oh! how I should love you, if she should like you. You are kind- hearted; you would never make her miserable. If you were to forsake her, I would cut your throat at once. A woman does not love twice, you see! Good heavens! what nonsense I am talking, M. Eugene! It is cold; you ought not to stay here. MON DIEU! so you have heard her speak? What message did she give you for me?"

°°°°"None at all," said Eugene to himself; aloud he answered, "She told me to tell you that your daughter sends you a good kiss."

°°°°"Good-night, neighbor! Sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you! I have mine already made for me by that message from her. May God grant you all your desires! You have come in like a good angel on me to-night, and brought with you the air that my daughter breathes."

°°°°"Poor old fellow!" said Eugene as he lay down. "It is enough to melt a heart of stone. His daughter no more thought of him than of the Grand Turk."

°°°°Ever after this conference Goriot looked upon his neighbor as a friend, a confidant such as he had never hoped to find; and there was established between the two the only relationship that could attach this old man to another man. The passions never miscalculate. Father Goriot felt that this friendship brought him closer to his daughter Delphine; he thought that he should find a warmer welcome for himself if the Baroness should care for Eugene. Moreover, he had confided one of his troubles to the younger man. Mme. de Nucingen, for whose happiness he prayed a thousand times daily, had never known the joys of love. Eugene was certainly (to make use of his own expression) one of the nicest young men that he had ever seen, and some prophetic instinct seemed to tell him that Eugene was to give her the happiness which had not been hers. These were the beginnings of a friendship that grew up between the old man and his neighbor; but for this friendship the catastrophe of the drama must have remained a mystery.

°°°°The affection with which Father Goriot regarded Eugene, by whom he seated himself at breakfast, the change in Goriot's face, which as a rule, looked as expressionless as a plaster cast, and a few words that passed between the two, surprised the other lodgers. Vautrin, who saw Eugene for the first time since their interview, seemed as if he would fain read the student's very soul. During the night Eugene had had some time in which to scan the vast field which lay before him; and now, as he remembered yesterday's proposal, the thought of Mlle. Taillefer's dowry came, of course, to his mind, and he could not help thinking of Victorine as the most exemplary youth may think of an heiress. It chanced that their eyes met. The poor girl did not fail to see that Eugene looked very handsome in his new clothes. So much was said in the glance, thus exchanged, that Eugene could not doubt but that he was associated in her mind with the vague hopes that lie dormant in a girl's heart and gather round the first attractive newcomer. "Eight hundred thousand francs!" a voice cried in his ears, but suddenly he took refuge in the memories of yesterday evening, thinking that his extemporized passion for Mme. de Nucingen was a talisman that would preserve him from this temptation.

°°°°"They gave Rossini's Barber of Seville at the Italiens yesterday evening," he remarked. "I never heard such delicious music. Good gracious! how lucky people are to have a box at the Italiens!"

°°°°Father Goriot drank in every word that Eugene let fall, and watched him as a dog watches his master's slightest movement.

°°°°"You men are like fighting cocks," said Mme. Vauquer; "you do what you like."

°°°°"How did you get back?" inquired Vautrin.

°°°°"I walked," answered Eugene.

°°°°"For my own part," remarked the tempter, "I do not care about doing things by halves. If I want to enjoy myself that way, I should prefer to go in my carriage, sit in my own box, and do the thing comfortably. Everything or nothing; that is my motto."

°°°°"And a good one, too," commented Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Perhaps you will see Mme. de Nucingen to-day," said Eugene, addressing Goriot in an undertone. "She will welcome you with open arms, I am sure; she would want to ask you for all sorts of little details about me. I have found out that she will do anything in the world to be known by my cousin Mme. de Beauseant; don't forget to tell her that I love her too well not to think of trying to arrange this."

°°°°Rastignac went at once to the Ecole de Droit. He had no mind to stay a moment longer than was necessary in that odious house. He wasted his time that day; he had fallen a victim to that fever of the brain that accompanies the too vivid hopes of youth. Vautrin's arguments had set him meditating on social life, and he was deep in these reflections when he happened on his friend Bianchon in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

°°°°"What makes you look so solemn?" said the medical student, putting an arm through Eugene's as they went towards the Palais.

°°°°"I am tormented by temptations."

°°°°"What kind? There is a cure for temptation."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Yielding to it."

°°°°"You laugh, but you don't know what it is all about. Have you read Rousseau?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Do you remember that he asks the reader somewhere what he would do if he could make a fortune by killing an old mandarin somewhere in China by mere force of wishing it, and without stirring from Paris?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Well, then?"

°°°°"Pshaw! I am at my thirty-third mandarin."

°°°°"Seriously, though. Look here, suppose you were sure that you could do it, and had only to give a nod. Would you do it?"

°°°°"Is he well stricken in years, this mandarin of yours? Pshaw! after all, young or old, paralytic, or well and sound, my word for it. . . . Well, then. Hang it, no!"

°°°°"You are a good fellow, Bianchon. But suppose you loved a woman well enough to lose your soul in hell for her, and that she wanted money for dresses and a carriage, and all her whims, in fact?"

°°°°"Why, here you are taking away my reason, and want me to reason!"

°°°°"Well, then, Bianchon, I am mad; bring me to my senses. I have two sisters as beautiful and innocent as angels, and I want them to be happy. How am I to find two hundred thousand francs apiece for them in the next five years? Now and then in life, you see, you must play for heavy stakes, and it is no use wasting your luck on low play."

°°°°"But you are only stating the problem that lies before every one at the outset of his life, and you want to cut the Gordian knot with a sword. If that is the way of it, dear boy, you must be an Alexander, or to the hulks you go. For my own part, I am quite contented with the little lot I mean to make for myself somewhere in the country, when I mean to step into my father's shoes and plod along. A man's affections are just as fully satisfied by the smallest circle as they can be by a vast circumference. Napoleon himself could only dine once, and he could not have more mistresses than a house student at the Capuchins. Happiness, old man, depends on what lies between the sole of your foot and the crown of your head; and whether it costs a million or a hundred louis, the actual amount of pleasure that you receive rests entirely with you, and is just exactly the same in any case. I am for letting that Chinaman live."

°°°°"Thank you, Bianchon; you have done me good. We will always be friends."

°°°°"I say," remarked the medical student, as they came to the end of a broad walk in the Jardin des Plantes, "I saw the Michonneau and Poiret a few minutes ago on a bench chatting with a gentleman whom I used to see in last year's troubles hanging about the Chamber of Deputies; he seems to me, in fact, to be a detective dressed up like a decent retired tradesman. Let us keep an eye on that couple; I will tell you why some time. Good-bye; it is nearly four o'clock, and I must be in to answer to my name."

°°°°When Eugene reached the lodging-house, he found Father Goriot waiting for him.

°°°°"Here," cried the old man, "here is a letter from her. Pretty handwriting, eh?"

°°°°Eugene broke the seal and read:--

°°°°"Sir,--I have heard from my father that you are fond of Italian music. I shall be delighted if you will do me the pleasure of accepting a seat in my box. La Fodor and Pellegrini will sing on Saturday, so I am sure that you will not refuse me. M. de Nucingen and I shall be pleased if you will dine with us; we shall be quite by ourselves. If you will come and be my escort, my husband will be glad to be relieved from his conjugal duties. Do not answer, but simply come.--Yours sincerely, D. DE N."

°°°°"Let me see it," said Father Goriot, when Eugene had read the letter. "You are going, aren't you?" he added, when he had smelled the writing-paper. "How nice it smells! Her fingers have touched it, that is certain."

°°°°"A woman does not fling herself at a man's head in this way," the student was thinking. "She wants to use me to bring back de Marsay; nothing but pique makes a woman do a thing like this."

°°°°"Well," said Father Goriot, "what are you thinking about?"

°°°°Eugene did not know the fever or vanity that possessed some women in those days; how should he imagine that to open a door in the Faubourg Saint-Germain a banker's wife would go to almost any length. For the coterie of the Faubourg Saint-Germain was a charmed circle, and the women who moved in it were at that time the queens of society; and among the greatest of these Dames du Petit-Chateau, as they were called, were Mme. de Beauseant and her friends the Duchesse de Langeais and the Duchesse de Maufrigneause. Rastignac was alone in his ignorance of the frantic efforts made by women who lived in the Chausee-d'Antin to enter this seventh heaven and shine among the brightest constellations of their sex. But his cautious disposition stood him in good stead, and kept his judgment cool, and the not altogether enviable power of imposing instead of accepting conditions.

°°°°"Yes, I am going," he replied.

°°°°So it was curiosity that drew him to Mme. de Nucingen; while, if she had treated him disdainfully, passion perhaps might have brought him to her feet. Still he waited almost impatiently for to-morrow, and the hour when he could go to her. There is almost as much charm for a young man in a first flirtation as there is in first love. The certainty of success is a source of happiness to which men do not confess, and all the charm of certain women lies in this. The desire of conquest springs no less from the easiness than from the difficulty of triumph, and every passion is excited or sustained by one or the other of these two motives which divide the empire of love. Perhaps this division is one result of the great question of temperaments; which, after all, dominates social life. The melancholic temperament may stand in need of the tonic of coquetry, while those of nervous or sanguine complexion withdraw if they meet with a too stubborn resistance. In other words, the lymphatic temperament is essentially despondent, and the rhapsodic is bilious.

°°°°Eugene lingered over his toilette with an enjoyment of all its little details that is grateful to a young man's self-love, though he will not own to it for fear of being laughed at. He thought, as he arranged his hair, that a pretty woman's glances would wander through the dark curls. He indulged in childish tricks like any young girl dressing for a dance, and gazed complacently at his graceful figure while he smoothed out the creases of his coat.

°°°°"There are worse figures, that is certain," he said to himself.

°°°°Then he went downstairs, just as the rest of the household were sitting down to dinner, and took with good humor the boisterous applause excited by his elegant appearance. The amazement with which any attention to dress is regarded in a lodging-house is a very characteristic trait. No one can put on a new coat but every one else must say his say about it.

°°°°"Clk! clk! clk!" cried Bianchon, making the sound with his tongue against the roof of his mouth, like a driver urging on a horse.

°°°°"He holds himself like a duke and a peer of France," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Are you going a-courting?" inquired Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried the artist.

°°°°"My compliments to my lady your wife," from the employe at the Museum.

°°°°"Your wife; have you a wife?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, in compartments, water-tight and floats, guaranteed fast color, all prices from twenty-five to forty sous, neat check patterns in the latest fashion and best taste, will wash, half- linen, half-cotton, half-wool; a certain cure for toothache and other complaints under the patronage of the Royal College of Physicians! children like it! a remedy for headache, indigestion, and all other diseases affecting the throat, eyes, and ears!" cried Vautrin, with a comical imitation of the volubility of a quack at a fair. "And how much shall we say for this marvel, gentlemen? Twopence? No. Nothing of the sort. All that is left in stock after supplying the Great Mogul. All the crowned heads of Europe, including the Gr-r-rand Duke of Baden, have been anxious to get a sight of it. Walk up! walk up! gentlemen! Pay at the desk as you go in! Strike up the music there! Brooum, la, la, trinn! la, la, boum! boum! Mister Clarinette, there you are out of tune!" he added gruffly; "I will rap your knuckles for you!"

°°°°"Goodness! what an amusing man!" said Mme. Vauquer to Mme. Couture; "I should never feel dull with him in the house."

°°°°This burlesque of Vautrin's was the signal for an outburst of merriment, and under cover of jokes and laughter Eugene caught a glance from Mlle. Taillefer; she had leaned over to say a few words in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"The cab is at the door," announced Sylvie.

°°°°"But where is he going to dine?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"With Madame la Baronne de Nucingen."

°°°°"M. Goriot's daughter," said the law student.

°°°°At this, all eyes turned to the old vermicelli maker; he was gazing at Eugene with something like envy in his eyes.

°°°°Rastignac reached the house in the Rue Saint-Lazare, one of those many-windowed houses with a mean-looking portico and slender columns, which are considered the thing in Paris, a typical banker's house, decorated in the most ostentatious fashion; the walls lined with stucco, the landings of marble mosaic. Mme. de Nucingen was sitting in a little drawing-room; the room was painted in the Italian fashion, and decorated like a restaurant. The Baroness seemed depressed. The effort that she made to hide her feelings aroused Eugene's interest; it was plain that she was not playing a part. He had expected a little flutter of excitement at his coming, and he found her dispirited and sad. The disappointment piqued his vanity.

°°°°"My claim to your confidence is very small, madame," he said, after rallying her on her abstracted mood; "but if I am in the way, please tell me so frankly; I count on your good faith."

°°°°"No, stay with me," she said; "I shall be all alone if you go. Nucingen is dining in town, and I do not want to be alone; I want to be taken out of myself."

°°°°"But what is the matter?"

°°°°"You are the very last person whom I should tell," she exclaimed.

°°°°"Then I am connected in some way in this secret. I wonder what it is?"

°°°°"Perhaps. Yet, no," she went on; "it is a domestic quarrel, which ought to be buried in the depths of the heart. I am very unhappy; did I not tell you so the day before yesterday? Golden chains are the heaviest of all fetters."

°°°°When a woman tells a young man that she is very unhappy, and when the young man is clever, and well dressed, and has fifteen hundred francs lying idle in his pocket, he is sure to think as Eugene said, and he becomes a coxcomb.

°°°°"What can you have left to wish for?" he answered. "You are young, beautiful, beloved, and rich."

°°°°"Do not let us talk of my affairs," she said shaking her head mournfully. "We will dine together tete-a-tete, and afterwards we will go to hear the most exquisite music. Am I to your taste?" she went on, rising and displaying her gown of white cashmere, covered with Persian designs in the most superb taste.

°°°°"I wish that you were altogether mine," said Eugene; "you are charming."

°°°°"You would have a forlorn piece of property," she said, smiling bitterly. "There is nothing about me that betrays my wretchedness; and yet, in spite of appearances, I am in despair. I cannot sleep; my troubles have broken my night's rest; I shall grow ugly."

°°°°"Oh! that is impossible," cried the law student; "but I am curious to know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface."

°°°°"Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me," she said. "Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else, for pity's sake," she added. "Let me show you my rooms."

°°°°"No; let us stay here," answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen's hand in his. She surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

°°°°"Listen," said Rastignac; "if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end to them, even if I have to kill half-a- dozen men; or I shall go, never to return."

°°°°"Very well," she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of despair, "I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes," she said to herself, "I have no other resource left."

°°°°She rang the bell.

°°°°"Are the horses put in for the master?" she asked of the servant.

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve dinner at seven o'clock."

°°°°"Now, come with me," she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in the banker's carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be dreaming.

°°°°"To the Palais-Royal," she said to the coachman; "stop near the Theatre-Francais."

°°°°She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

°°°°"Another moment and she will escape me," he said to himself.

°°°°When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

°°°°"Is it true that you love me?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes," he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the uneasiness that he felt.

°°°°"You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"Are you ready to do my bidding?"

°°°°"Blindly."

°°°°"Have you ever been to a gaming-house?" she asked in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Never."

°°°°"Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse," she said. "Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my troubles when you come back."

°°°°"Devil take me, I'm sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am about, but I will obey you," he added, with inward exultation, as he thought, "She has gone too far to draw back-- she can refuse me nothing now!"

°°°°Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand clothes-dealer, and hurried to number 9, which happened to be the nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his stakes.

°°°°"If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it turns up, you will win thirty-six louis," said a respectable- looking, white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

°°°°Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number 21 (his own age). There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had won.

°°°°"Take your money off, sir," said the old gentleman; "you don't often win twice running by that system."

°°°°Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once more.

°°°°"You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own," the old gentleman said in his ear. "Take my advice and go away with your winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable, you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck."

°°°°Rastignac's head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the white-haired man's possession, and went down-stairs with his seven thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his luck.

°°°°"So, that is over; and now where will you take me?" he asked, as soon as the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild embrace.

°°°°"You have saved me!" she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

°°°°"I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then," she went on, "I wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over disgracefully. If, at a woman's utmost need, SOMEBODY heaps gold upon her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever! But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept money in such a way? MON DIEU! is it not natural to share everything with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how, then, can our interests be separate?

°°°°"You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I longed to escape, to run away . . . where, I did not know. Half the women in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture. Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think of me as a woman whom he has paid." She tried to conceal her tears from him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

°°°°"It is hideous, is it not," she cried, "to speak in a breath of money and affection. You cannot love me after this," she added.

°°°°The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great, and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution of society, had thrown Eugene's thoughts into confusion; he uttered soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

°°°°"You will not remember this against me?" she asked; "promise me that you will not."

°°°°"Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so," he said. She took his hand and held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep gratitude.

°°°°"I am free and happy once more, thanks to you," she said. "Oh! I have felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this," she went on, as she took only six of the banknotes. "In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns, for I really ought to go halves with you."

°°°°Eugene's maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, "I am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy," he took the money.

°°°°"It shall be a last stake in reserve," he said, "in case of misfortune."

°°°°"That was what I was dreading to hear," she cried, turning pale. "Oh, if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you! I should die of sorrow!"

°°°°They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin's cynical words began to ring in his ears.

°°°°"Seat yourself there," said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside the fire. "I have a difficult letter to write," she added. "Tell me what to say."

°°°°"Say nothing," Eugene answered her. "Put the bills in an envelope, direct it, and send it by your maid."

°°°°"Why, you are a love of a man," she said. "Ah! see what it is to have been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through," she went on, smiling at him.

°°°°"She is charming," thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

°°°°"Do you like it?" she asked, as she rang for the maid.

°°°°"Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me."

°°°°Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

°°°°Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of the table which he had admired in his cousin's house.

°°°°"Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens afterwards," she said.

°°°°"I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am a poor student, and I have my way to make."

°°°°"Oh! you will succeed," she said laughing. "You will see. All that you wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy."

°°°°It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris, believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

°°°°Eugene took the Baroness' hand in his, and by some light pressure of the fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

°°°°"That was gratitude," she said, "for devotion that I did not dare to hope for, but now it would be a promise."

°°°°"And will you give me no promise, ingrate?"

°°°°He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a discontented air that delighted her.

°°°°"I shall see you at the ball on Monday," she said.

°°°°As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections. He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible excuses for appropriating it.

°°°°He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the stairhead he saw a light in Goriot's room; the old man had lighted a candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and go to his room without "telling him all about his daughter," to use his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without reserve.

°°°°"Then they think that I am ruined!" cried Father Goriot, in an agony of jealousy and desperation. "Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a year! MON DIEU! Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why did not YOU come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I had hold of them, I would wring their necks. MON DIEU! CRYING! Did you say she was crying?"

°°°°"With her head on my waistcoat," said Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! give it to me," said Father Goriot. "What! my daughter's tears have fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me have it. By the terms of her marriage- contract, she ought to have the use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth."

°°°°"Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the waistcoat."

°°°°Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student's hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

°°°°"You will succeed," the old man said. "God is just, you see. I know an honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to save one tear to either of them."

°°°°"An honest man!" said Eugene to himself as he lay down. "Upon my word, I think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey the voice of conscience." Perhaps none but believers in God do good in secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

°°°°The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant, who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball. The Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there. Delphine's dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene's eyes; she was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who can guess all that passes in a woman's mind. Who has not refrained from giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure; he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room; all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

°°°°Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

°°°°The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in a diabolical fashion.

°°°°"And do you suppose," cried that cold-blooded logician, "that a young man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, in the Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way, I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but, after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be out of place here, where we only aim at the purely patriarchalorama. If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend," Vautrin continued, with half-paternal jocularity, "you must have three horses, a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further. Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good- bye to your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe going to carry your billets-doux for you? Do you mean to employ the stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom of your elders!" he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each syllable. "Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously, and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way."

°°°°Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by which he had sought to corrupt the student's mind.

°°°°Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve in the small hours. He rose at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew. He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money, and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

°°°°One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in their youth and in the almost frantic eagerness with which youth grasps at pleasure. They are reckless with anything obtained on credit, while everything for which they must pay in ready money is made to last as long as possible; if they cannot have all that they want, they make up for it, it would seem, by squandering what they have. To state the matter simply--a student is far more careful of his hat than of his coat, because the latter being a comparatively costly article of dress, it is in the nature of things that a tailor should be a creditor; but it is otherwise with the hatter; the sums of money spent with him are so modest, that he is the most independent and unmanageable of his tribe, and it is almost impossible to bring him to terms. The young man in the balcony of a theatre who displays a gorgeous waistcoat for the benefit of the fair owners of opera glasses, has very probably no socks in his wardrobe, for the hosier is another of the genus of weevils that nibble at the purse. This was Rastignac's condition. His purse was always empty for Mme. Vauquer, always full at the demand of vanity; there was a periodical ebb and flow in his fortunes, which was seldom favorable to the payment of just debts. If he was to leave that unsavory and mean abode, where from time to time his pretensions met with humiliation, the first step was to pay his hostess for a month's board and lodging, and the second to purchase furniture worthy of the new lodgings he must take in his quality of dandy, a course that remained impossible. Rastignac, out of his winnings at cards, would pay his jeweler exorbitant prices for gold watches and chains, and then, to meet the exigencies of play, would carry them to the pawnbroker, that discreet and forbidding- looking friend of youth; but when it was a question of paying for board or lodging, or for the necessary implements for the cultivation of his Elysian fields, his imagination and pluck alike deserted him. There was no inspiration to be found in vulgar necessity, in debts contracted for past requirements. Like most of those who trust to their luck, he put off till the last moment the payment of debts that among the bourgeoisie are regarded as sacred engagements, acting on the plan of Mirabeau, who never settled his baker's bill until it underwent a formidable transformation into a bill of exchange.

°°°°It was about this time when Rastignac was down on his luck and fell into debt, that it became clear to the law student's mind that he must have some more certain source of income if he meant to live as he had been doing. But while he groaned over the thorny problems of his precarious situation, he felt that he could not bring himself to renounce the pleasures of this extravagant life, and decided that he must continue it at all costs. His dreams of obtaining a fortune appeared more and more chimerical, and the real obstacles grew more formidable. His initiation into the secrets of the Nucingen household had revealed to him that if he were to attempt to use this love affair as a means of mending his fortunes, he must swallow down all sense of decency, and renounce all the generous ideas which redeem the sins of youth. He had chosen this life of apparent splendor, but secretly gnawed by the canker worm of remorse, a life of fleeting pleasure dearly paid for by persistent pain; like Le Distrait of La Bruyere, he had descended so far as to make his bed in a ditch; but (also like Le Distrait) he himself was uncontaminated as yet by the mire that stained his garments.

°°°°"So we have killed our mandarin, have we?" said Bianchon one day as they left the dinner table.

°°°°"Not yet," he answered, "but he is at his last gasp."

°°°°The medical student took this for a joke, but it was not a jest. Eugene had dined in the house that night for the first time for a long while, and had looked thoughtful during the meal. He had taken his place beside Mlle. Taillefer, and stayed through the dessert, giving his neighbor an expressive glance from time to time. A few of the boarders discussed the walnuts at the table, and others walked about the room, still taking part in the conversation which had begun among them. People usually went when they chose; the amount of time that they lingered being determined by the amount of interest that the conversation possessed for them, or by the difficulty of the process of digestion. In winter-time the room was seldom empty before eight o'clock, when the four women had it all to themselves, and made up for the silence previously imposed upon them by the preponderating masculine element. This evening Vautrin had noticed Eugene's abstractedness, and stayed in the room, though he had seemed to be in a hurry to finish his dinner and go. All through the talk afterwards he had kept out of the sight of the law student, who quite believed that Vautrin had left the room. He now took up his position cunningly in the sitting-room instead of going when the last boarders went. He had fathomed the young man's thoughts, and felt that a crisis was at hand. Rastignac was, in fact, in a dilemma, which many another young man must have known.

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen might love him, or might merely be playing with him, but in either case Rastignac had been made to experience all the alternations of hope and despair of genuine passion, and all the diplomatic arts of a Parisienne had been employed on him. After compromising herself by continually appearing in public with Mme. de Beauseant's cousin she still hesitated, and would not give him the lover's privileges which he appeared to enjoy. For a whole month she had so wrought on his senses, that at last she had made an impression on his heart. If in the earliest days the student had fancied himself to be master, Mme. de Nucingen had since become the stronger of the two, for she had skilfully roused and played upon every instinct, good or bad, in the two or three men comprised in a young student in Paris. This was not the result of deep design on her part, nor was she playing a part, for women are in a manner true to themselves even through their grossest deceit, because their actions are prompted by a natural impulse. It may have been that Delphine, who had allowed this young man to gain such an ascendency over her, conscious that she had been too demonstrative, was obeying a sentiment of dignity, and either repented of her concessions, or it pleased her to suspend them. It is so natural to a Parisienne, even when passion has almost mastered her, to hesitate and pause before taking the plunge; to probe the heart of him to whom she intrusts her future. And once already Mme. de Nucingen's hopes had been betrayed, and her loyalty to a selfish young lover had been despised. She had good reason to be suspicious. Or it may have been that something in Eugene's manner (for his rapid success was making a coxcomb of him) had warned her that the grotesque nature of their position had lowered her somewhat in his eyes. She doubtless wished to assert her dignity; he was young, and she would be great in his eyes; for the lover who had forsaken her had held her so cheap that she was determined that Eugene should not think her an easy conquest, and for this very reason--he knew that de Marsay had been his predecessor. Finally, after the degradation of submission to the pleasure of a heartless young rake, it was so sweet to her to wander in the flower-strewn realms of love, that it was not wonderful that she should wish to dwell a while on the prospect, to tremble with the vibrations of love, to feel the freshness of the breath of its dawn. The true lover was suffering for the sins of the false. This inconsistency is unfortunately only to be expected so long as men do not know how many flowers are mown down in a young woman's soul by the first stroke of treachery.

°°°°Whatever her reasons may have been, Delphine was playing with Rastignac, and took pleasure in playing with him, doubtless because she felt sure of his love, and confident that she could put an end to the torture as soon as it was her royal pleasure to do so. Eugene's self-love was engaged; he could not suffer his first passage of love to end in a defeat, and persisted in his suit like a sportsman determined to bring down at least one partridge to celebrate his first Feast of Saint-Hubert. The pressure of anxiety, his wounded self-love, his despair, real or feigned, drew him nearer and nearer to this woman. All Paris credited him with this conquest, and yet he was conscious that he had made no progress since the day when he saw Mme. de Nucingen for the first time. He did not know as yet that a woman's coquetry is sometimes more delightful than the pleasure of secure possession of her love, and was possessed with helpless rage. If, at this time, while she denied herself to love, Eugene gathered the springtide spoils of his life, the fruit, somewhat sharp and green, and dearly bought, was no less delicious to the taste. There were moments when he had not a sou in his pockets, and at such times he thought in spite of his conscience of Vautrin's offer and the possibility of fortune by a marriage with Mlle. Taillefer. Poverty would clamor so loudly that more than once he was on the point of yielding to the cunning temptations of the terrible sphinx, whose glance had so often exerted a strange spell over him.

°°°°Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau went up to their rooms; and Rastignac, thinking that he was alone with the women in the dining-room, sat between Mme. Vauquer and Mme. Couture, who was nodding over the woolen cuffs that she was knitting by the stove, and looked at Mlle. Taillefer so tenderly that she lowered her eyes.

°°°°"Can you be in trouble, M. Eugene?" Victorine said after a pause.

°°°°"Who has not his troubles?" answered Rastignac. "If we men were sure of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should have no troubles."

°°°°For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible to mistake its meaning.

°°°°"You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to- day, but are you sure that it will never change?"

°°°°A smile flitted over the poor girl's lips; it seemed as if a ray of light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

°°°°"Ah! but suppose," he said, "that you should be rich and happy to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of poverty?"

°°°°A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

°°°°"Even if he were very poor?"

°°°°Again the same mute answer.

°°°°"What nonsense are you talking, you two?" exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Never mind," answered Eugene; "we understand each other."

°°°°"So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?" The words were uttered in Vautrin's deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door as he spoke.

°°°°"Oh! how you startled me!" Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed together.

°°°°"I might make a worse choice," said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin's voice had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

°°°°"No bad jokes, gentlemen!" said Mme. Couture. "My dear, let us go upstairs."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene and Vautrin were left alone.

°°°°"I felt sure you would come round to it," said the elder man with the coolness that nothing seemed to shake. "But stay a moment! I have as much delicacy as anybody else. Don't make up your mind on the spur of the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like."

°°°°The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes, which he fluttered before the student's eyes. Eugene was in a most painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis to the Marquis d'Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud's house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

°°°°"You must see," said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor, "that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself under any obligation to you."

°°°°"Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise," answered the tempter. "You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion, and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women. Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you? Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account," Vautrin went on, and a smile stole over his lips. "Take these bits of paper and write across this," he added, producing a piece of stamped paper, "Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day twelvemonth, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful. In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of strength, my boy."

°°°°"What manner of man are you?" cried Eugene. "Were you created to torment me?"

°°°°"Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes, and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your first fright will go off like a conscript's terror on the battlefield. You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, 'Here are a hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,' and you could sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won't compromise you in any way, and you hesitate. 'Tis an effeminate age."

°°°°Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for it.

°°°°"Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally," Vautrin continued. "I mean to leave this country in a few months' time for America, and set about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do; I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look at. What is a man's life to me? Not THAT," he said, and he snapped his thumb-nail against his teeth. "A man, in short, is everything to me, or just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret; you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin, but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A sentiment-- what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part, I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is my passion. I knew Venice Preserved by heart. Have you met many men plucky enough when a comrade says, 'Let us bury a dead body!' to go and do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!"

°°°°Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student's repudiation, he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying their blameworthy actions to themselves.

°°°°"He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is certain," said Eugene to himself.

°°°°He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of Vautrin's ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for his own ends, raised him in the student's eyes; but the thought of a compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de Restaud's.

°°°°For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid Messieurs de Trailles and d'Ajuda, played at whist for part of the evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to consider that his luck was heaven's reward for his perseverance in the right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin whether the bill he had given was still in the other's possession; and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand francs with a not unnatural relief.

°°°°"Everything is going on well," said Vautrin.

°°°°"But I am not your accomplice," said Eugene.

°°°°"I know, I know," Vautrin broke in. "You are still acting like a child. You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset."

°°°°Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not without good reason, his own suspicions.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," this M. Gondureau was saying, "I do not see any cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of Police----"

°°°°"Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter," said Gondureau.

°°°°Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by that word "police," and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers, confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where the BONUS flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature (an illegible scrawl) and by his title--"His Excellency Monseigneur le Ministre," five words which produce as much effect as the il Bondo Cani of the Calife de Bagdad, five words which in the eyes of this low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a moment? Pronounce the words "His Excellency," and these poor folk will forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests. Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences, annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the deus ex machina, the magical words "His Excellency," so as to dazzle Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

°°°°"If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister . . . Ah! that is quite another thing," said Poiret.

°°°°"You seem to be guided by this gentleman's opinion, and you hear what he says," said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau. "Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the nickname Trompe-la-Mort."

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort?" said Pioret. "Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves that nickname."

°°°°"Well, yes," said the detective. "They call him so because he has been so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----"

°°°°"Then is he a man of honor?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man's crime upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler, who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been unexceptionable."

°°°°"But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, why should he want me?" asked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Oh yes," said Poiret, "if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as to tell us, really knows for a certainty----"

°°°°"Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed Trompe-la- Mort, is in the confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing their affairs, which want a MAN OF MARK to see about them."

°°°°"Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?" asked Poiret. "This gentleman calls himself a MAN OF MARK because he is a MARKED MAN-- branded, you know."

°°°°"This so-called Vautrin," said the detective, "receives the money belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for their benefit."

°°°°"Their mistresses! You mean their wives," remarked Poiret.

°°°°"No, sir. A convict's wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We call them concubines."

°°°°"Then they all live in a state of concubinage?"

°°°°"Naturally."

°°°°"Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow. Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society."

°°°°"But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues, my dear sir----"

°°°°"Of course not, sir; but still----"

°°°°"Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie," said Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"You see how it is, mademoiselle," Gondureau continued. "The Government may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the Society of the Ten Thousand----"

°°°°"Ten Thousand Thieves!" cried Pioret in alarm.

°°°°"No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they won't touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society. If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds, we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again; they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, "What is there to hinder Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?"

°°°°"Oh!" said the detective, "a man is told off to follow him everywhere he goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions."

°°°°"You are quite right, sir," said Poiret, "utterly disgraced he would be."

°°°°"But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without more ado," remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but," he added in her ear, "keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.-- Trompe-la-Mort, when he came back here," he went on aloud "slipped into the skin of an honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning, that he is! You don't catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of consequence, who transacts a good deal of business."

°°°°"Naturally," said Poiret to himself.

°°°°"And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of the real Vautrin, he would put every one's back up among the business men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about."

°°°°"Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman," said Mlle. Michonneau briskly.

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him," said the detective. "I will tell you a secret--he does not like them."

°°°°"Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to identify him for two thousand francs."

°°°°"Nothing simpler," said the stranger. "I will send you a little bottle containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder, and PRESTO! the letters will appear."

°°°°"Why, that is just nothing at all," said Poiret.

°°°°"Well, do you agree?" said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

°°°°"But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all," said Mlle. Michonneau; "am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"What will you give me then?"

°°°°"Five hundred francs."

°°°°"It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir."

°°°°"I assure you," said Poiret, "that mademoiselle has a great deal of conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very intelligent."

°°°°"Well, now," Mlle. Michonneau went on, "make it three thousand francs if he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man."

°°°°"Done!" said Gondureau, "but on the condition that the thing is settled to-morrow."

°°°°"Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first."

°°°°"You are a sly one," said the detective as he rose to his feet. "Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M. Gondureau."

°°°°Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier's lecture, overheard the sufficiently striking nickname of Trompe-la-Mort, and caught the celebrated chief detective's "Done!"

°°°°"Why didn't you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a year," said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Why didn't I?" she asked. "Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without paying, and that would be an abominable sell."

°°°°"And suppose you did warn him," Poiret went on, "didn't that gentleman say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything."

°°°°"Anyhow," thought Mlle. Michonneau, "I can't abide him. He says nothing but disagreeable things to me."

°°°°"But you can do better than that," Poiret resumed. "As that gentleman said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief. Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into the bargain!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau's musings did not permit her to listen very closely to the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret's lips like water dripping from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

°°°°By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau versus Dame Morin, when he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

°°°°As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"I knew how it would end," remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. "They have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week past."

°°°°"Yes," he answered. "So she was found guilty."

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. Morin."

°°°°"I am talking about Mlle. Victorine," said Mlle, Michonneau, as she entered Poiret's room with an absent air, "and you answer, 'Mme. Morin.' Who may Mme. Morin be?"

°°°°"What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?" demanded Poiret.

°°°°"Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!"

°°°°That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel's voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac's face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately; he had said to himself that a woman's happiness should atone for this venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face; the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice broke in upon their bliss.

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity,"

°°°°he sang mockingly.

°°°°Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand, the light touch of Rastignac's hair against her cheek, a word whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student's warm breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love's sake in the most famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

°°°°"The thing is arranged," Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. "Our two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half- past eight in the morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father's fortune and affections. A funny way of putting it, isn't it? Taillefer's youngster is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know."

°°°°Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders likewise appeared.

°°°°"That is just as I intended." Vautrin said. "You know quite well what you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you."

°°°°He made as though he would take Eugene's hand, but Rastignac hastily withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

°°°°"Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes of virtue about us!" murmured Vautrin. "But Papa Doliban has three millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride's white dress, even in your own eyes."

°°°°Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, "You look melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me."

°°°°The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

°°°°"Let us go up to your room," the worthy soul remarked, when he had asked Sylvie for the law student's key. "This morning," he resumed, "you thought that SHE did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting ME! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move into it in three days' time. Don't split upon me. She wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn't bear to keep the secret from you. You will be in the Rue d'Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that won't run away."

°°°°Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student's back was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney- piece and set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac's arms stamped in gold on the leather.

°°°°"My dear boy," said the kind soul, "I have been up to the eyes in this business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?"

°°°°"What is it?"

°°°°"There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn't that so? I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say to myself, 'He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.' If I were ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs- Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my little girl again, so light- hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, 'I am very happy, papa!' When they say 'father' stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me 'papa,' it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else."

°°°°The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

°°°°"It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!" he said, raising his head after a pause. "All the time we were going about together she chatted away about you. 'He is so nice-looking, papa; isn't he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?' Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no sign, and he was dying of impatience.

°°°°Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were written:

°°°°"I want you to think of me every hour, BECAUSE . . .   "DELPHINE."

°°°°That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as well as for his daughter's sake.

°°°°"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera- dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me with you, will you not?"

°°°°"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

°°°°"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you! Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

°°°°"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to her this evening, will you not?"

°°°°"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

°°°°"Can I be of any use?"

°°°°"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening; it is a matter of life and death."

°°°°"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance; "are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were saying down below? . . . TONNERRE DE DIEU! you have no notion what a tap A LA GORIOT is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh! the thing is impossible!"

°°°°"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

°°°°"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

°°°°"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to- morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

°°°°"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

°°°°"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting in an appearance----"

°°°°Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing at the threshold of his door and singing:

°°°°"Oh! Richard, oh my king!   All the world abandons thee!   Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

°°°°The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a . . . tra la la."

°°°°"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is waiting for you."

°°°°"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my Bordeaux."

°°°°"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste, hasn't she? Eh?"

°°°°Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and, all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

°°°°Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with consternation.

°°°°"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as merry as a skylark."

°°°°"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

°°°°"Bargain?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on, seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.

°°°°"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules," said the young painter.

°°°°"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

°°°°"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

°°°°"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

°°°°"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and the cheese."

°°°°"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach besides."

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme. Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

°°°°"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

°°°°Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

°°°°"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this, Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right- hand side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

°°°°"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a hundred chestnuts."

°°°°"Oh! oh!"

°°°°"Booououh!"

°°°°"Prrr!"

°°°°These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a set firework.

°°°°"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called Vautrin.

°°°°"Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for it, I have some currant cordial."

°°°°"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered the medical student.

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for it," he added.

°°°°"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little cakes."

°°°°"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out the biscuits."

°°°°The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously struck up with the following variations:

°°°°"Scissors to grind!"

°°°°"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

°°°°"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

°°°°"China to mend!"

°°°°"Boat ahoy!"

°°°°"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

°°°°"Old clo'!"

°°°°"Cherries all ripe!"

°°°°But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

°°°°A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

°°°°"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs. When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer, telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the bread is ready for the oven; to- morrow we will eat it up and whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? . . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

°°°°Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

°°°°"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the widow.

°°°°These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

°°°°"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

°°°°"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two ladies----"

°°°°"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your young lady."

°°°°"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

°°°°"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

°°°°He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead, and began to sing:

°°°°"Sleep, little darlings;   I watch while you slumber."

°°°°"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

°°°°"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. " 'Tis your duty as a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "the young fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife-- there's your fortune for you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I go out and call a cab--all my own self."

°°°°And he started out, singing as he went:

°°°°"Oh! sun! divine sun!   Ripening the pumpkins every one."

°°°°"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over. HE never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't lose what he hadn't got-- Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

°°°°Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just as he was, like a package, across the bed.

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know what dissipation is."

°°°°"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

°°°°"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such things----"

°°°°"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

°°°°"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer. It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

°°°°"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

°°°°"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

°°°°"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

°°°°"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress as she spoke.

°°°°Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.

°°°°"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

°°°°The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face, so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet, austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught something of the golden glory of heaven.

°°°°"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing her fingers through Eugene's hair.

°°°°"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

°°°°There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

°°°°"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though you had nothing on."

°°°°"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

°°°°"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint- Pierre (good soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme. Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now, don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will idolize you."

°°°°The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady; "we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments with all the care of an antiquary."

°°°°"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine. "Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them."

°°°°"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M. Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

°°°°"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

°°°°"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two women were alone together.

°°°°"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady; "just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

°°°°"Oh! mamma."

°°°°"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in for."

°°°°"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life," said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

°°°°"MON DIEU! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

°°°°With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room, Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned, and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

°°°°That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

°°°°But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the scent.

°°°°"A delusion," he said. "Collin's sorbonne is the most dangerous that has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the Place de Greve."

°°°°As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible expressions borrowed from thieves' Latin, thieves, of all people, being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking-- his council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth after the axe has done its work.

°°°°"Collin is playing us off," he continued. "When we come across a man like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la- Mort's paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent crime than to punish it."

°°°°"And you do a service to our country," said Poiret.

°°°°"Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you are," said the head of the department. "Yes, of course, we are serving our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle. I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get it back for you."

°°°°"Well, now," Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, "there are idiots who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as saying 'Good-day.' "

°°°°The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like apparition of the sham Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her boarders so long as she lived.

°°°°In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till close upon eleven o'clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin's first bottle of wine), was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme. Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o'clock, and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested, therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup belonging to Vautrin--it was standing with the others in the bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business. The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen. It ran thus:--

°°°°"I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my friend. Till two o'clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity's sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line will be enough. Say, 'I will hasten to you,' or else, 'I am ill.' But if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have happened? . . ."

°°°°"Yes, indeed, what has happened?" exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any more. "What time is it?"

°°°°"Half-past eleven," said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his coffee.

°°°°The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M. Taillefer's servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," he cried, "your father is asking for you-- something terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious."

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" exclaimed Vautrin. "How can people brawl when they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people have bad manners, and that is a fact."

°°°°"Sir!" cried Eugene.

°°°°"Well, what then, you big baby!" said Vautrin, swallowing down his coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. "Are there not duels every morning in Paris?" added Vautrin.

°°°°"I will go with you, Victorine," said Mme. Couture, and the two women hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance that said--"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me tears!"

°°°°"Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"I am all sorts of things," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Queer, isn't it?" said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession of commonplaces suited to the occasion. "Death takes us off without asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have other complaints that men don't suffer from. We bear children, and it takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her father will have to acknowledge her now!"

°°°°"There!" said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, "yesterday she had not a penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune."

°°°°"I say, M. Eugene!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "you have landed on your feet!"

°°°°At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the crumpled letter still in his hand.

°°°°"You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to be like the rest of them?" he asked.

°°°°"Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine," said Eugene, turning to Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised the onlookers at this scene.

°°°°Father Goriot caught the student's hand and grasped it warmly. He could have kissed it.

°°°°"Oh, ho!" said Vautrin, "the Italians have a good proverb--Col tempo."

°°°°"Is there any answer?" said Mme. de Nucingen's messenger, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Say that I will come directly."

°°°°The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he could not be prudent.

°°°°"What is to be done?" he exclaimed aloud. "There are no proofs!"

°°°°Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, "Luck comes to us while we sleep, young man," and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck dead.

°°°°"So there is a Divine Justice!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?"

°°°°"A stroke!" cried Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor," called the widow. "Oh, M. Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel."

°°°°Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.

°°°°"Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist's and ask for something that's good for the apoplexy."

°°°°Christophe likewise went.

°°°°"Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs."

°°°°Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow staircase, and laid upon his bed.

°°°°"I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter," said M. Goriot.

°°°°"Selfish old thing!" cried Mme. Vauquer. "Yes, go; I wish you may die like a dog."

°°°°"Just go and see if you can find some ether," said Mlle. Michonneau to Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the sick man's clothes.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress of the situation.

°°°°"Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be of some use in sparing my modesty," she said to Poiret, "instead of standing there like a stock."

°°°°Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

°°°°"There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily," exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on the shirt again.--"Ouf! How heavy he is," he added, as he laid the convict down.

°°°°"Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!" said the old maid briskly; her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of the furniture with greedy eyes. "Could we find some excuse for opening that desk?"

°°°°"It mightn't be quite right," responded Poiret to this.

°°°°"Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it doesn't belong to any one now. But we haven't time, there is the Vauquer."

°°°°"Here is the ether," said that lady. "I must say that this is an eventful day. Lord! that man can't have had a stroke; he is as white as curds."

°°°°"White as curds?" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"And his pulse is steady," said the widow, laying her hand on his breast.

°°°°"Steady?" said the astonished Poiret.

°°°°"He is all right."

°°°°"Do you think so?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look, mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears a wig. They say that red- haired people are either the worst or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?"

°°°°"Good to hang," said Poiret.

°°°°"Round a pretty woman's neck, you mean," said Mlle Michonneau, hastily. "Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman's duty to nurse you men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take yourself off," she added. "Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of dear M. Vautrin.

°°°°Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the room by his master.

°°°°Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself might be implicated. Vautrin's coolness still further dismayed him.

°°°°"Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?" Rastignac asked himself.

°°°°He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

°°°°"Well?" shouted Bianchon, "you have seen the Pilote?"

°°°°The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local journals.

°°°°"There is a wonderful history in it," said the house student of the Hopital Cochin. "Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?"

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----"

°°°°"You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master Taillefer's money!"

°°°°"Are all the devils of hell at my heels?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand," said Bianchon, "and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish."

°°°°"Just go to Mother Vauquer's," said Rastignac; "that scoundrel Vautrin has dropped down like one dead."

°°°°"Aha!" said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, "you confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself."

°°°°The law student's long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot's confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue d'Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.

°°°°"Such a love is my anchor of safety," he said to himself. "How the old man's heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!"

°°°°He took out his watch and admired it.

°°°°"I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?"

°°°°Rastignac's battle with himself went on for a long while; and though the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison Vauquer through the gathering dusk.

°°°°Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau's officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer's duel. They were anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the probable change in Victorine's prospects. Father Goriot alone was absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the same look that had read his thoughts before--the look that had such power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.

°°°°"Well, dear boy," said the escaped convict, "I am likely to cheat death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors."

°°°°"A bull you might say," cried the widow.

°°°°"You really might be sorry to see me still alive," said Vautrin in Rastignac's ear, thinking that he guessed the student's thoughts. "You must be mighty sure of yourself."

°°°°"Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort," said Bianchon; "and, upon my word, that name would do very well for you."

°°°°Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle. Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature had dropped from the convict's face; from the unmistakable ferocity of that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the sitting-room.

°°°°"In the name of the King and the Law!" said an officer, but the words were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.

°°°°Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men, who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden, and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin's face was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair, the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines, his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor. Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.

°°°°"You are not in the politest of humors to-day," he remarked to the chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his head.

°°°°"Gentlemen," he said, "put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call on those present to witness that I make no resistance."

°°°°A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally sudden cessation.

°°°°"There's a sell for you, master crusher," the convict added, looking at the famous director of police.

°°°°"Come, strip!" said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.

°°°°"Why?" asked Collin. "There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and surrender."

°°°°He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to overwhelm his audience.

°°°°"Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle," he went on, addressing a little, white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table; and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to draw up a document. "I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin, otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years' penal servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my nickname.--If I had as much as raised my hand," he went on, addressing the other lodgers, "those three sneaking wretches yonder would have drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer's domestic hearth. The rogues have laid their heads together to set a trap for me."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.

°°°°"Good Lord!" she cried, "this does give one a turn; and me at the Gaite with him only last night!" she said to Sylvie.

°°°°"Summon your philosophy, mamma," Collin resumed. "Is it a misfortune to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me." His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his eyes.--"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept any time you like! Do you understand?" And he sang:

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity."

°°°°"Don't you trouble yourself," he went on; "I can get in my money. They are too much afraid of me to swindle me."

°°°°The convicts' prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur, its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the speaker's discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno, wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own evil thoughts.

°°°°"Who betrayed me?" said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"It was you, old cat!" he said. "That sham stroke of apoplexy was your doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs," he shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession of his effects. "The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here," he said tapping his forehead. "Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?" he said, turning to the chief. "It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?" he asked of the police officers. "A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money," he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. "These folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?" he asked proudly. "There is some good there," he said tapping his heart; "I have never betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut," he said to the old maid, "they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them sick. Rake in your gains."

°°°°He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers' faces.

°°°°"What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before? A convict of Collin's stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and I am a match for them all."

°°°°"Ye gods!" cried the painter, "what a magnificent sketch one might make of him!"

°°°°"Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master of ceremonies to the widow" (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given by prisoners to the guillotine), "be a good fellow, and tell me if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don't want him to suffer for some one else, that would not be fair."

°°°°But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Collin, addressing the lodgers, "they will take me away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me to send you figs from Provence."

°°°°He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at Rastignac.

°°°°"Good-bye, Eugene," he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange transition from his previous rough and stern manner. "If you should be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend," and, in spite of his shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, "One, two!" like a fencing-master, and lunged. "If anything goes wrong, apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service."

°°°°The strange speaker's manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the pantomime.

°°°°As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house, Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress' temples with vinegar, looked round at the bewildered lodgers.

°°°°"Well," said she, "he was a man, he was, for all that."

°°°°Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead- alive, mummy-like figure, crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, "If that creature is going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out."

°°°°In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save Poiret, was of the medical student's opinion, so that the latter, strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

°°°°"You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us," he said; "speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at once."

°°°°"At once!" echoed Poiret in amazement.

°°°°Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in her ear.

°°°°"I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here as any one else," she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

°°°°"Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Monsieur is taking Collin's part" she said, with a questioning, malignant glance at the law student; "it is not difficult to guess why."

°°°°Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

°°°°"Let her alone!" cried the boarders.

°°°°Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

°°°°"Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas," said the painter, turning to Mme. Vauquer. "If you don't show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are."

°°°°At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in them.

°°°°"Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness," she cried, interrupting herself, "I can't help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is moving----"

°°°°"Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux's in the Place Sorbonne," cried Bianchon.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Come, now," she said; "you would not be the ruin of my establishment, would you, eh? There's a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening."

°°°°"Never a bit of it!" cried the boarders. "She must go, and go this minute!"

°°°°"But the poor lady has had no dinner," said Poiret, with piteous entreaty.

°°°°"She can go and dine where she likes," shouted several voices.

°°°°"Turn her out, the spy!"

°°°°"Turn them both out! Spies!"

°°°°"Gentlemen," cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love gives to the ovine male, "respect the weaker sex."

°°°°"Spies are of no sex!" said the painter.

°°°°"A precious sexorama!"

°°°°"Turn her into the streetorama!"

°°°°"Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house, it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We have paid our money, and we are not going," said Poiret, putting on his cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer was remonstrating.

°°°°"Naughty boy!" said the painter, with a comical look; "run away, naughty little boy!"

°°°°"Look here," said Bianchon; "if you do not go, all the rest of us will," and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room- door.

°°°°"Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?" cried Mme. Vauquer. "I am a ruined woman. You can't stay here; they will go further, do something violent."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

°°°°"She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn't."

°°°°These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions, borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low voice in her hostess' ear, and then--"I shall go to Mme. Buneaud's," she said, with a threatening look.

°°°°"Go where you please, mademoiselle," said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. "Go and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the food is cheap and nasty."

°°°°The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out laughing at the sight of him.

°°°°"Hist!--st!--st! Poiret," shouted the painter. "Hallo! I say, Poiret, hallo!" The employe from the Museum began to sing:

°°°°"Partant pour la Syrie,   Le jeune et beau Dunois . . ."

°°°°"Get along with you; you must be dying to go, trahit sua quemque voluptas!" said Bianchon.

°°°°"Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil," said the tutor.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret's arm, with an appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together, the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause, followed by peals of laughter.

°°°°"Bravo, Poiret!"

°°°°"Who would have thought it of old Poiret!"

°°°°"Apollo Poiret!"

°°°°"Mars Poiret!"

°°°°"Intrepid Poiret!"

°°°°A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

°°°°"The house might as well be burned down at once," cried she, "if there are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three o'clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those ladies at that poor man's expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me to send their things, because they are going to live with her father. M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone! . . ."

°°°°She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

°°°°"Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think," she cried.

°°°°Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

°°°°"What! another windfall for somebody!" was Sylvie's comment.

°°°°But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

°°°°"Goriot in a cab!" cried the boarders; "the world is coming to an end."

°°°°The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man's arm.

°°°°"Come," he said, with gladness in his eyes.

°°°°"Then you haven't heard the news?" said Eugene. "Vautrin was an escaped convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead."

°°°°"Very well, but what business is it of ours?" replied Father Goriot. "I am going to dine with my daughter in YOUR HOUSE, do you understand? She is expecting you. Come!"

°°°°He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

°°°°"Now, let us have dinner," cried the painter, and every one drew his chair to the table.

°°°°"Well, I never," said the portly Sylvie. "Nothing goes right to- day! The haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it is, more's the pity!"

°°°°Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day's events; but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels, jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day. Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope was the portly Sylvie.

°°°°That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in the cab. The old man's voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears like words spoken in a dream.

°°°°"It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don't know what pretty ways she has; at table she will look after me, 'Here, papa, just try this, it is nice.' And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her."

°°°°"It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down."

°°°°"Upside down?" repeated Father Goriot. "Why, the world has never been so right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood would be as sweet as honey."

°°°°"I feel as if I were coming back to life again," said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, hurry up there!" cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in front. "Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the place I told you of in ten minutes time."

°°°°With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous celerity.

°°°°"How that fellow crawls!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"But where are you taking me?" Eugene asked him.

°°°°"To your own house," said Goriot.

°°°°The cab stopped in the Rue d'Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning to bachelor ways.

°°°°"Come along upstairs," he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard, and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen's maid. Eugene found himself in a charming set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description, the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

°°°°"So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to understand!"

°°°°Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just witnessed was too much for Rastignac's over- wrought nerves, after the day's strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was almost overcome by it.

°°°°"I felt sure myself that he loved you," murmured Father Goriot, while Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring about this final transformation scene.

°°°°"But you must see your rooms," said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed, down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of Delphine's apartment.

°°°°"There is no bed," said Rastignac.

°°°°"No, monsieur," she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene, looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

°°°°"You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for ever," he said in her ear. "Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret."

°°°°"Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose," growled the father.

°°°°"You know quite well that 'we' means you."

°°°°"Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a good idea of mine to say to you, 'There are some nice rooms to let in the Rue d'Artois; let us furnish them for him?' And she would not hear of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers else."

°°°°"Was that how it happened?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----"

°°°°Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low though the sound was.

°°°°The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was wanting there.

°°°°"Have we guessed your wishes rightly?" she asked, as they returned to the drawing-room for dinner.

°°°°"Yes," he said, "only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----"

°°°°"Ah! ah! you say me nay already," she said with arch imperiousness, and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman's way of laughing away scruples.

°°°°But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self- questioning, and Vautrin's arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into abandoning his high- minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled his mind.

°°°°"Do you really mean to refuse?" said Mme. de Nucingen. "And do you know what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying my affection? If you love me, if I-- love you, why should you shrink back from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment, you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this. . . . Ah!" she cried, as Eugene's passionate glance was turned on her, "and you are making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you. Speak!-- Father," she said after a pause, "make him listen to reason. Can he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?"

°°°°Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

°°°°"Child that you are!" she cried again, catching Eugene's hand. "You are just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man finds insurmountable; a woman's hand opens the way and you shrink back! Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to repay me my loan of today? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your garret must be if it is like papa's room! See, dinner is waiting all this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don't you answer?" she said, shaking his hand. "MON DIEU! papa, make up his mind for him, or I will go away and never see him any more."

°°°°"I will make up your mind," said Goriot, coming down from the clouds. "Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews, isn't it?"

°°°°"There is positively no help for it," said Eugene.

°°°°"All right, I will give you credit," said the other, drawing out a cheap leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. "I have turned Jew myself; I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you can return it some time or other."

°°°°Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot's warmly.

°°°°"Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?"

°°°°"Oh! my poor father," said Mme. de Nucingen, "how did you do it?"

°°°°"Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you, and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to myself, 'She will never be able to pay for them.' The attorney says that those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year, and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, 'How happy they are going to be!' and--well, now, are you not happy?"

°°°°"Oh papa! papa!" cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright and radiant.

°°°°"Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel for you now?"

°°°°"Why, children, why Delphinette!" cried Goriot, who had not felt his daughter's heart beat against his breast for ten years, "do you want me to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are quits already." And the old man strained her to his breast with such fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

°°°°"Oh! you are hurting me!" she said.

°°°°"I am hurting you!" He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men. Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his fingers had grasped too roughly.

°°°°"Oh! no, no," he cried. "I have not hurt you, have I?" and his smile seemed to repeat the question. "YOU have hurt me with that cry just now.--The things cost rather more than that," he said in her ear, with another gentle kiss, "but I had to deceive him about it, or he would have been angry."

°°°°Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration which shapes the beliefs of youth.

°°°°"I will be worthy of all this," he cried.

°°°°"Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said," and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law student on the forehead.

°°°°"He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you," said Father Goriot. "Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus."

°°°°"Oh! why did you tell her?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"Eugene," Delphine said in his ear, "I have one regret now this evening. Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!"

°°°°"This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!" cried Goriot. "God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer through you, and I can still say, 'In this short month of February I had more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.'--Look at me, Fifine!" he said to his daughter. "She is very beautiful, is she not? Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell instead. Come, let us have dinner," he added, scarcely knowing what he said, "everything is ours."

°°°°"Poor dear father!"

°°°°He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a kiss on the plaits of hair. "If you only knew, little one, how happy you can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me, say that you will!"

°°°°"Yes, dear father."

°°°°"Say it again."

°°°°"Yes, I will, my kind father."

°°°°"Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed my own wishes. Let us have dinner."

°°°°The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot's spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter's feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more tender.

°°°°"You see!" Delphine said with a look at Eugene, "so long as my father is with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes."

°°°°Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

°°°°"And when will the rooms be ready?" asked Eugene, looking round. "We must all leave them this evening, I suppose."

°°°°"Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me," she answered, with an eloquent glance. "It is our night at the Italiens."

°°°°"I shall go to the pit," said her father.

°°°°It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen's carriage was waiting for her, and Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing that the father's self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her father's adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future of love.

°°°°They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso's lamentations as recorded in Byron's poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force of truth they fall far short of the widow's cry from the depths.

°°°°"Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life, now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people! The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and Christophe will have to go!"

°°°°The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said, "Madame," questioningly.

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Sylvie, "he is like a dog."

°°°°"In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a little dog."

°°°°"Lord!" said Sylvie, flinging up her head, "those old maids are up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"There's that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict," the widow went on. "Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I can't bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny on the nail too."

°°°°"And open-handed he was!" said Christophe.

°°°°"There is some mistake," said Sylvie.

°°°°"Why, no there isn't! he said so himself!" said Mme. Vauquer. "And to think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it's like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap; we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again; there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred, will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that is just what it is!"

°°°°"And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear," cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Don't speak of her, she is a wicked woman!" said Mme. Vauquer. "She is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed and murdered people in her time. SHE ought to be put in jail for life instead of that poor dear----"

°°°°Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

°°°°"Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers," said the widow, sighing.

°°°°But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d'Antin.

°°°°"Sylvie!" cried the widow, "this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There's a weight on my chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow, Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen," and she went.

°°°°"What is the matter now?" Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

°°°°"Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a bit. It's the first time she has cried since I've been with her."

°°°°By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had "made up her mind to it." True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A lover's farewell glance at his lady-love's window is not more mournful than Mme. Vauquer's survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take his (Rastignac's) place; that the official from the Museum had often expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture's rooms; and that in a very few days her household would be on the old footing.

°°°°"God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here. There'll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you'll see," and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining- room. "Whose turn will it be, I wonder?"

°°°°"It is just as well that we are moving out," said Eugene to Father Goriot in a low voice.

°°°°"Madame," said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, "I have not seen Mistigris these three days."

°°°°"Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if HE has gone and left us, I----"

°°°°The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this dreadful portent.

°°°°By twelve o'clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse's great ball, which had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was slipped in with the card.

°°°°"I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to   interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the   card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make   the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud's sister. Pray introduce that   charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your   affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.   "VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT."

°°°°"Well," said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, "Mme. de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de Nucingen."

°°°°He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of Paris--will never have a rival.

°°°°Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country, it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love exist there without that wealth?

°°°°If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water, without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls, waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look with pity upon those of earth.

°°°°Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it. In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one man, but of a whole nation.

°°°°But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a brilliant future.

°°°°So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

°°°°"Madame is in her room," Therese came to tell him. The woman's voice made him start.

°°°°He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid the blossom.

°°°°"Well," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "here you are."

°°°°"Guess what I bring for you," said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He took possession of her arm to kiss her hand

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

°°°°"And I owe this happiness to you--to THEE" (she whispered the more intimate word in his ear); "but Therese is in my dressing- room, let us be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes to me through YOU--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint- Germain, it is because I shall meet you there."

°°°°"Mme. de Beauseant's note seems to say very plainly that she does not expect to see the BARON de Nucingen at her ball; don't you think so?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, yes," said the Baroness as she returned the letter. "Those women have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go. My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully dressed.--Eugene," she went on, lowering her voice, "she will go to dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a woman's character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband's mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant's ball in tissue of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I mean to be perfectly happy."

°°°°At one o'clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In the midst of their lovers' farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to come, she said in a troubled voice, "I am very fearful, superstitious. Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe."

°°°°"Child!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?" she asked, laughingly.

°°°°Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left its sweetness on the lips.

°°°°"Well?" cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene; "I will tell you everything to-morrow."

°°°°"Everything, will you not?" cried the old man. "Go to bed. To- morrow our happy life will begin."

°°°°Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging- house, and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it; but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran lightly upstairs.

°°°°It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d'Artois at four o'clock; but Rastignac's name had been called early on the list at the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this, Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin's signature lying in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot's room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him; but after the first few words, the conversation between the father and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his attention.

°°°°"Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe to talk?" she added.

°°°°"Yes, there is no one in the house," said her father faintly.

°°°°"What is the matter with you?" asked Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!" said the old man. "You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d'Artois."

°°°°"Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the subject with him. Wasn't that what you told me to tell him?"

°°°°"Yes, quite right," answered Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then," Delphine continued, "he told me all about his affairs. He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations; they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes, on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy (in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him."

°°°°"Do you really believe that silly rubbish?" . . . cried her father. "It was all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No, no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them, and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that's holiest in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked! and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers. If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don't give way, don't make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he can't do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once; I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know for certain that your fortune is secure."

°°°°"Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile, it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we drive him to despair, I am lost."

°°°°"Why, then, the man is a rogue?"

°°°°"Well, yes, father," she said, flinging herself into a chair, "I wanted to keep it from you to spare your feelings," and she burst into tears; "I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his stalking- horse."

°°°°"But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons- in-law of that sort," cried her father; "why, I would guillotine him myself if there was no headsman to do it."

°°°°"No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says, stripped of all his circumlocutions--'Take your choice, you and no one else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through myself.' Is that plain speaking? He MUST have my assistance. He is assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to be Eugene's wife in all but name. 'I connive at your errors, and you allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!' Is that sufficiently explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get possession of those bills?"

°°°°Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on his knees.

°°°°"Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child! forgive me!" cried the old man.

°°°°"Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame," said Delphine. "We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us! Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa," she said, kissing him.

°°°°"Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your husband's winding."

°°°°"No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me, well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters. No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant's ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene! . . . Come, let us see his room."

°°°°But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve, and the sound of Mme. de Restaud's voice came from the staircase. "Is my father in?" she asked of Sylvie.

°°°°This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

°°°°"Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?" said Delphine, when she heard her sister speak. "It looks as though some strange things had happened in that family."

°°°°"What sort of things?" asked Goriot. "This is like to be the death of me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune."

°°°°"Good-morning, father," said the Countess from the threshold. "Oh! Delphine, are you here?"

°°°°Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister's presence.

°°°°"Good-morning, Nasie," said the Baroness. "What is there so extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day."

°°°°"Since when?"

°°°°"If you came yourself you would know."

°°°°"Don't tease, Delphine," said the Countess fretfully. "I am very miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!"

°°°°"What is it, Nasie?" cried Goriot. "Tell us all about it, child! How white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will love you even better, if that were possible."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. "We are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see."

°°°°The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

°°°°"This will kill me!" said their father. "There," he went on, stirring the smouldering fire, "come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it, Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----"

°°°°"Well, then, my husband knows everything," said the Countess. "Just imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime's some time ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that. About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled. He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively. Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard; for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I had eaten up all that you had----"

°°°°"No," said Goriot; "I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet."

°°°°The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when the father's love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice, revealed the depths of his despair.

°°°°"I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell," and the Countess burst into tears.

°°°°Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister's shoulder, and cried too.

°°°°"Then it is all true," she said.

°°°°Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her, kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

°°°°"I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie," she said.

°°°°"My angels," murmured Goriot faintly. "Oh, why should it be trouble that draws you together?"

°°°°This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

°°°°"To save Maxime's life," she said, "to save all my own happiness, I went to the money-lender you know of, a man of iron forged in hell-fire; nothing can melt him; I took all the family diamonds that M. de Restaud is so proud of--his and mine too--and sold them to that M. Gobseck. SOLD THEM! Do you understand? I saved Maxime, but I am lost. Restaud found it all out."

°°°°"How? Who told him? I will kill him," cried Goriot.

°°°°"Yesterday he sent to tell me to come to his room. I went. . . . 'Anastasie,' he said in a voice--oh! such a voice; that was enough, it told me everything--'where are your diamonds?'--'In my room----'--'No,' he said, looking straight at me, 'there they are on that chest of drawers----' and he lifted his handkerchief and showed me the casket. 'Do you know where they came from?' he said. I fell at his feet. . . . I cried; I besought him to tell me the death he wished to see me die."

°°°°"You said that!" cried Goriot. "By God in heaven, whoever lays a hand on either of you so long as I am alive may reckon on being roasted by slow fires! Yes, I will cut him in pieces like . . ."

°°°°Goriot stopped; the words died away in his throat.

°°°°"And then, dear, he asked something worse than death of me. Oh! heaven preserve all other women from hearing such words as I heard then!"

°°°°"I will murder that man," said Goriot quietly. "But he has only one life, and he deserves to die twice.--And then, what next?" he added, looking at Anastasie.

°°°°"Then," the Countess resumed, "there was a pause, and he looked at me. 'Anastasie,' he said, 'I will bury this in silence; there shall be no separation; there are the children. I will not kill M. de Trailles. I might miss him if we fought, and as for other ways of getting rid of him, I should come into collision with the law. If I killed him in your arms, it would bring dishonor on THOSE children. But if you do not want to see your children perish, nor their father nor me, you must first of all submit to two conditions. Answer me. Have I a child of my own?' I answered, 'Yes,'--'Which?'--'Ernest, our eldest boy.'--'Very well,' he said, 'and now swear to obey me in this particular from this time forward.' I swore. 'You will make over your property to me when I require you to do so.' "

°°°°"Do nothing of the kind!" cried Goriot. "Aha! M. de Restaud, you could not make your wife happy; she has looked for happiness and found it elsewhere, and you make her suffer for your own ineptitude? He will have to reckon with me. Make yourself easy, Nasie. Aha! he cares about his heir! Good, very good. I will get hold of the boy; isn't he my grandson? What the blazes! I can surely go to see the brat! I will stow him away somewhere; I will take care of him, you may be quite easy. I will bring Restaud to terms, the monster! I shall say to him, 'A word or two with you! If you want your son back again, give my daughter her property, and leave her to do as she pleases.' "

°°°°"Father!"

°°°°"Yes. I am your father, Nasie, a father indeed! That rogue of a great lord had better not ill-treat my daughter. Tonnerre! What is it in my veins? There is the blood of a tiger in me; I could tear those two men to pieces! Oh! children, children! so this is what your lives are! Why, it is death! . . . What will become of you when I shall be here no longer? Fathers ought to live as long as their children. Ah! Lord God in heaven! how ill Thy world is ordered! Thou hast a Son, if what they tell us is true, and yet Thou leavest us to suffer so through our children. My darlings, my darlings! to think that trouble only should bring you to me, that I should only see you with tears on your faces! Ah! yes, yes, you love me, I see that you love me. Come to me and pour out your griefs to me; my heart is large enough to hold them all. Oh! you might rend my heart in pieces, and every fragment would make a father's heart. If only I could bear all your sorrows for you! . . . Ah! you were so happy when you were little and still with me. . . ."

°°°°"We have never been happy since," said Delphine. "Where are the old days when we slid down the sacks in the great granary?"

°°°°"That is not all, father," said Anastasie in Goriot's ear. The old man gave a startled shudder. "The diamonds only sold for a hundred thousand francs. Maxime is hard pressed. There are twelve thousand francs still to pay. He has given me his word that he will be steady and give up play in future. His love is all that I have left in the world. I have paid such a fearful price for it that I should die if I lose him now. I have sacrificed my fortune, my honor, my peace of mind, and my children for him. Oh! do something, so that at the least Maxime may be at large and live undisgraced in the world, where he will assuredly make a career for himself. Something more than my happiness is at stake; the children have nothing, and if he is sent to Sainte-Pelagie all his prospects will be ruined."

°°°°"I haven't the money, Nasie. I have NOTHING--nothing left. This is the end of everything. Yes, the world is crumbling into ruin, I am sure. Fly! Save yourselves! Ah!--I have still my silver buckles left, and half-a-dozen silver spoons and forks, the first I ever had in my life. But I have nothing else except my life annuity, twelve hundred francs . . ."

°°°°"Then what has become of your money in the funds?"

°°°°"I sold out, and only kept a trifle for my wants. I wanted twelve thousand francs to furnish some rooms for Delphine."

°°°°"In your own house?" asked Mme. de Restaud, looking at her sister.

°°°°"What does it matter where they were?" asked Goriot. "The money is spent now."

°°°°"I see how it is," said the Countess. "Rooms for M. de Rastignac. Poor Delphine, take warning by me!"

°°°°"M. de Rastignac is incapable of ruining the woman he loves, dear."

°°°°"Thanks! Delphine. I thought you would have been kinder to me in my troubles, but you never did love me."

°°°°"Yes, yes, she loves you, Nasie," cried Goriot; "she was saying so only just now. We were talking about you, and she insisted that you were beautiful, and that she herself was only pretty!"

°°°°"Pretty!" said the Countess. "She is as hard as a marble statue."

°°°°"And if I am?" cried Delphine, flushing up, "how have you treated me? You would not recognize me; you closed the doors of every house against me; you have never let an opportunity of mortifying me slip by. And when did I come, as you were always doing, to drain our poor father, a thousand francs at a time, till he is left as you see him now? That is all your doing, sister! I myself have seen my father as often as I could. I have not turned him out of the house, and then come and fawned upon him when I wanted money. I did not so much as know that he had spent those twelve thousand francs on me. I am economical, as you know; and when papa has made me presents, it has never been because I came and begged for them."

°°°°"You were better off than I. M. de Marsay was rich, as you have reason to know. You always were as slippery as gold. Good-bye; I have neither sister nor----"

°°°°"Oh! hush, hush, Nasie!" cried her father.

°°°°"Nobody else would repeat what everybody has ceased to believe. You are an unnatural sister!" cried Delphine.

°°°°"Oh, children, children! hush! hush! or I will kill myself before your eyes."

°°°°"There, Nasie, I forgive you," said Mme. de Nucingen; "you are very unhappy. But I am kinder than you are. How could you say THAT just when I was ready to do anything in the world to help you, even to be reconciled with my husband, which for my own sake I---- Oh! it is just like you; you have behaved cruelly to me all through these nine years."

°°°°"Children, children, kiss each other!" cried the father. "You are angels, both of you."

°°°°"No. Let me alone," cried the Countess shaking off the hand that her father had laid on her arm. "She is more merciless than my husband. Any one might think she was a model of all the virtues herself!"

°°°°"I would rather have people think that I owed money to M. de Marsay than own that M. de Trailles had cost me more than two hundred thousand francs," retorted Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"DELPHINE!" cried the Countess, stepping towards her sister.

°°°°"I shall tell you the truth about yourself if you begin to slander me," said the Baroness coldly.

°°°°"Delphine! you are a ----"

°°°°Father Goriot sprang between them, grasped the Countess' hand, and laid his own over her mouth.

°°°°"Good heavens, father! What have you been handling this morning?" said Anastasie.

°°°°"Ah! well, yes, I ought not to have touched you," said the poor father, wiping his hands on his trousers, "but I have been packing up my things; I did not know that you were coming to see me."

°°°°He was glad that he had drawn down her wrath upon himself.

°°°°"Ah!" he sighed, as he sat down, "you children have broken my heart between you. This is killing me. My head feels as if it were on fire. Be good to each other and love each other! This will be the death of me! Delphine! Nasie! come, be sensible; you are both in the wrong. Come, Dedel," he added, looking through his tears at the Baroness, "she must have twelve thousand francs, you see; let us see if we can find them for her. Oh, my girls, do not look at each other like that!" and he sank on his knees beside Delphine. "Ask her to forgive you--just to please me," he said in her ear. "She is more miserable than you are. Come now, Dedel."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Delphine, alarmed at the wild extravagant grief in her father's face, "I was in the wrong, kiss me----"

°°°°"Ah! that is like balm to my heart," cried Father Goriot. "But how are we to find twelve thousand francs? I might offer myself as a substitute in the army----"

°°°°"Oh! father dear!" they both cried, flinging their arms about him. "No, no!"

°°°°"God reward you for the thought. We are not worth it, are we, Nasie?" asked Delphine.

°°°°"And besides, father dear, it would only be a drop in the bucket," observed the Countess.

°°°°"But is flesh and blood worth nothing?" cried the old man in his despair. "I would give body and soul to save you, Nasie. I would do a murder for the man who would rescue you. I would do, as Vautrin did, go to the hulks, go----" he stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and put both hands to his head. "Nothing left!" he cried, tearing his hair. "If I only knew of a way to steal money, but it is so hard to do it, and then you can't set to work by yourself, and it takes time to rob a bank. Yes, it is time I was dead; there is nothing left me to do but to die. I am no good in the world; I am no longer a father! No. She has come to me in her extremity, and, wretch that I am, I have nothing to give her. Ah! you put your money into a life annuity, old scoundrel; and had you not daughters? You did not love them. Die, die in a ditch, like the dog that you are! Yes, I am worse than a dog; a beast would not have done as I have done! Oh! my head . . . it throbs as if it would burst."

°°°°"Papa!" cried both the young women at once, "do, pray, be reasonable!" and they clung to him to prevent him from dashing his head against the wall. There was a sound of sobbing.

°°°°Eugene, greatly alarmed, took the bill that bore Vautrin's signature, saw that the stamp would suffice for a larger sum, altered the figures, made it into a regular bill for twelve thousand francs, payable to Goriot's order, and went to his neighbor's room.

°°°°"Here is the money, madame," he said, handing the piece of paper to her. "I was asleep; your conversation awoke me, and by this means I learned all that I owed to M. Goriot. This bill can be discounted, and I shall meet it punctually at the due date."

°°°°The Countess stood motionless and speechless, but she held the bill in her fingers.

°°°°"Delphine," she said, with a white face, and her whole frame quivering with indignation, anger, and rage, "I forgave you everything; God is my witness that I forgave you, but I cannot forgive this! So this gentleman was there all the time, and you knew it! Your petty spite has let you to wreak your vengeance on me by betraying my secrets, my life, my children's lives, my shame, my honor! There, you are nothing to me any longer. I hate you. I will do all that I can to injure you. I will . . ."

°°°°Anger paralyzed her; the words died in her dry parched throat.

°°°°"Why, he is my son, my child; he is your brother, your preserver!" cried Goriot. "Kiss his hand, Nasie! Stay, I will embrace him myself," he said, straining Eugene to his breast in a frenzied clasp. "Oh my boy! I will be more than a father to you; if I had God's power, I would fling worlds at your feet. Why don't you kiss him, Nasie? He is not a man, but an angel, a angel out of heaven."

°°°°"Never mind her, father; she is mad just now."

°°°°"Mad! am I? And what are you?" cried Mme. de Restaud.

°°°°"Children, children, I shall die if you go on like this," cried the old man, and he staggered and fell on the bed as if a bullet had struck him.--"They are killing me between them," he said to himself.

°°°°The Countess fixed her eyes on Eugene, who stood stock still; all his faculties were numbed by this violent scene.

°°°°"Sir? . . ." she said, doubt and inquiry in her face, tone, and bearing; she took no notice now of her father nor of Delphine, who was hastily unfastening his waistcoat.

°°°°"Madame," said Eugene, answering the question before it was asked, "I will meet the bill, and keep silence about it."

°°°°"You have killed our father, Nasie!" said Delphine, pointing to Goriot, who lay unconscious on the bed. The Countess fled.

°°°°"I freely forgive her," said the old man, opening his eyes; "her position is horrible; it would turn an older head than hers. Comfort Nasie, and be nice to her, Delphine; promise it to your poor father before he dies," he asked, holding Delphine's hand in a convulsive clasp.

°°°°"Oh! what ails you, father?" she cried in real alarm.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing," said Goriot; "it will go off. There is something heavy pressing on my forehead, a little headache. . . . Ah! poor Nasie, what a life lies before her!"

°°°°Just as he spoke, the Countess came back again and flung herself on her knees before him. "Forgive me!" she cried.

°°°°"Come," said her father, "you are hurting me still more."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Countess said, turning to Rastignac, "misery made me unjust to you. You will be a brother to me, will you not?" and she held out her hand. Her eyes were full of tears as she spoke.

°°°°"Nasie," cried Delphine, flinging her arms round her sister, "my little Nasie, let us forget and forgive."

°°°°"No, no," cried Nasie; "I shall never forget!"

°°°°"Dear angels," cried Goriot, "it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won't it?"

°°°°"I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?"

°°°°"There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No, after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in future."

°°°°Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

°°°°"Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper," said Mme. de Nucingen, "but she has a good heart."

°°°°"She came back for the endorsement," said Eugene in Delphine's ear.

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her," he answered, raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did not venture to express.

°°°°"Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent."

°°°°"How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"I should like to go to sleep," he replied.

°°°°Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

°°°°"This evening at the Italiens," she said to Eugene, "and you can let me know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go into your room.--Oh! how frightful!" she cried on the threshold. "Why, you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps of gold."

°°°°A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot's bedside; to all appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, "They are not happy!" Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they were spoken went to his daughter's heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

°°°°"Ah! Delphine!" he said.

°°°°"How are you now?" she asked.

°°°°"Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently. Don't stay with me, children; go, go and be happy."

°°°°Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room, and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

°°°°"Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin," said Eugene.

°°°°Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him next to the old lodger.

°°°°"What is wrong with him?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning."

°°°°"Is there any cure for it?"

°°°°"None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on? There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way."

°°°°"Yes, there was," said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had struck blow on blow at their father's heart.

°°°°"But Delphine at any rate loves her father," he said to himself.

°°°°That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

°°°°"Do not be anxious about him," she said, however, as soon as Eugene began, "our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear. At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake. To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me; what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh! no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in life when everything turns to bitterness."

°°°°Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression on him.

°°°°Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love, they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme. de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

°°°°"What are you thinking about?" she asked.

°°°°"I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me."

°°°°She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more words, and she feared for her self- control.

°°°°"Eugene," she said, changing the conversation, "I wonder whether you know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant's to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d'Ajuda have agreed to keep the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be there. People are wondering what will happen?"

°°°°"The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill Mme. de Beauseant."

°°°°"Oh, no," said Delphine, smiling, "you do not know that kind of woman. Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for your sake."

°°°°"Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set in circulation here."

°°°°"We shall know the truth to-morrow."

°°°°Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d'Artois. Yesterday evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o'clock in the morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot's existence. The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four o'clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

°°°°"Aha!" said the painter as Eugene came in, "Father Goriot has broken down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of its brightest ornaments."

°°°°Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

°°°°"Hey! Monsieur Eugene!"

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you," shouted Sylvie.

°°°°"It is this, sir," said the widow. "You and M. Goriot should by rights have moved out on the 15th of February. That was three days ago; to-day is the 18th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied."

°°°°"Why can't you trust him?"

°°°°"Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died, those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won't fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and forks he has left, I don't know why. He had got himself up to look quite young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks; he looked quite young again."

°°°°"I will be responsible," said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he foresaw the end.

°°°°He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot's room. The old man was tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

°°°°"Good-evening, father," said Eugene.

°°°°The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

°°°°"How is SHE?"

°°°°"She is quite well. But how are you?"

°°°°"There is nothing much the matter."

°°°°"Don't tire him," said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the room.

°°°°"Well?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in; I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are acting."

°°°°"Is it possible to move him?"

°°°°"Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as quiet as possible----"

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," said Eugene, "we will nurse him between us."

°°°°"I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him."

°°°°"And what did he say?"

°°°°"He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went, and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his strength. One of his daughters has been here."

°°°°"Was it the Countess?" asked Eugene. "A tall, dark-haired woman, with large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Leave him to me for a bit," said Rastignac. "I will make him confess; he will tell me all about it."

°°°°"And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is still some hope left."

°°°°"All right."

°°°°"How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow," said Father Goriot when they were alone. "They are going to a grand ball."

°°°°"What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this evening that you have to stop in bed?"

°°°°"Nothing."

°°°°"Did not Anastasie come to see you?" demanded Rastignac.

°°°°"Yes," said Father Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then, don't keep anything from me. What more did she want of you?"

°°°°"Oh, she was very miserable," he answered, gathering up all his strength to speak. "It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds, Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie's waiting-woman advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie's maid saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair. She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that heartless scoundrel and say, 'I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker; pay her for me!' She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there too in a superb toilette, and Anastasie ought not to be outshone by her younger sister. And then--she was drowned in tears, poor girl! I felt so humbled yesterday when I had not the twelve thousand francs, that I would have given the rest of my miserable life to wipe out that wrong. You see, I could have borne anything once, but latterly this want of money has broken my heart. Oh! I did not do it by halves; I titivated myself up a bit, and went out and sold my spoons and forks and buckles for six hundred francs; then I went to old Daddy Gobseck, and sold a year's interest on my annuity for four hundred francs down. Pshaw! I can live on dry bread, as I did when I was a young man; if I have done it before, I can do it again. My Nasie shall have one happy evening, at any rate. She shall be smart. The banknote for a thousand francs is under my pillow; it warms me to have it lying there under my head, for it is going to make my poor Nasie happy. She can turn that bad girl Victoire out of the house. A servant that cannot trust her mistress, did any one ever hear the like! I shall be quite well to-morrow. Nasie is coming at ten o'clock. They must not think that I am ill, or they will not go to the ball; they will stop and take care of me. To-morrow Nasie will come and hold me in her arms as if I were one of her children; her kisses will make me well again. After all, I might have spent the thousand francs on physic; I would far rather give them to my little Nasie, who can charm all the pain away. At any rate, I am some comfort to her in her misery; and that makes up for my unkindness in buying an annuity. She is in the depths, and I cannot draw her out of them now. Oh! I will go into business again, I will buy wheat in Odessa; out there, wheat fetches a quarter of the price it sells for here. There is a law against the importation of grain, but the good folk who made the law forgot to prohibit the introduction of wheat products and food stuffs made from corn. Hey! hey! . . . That struck me this morning. There is a fine trade to be done in starch."

°°°°Eugene, watching the old man's face, thought that his friend was light-headed.

°°°°"Come," he said, "do not talk any more, you must rest----" Just then Bianchon came up, and Eugene went down to dinner.

°°°°The two students sat up with him that night, relieving each other in turn. Bianchon brought up his medical books and studied; Eugene wrote letters home to his mother and sisters. Next morning Bianchon thought the symptoms more hopeful, but the patient's condition demanded continual attention, which the two students alone were willing to give--a task impossible to describe in the squeamish phraseology of the epoch. Leeches must be applied to the wasted body, the poultices and hot foot-baths, and other details of the treatment required the physical strength and devotion of the two young men. Mme. de Restaud did not come; but she sent a messenger for the money.

°°°°"I expected she would come herself; but it would have been a pity for her to come, she would have been anxious about me," said the father, and to all appearances he was well content.

°°°°At seven o'clock that evening Therese came with a letter from Delphine.

°°°°"What are you doing, dear friend? I have been loved for a very   little while, and I am neglected already? In the confidences of   heart and heart, I have learned to know your soul--you are too   noble not to be faithful for ever, for you know that love with   all its infinite subtle changes of feeling is never the same.   Once you said, as we were listening to the Prayer in Mose in   Egitto, 'For some it is the monotony of a single note; for   others, it is the infinite of sound.' Remember that I am   expecting you this evening to take me to Mme. de Beauseant's   ball. Every one knows now that the King signed M. d'Ajuda's   marriage-contract this morning, and the poor Vicomtesse knew   nothing of it until two o'clock this afternoon. All Paris will   flock to her house, of course, just as a crowd fills the Place de   Greve to see an execution. It is horrible, is it not, to go out   of curiosity to see if she will hide her anguish, and whether she   will die courageously? I certainly should not go, my friend, if I   had been at her house before; but, of course, she will not   receive society any more after this, and all my efforts would be   in vain. My position is a very unusual one, and besides, I am   going there partly on your account. I am waiting for you. If you   are not beside me in less than two hours, I do not know whether I   could forgive such treason."

°°°°Rastignac took up a pen and wrote:

°°°°"I am waiting till the doctor comes to know if there is any hope   of your father's life. He is lying dangerously ill. I will come   and bring you the news, but I am afraid it may be a sentence of   death. When I come you can decide whether you can go to the   ball.--Yours a thousand times."

°°°°At half-past eight the doctor arrived. He did not take a very hopeful view of the case, but thought that there was no immediate danger. Improvements and relapses might be expected, and the good man's life and reason hung in the balance.

°°°°"It would be better for him to die at once," the doctor said as he took leave.

°°°°Eugene left Goriot to Bianchon's care, and went to carry the sad news to Mme. de Nucingen. Family feeling lingered in her, and this must put an end for the present to her plans of amusement.

°°°°"Tell her to enjoy her evening as if nothing had happened," cried Goriot. He had been lying in a sort of stupor, but he suddenly sat upright as Eugene went out.

°°°°Eugene, half heartbroken, entered Delphine's. Her hair had been dressed; she wore her dancing slippers; she had only to put on her ball-dress; but when the artist is giving the finishing stroke to his creation, the last touches require more time than the whole groundwork of the picture.

°°°°"Why, you are not dressed!" she cried.

°°°°"Madame, your father----"

°°°°"My father again!" she exclaimed, breaking in upon him. "You need not teach me what is due to my father, I have known my father this long while. Not a word, Eugene. I will hear what you have to say when you are dressed. My carriage is waiting, take it, go round to your rooms and dress, Therese has put out everything in readiness for you. Come back as soon as you can; we will talk about my father on the way to Mme. de Beauseant's. We must go early; if we have to wait our turn in a row of carriages, we shall be lucky if we get there by eleven o'clock."

°°°°"Madame----"

°°°°"Quick! not a word!" she cried, darting into her dressing-room for a necklace.

°°°°"Do go, Monsieur Eugene, or you will vex madame," said Therese, hurrying him away; and Eugene was too horror-stricken by this elegant parricide to resist.

°°°°He went to his rooms and dressed, sad, thoughtful, and dispirited. The world of Paris was like an ocean of mud for him just then; and it seemed that whoever set foot in that black mire must needs sink into it up to the chin.

°°°°"Their crimes are paltry," said Eugene to himself. "Vautrin was greater."

°°°°He had seen society in its three great phases--Obedience, Struggle, and Revolt; the Family, the World, and Vautrin; and he hesitated in his choice. Obedience was dull, Revolt impossible, Struggle hazardous. His thoughts wandered back to the home circle. He thought of the quiet uneventful life, the pure happiness of the days spent among those who loved him there. Those loving and beloved beings passed their lives in obedience to the natural laws of the hearth, and in that obedience found a deep and constant serenity, unvexed by torments such as these. Yet, for all his good impulses, he could not bring himself to make profession of the religion of pure souls to Delphine, nor to prescribe the duties of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was capable of stepping over her father's corpse to go to the ball; and within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the courage to leave her to go alone.

°°°°"She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it," he said to himself. Then he turned the doctor's dictum over in his mind; he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of traitorous excuses for Delphine's conduct. She did not know how ill her father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations; and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family life that excuse the apparent offence.

°°°°Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his, and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, "how is my father?"

°°°°"Very dangerously ill," he answered; "if you will grant me a proof of your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way."

°°°°"Very well," she said. "Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice, and don't preach to me. Come."

°°°°They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

°°°°"What is it now?" she asked.

°°°°"I can hear the death-rattle in your father's throat," he said almost angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of Mme. de Restaud's vanity and cruelty, of her father's final act of self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie's golden embroideries. Delphine cried.

°°°°"I shall look frightful," she thought. She dried her tears.

°°°°"I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside," she said aloud.

°°°°"Ah! now you are as I would have you," exclaimed Rastignac.

°°°°The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the Vicomtesse.

°°°°The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

°°°°Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a last audience of one of its sovereigns.

°°°°"I was afraid that you would not come," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°"Madame," he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a reproach, "I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here."

°°°°"Good," she said, and she took his hand. "You are perhaps the only one I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a woman."

°°°°She took Rastignac's arm, and went towards a sofa in the card- room.

°°°°"I want you to go to the Marquis," she said. "Jacques, my footman, will go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one shall bring me word."

°°°°She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

°°°°Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d'Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide, feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave a casket to the student, saying as he did so, "They are all there."

°°°°He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes, and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

°°°°"Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene." He grasped Rastignac's hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him. Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the Vicomtesse's room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey. He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

°°°°"Ah! my friend! . . ." said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid her hand on Rastignac's shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin's uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it in the fire, and watched it burn.

°°°°"They are dancing," she said. "They all came very early; but death will be long in coming. Hush! my friend," and she laid a finger on Rastignac's lips, seeing that he was about to speak. "I shall never see Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o'clock this morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my arrangements; since three o'clock this afternoon I have been busy signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I could send to . . ."

°°°°She broke off.

°°°°"He was sure to be . . ."

°°°°Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are impossible to utter.

°°°°"And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service this evening," she said. "I should like to give you some pledge of friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay," she said, glancing about her, "there is this box that has held my gloves. Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer. Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to you in the Rue d'Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my tears. One last look round first."

°°°°She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and took the student's arm.

°°°°"Let us go!" she said.

°°°°This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene's arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her husband's eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten Rastignac's sad thougths; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

°°°°"Come," she said, "I must not deprive you of a pleasure."

°°°°Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover's feet the homage she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move henceforth.

°°°°"What do you think of Nasie?" she asked him.

°°°°"She has discounted everything, even her own father's death," said Rastignac.

°°°°Towards four o'clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M. de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, "It is a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among us."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an exclamation broke from her.

°°°°"I saw how it was, Clara," said Mme. de Langeais. "You are going from among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you have heard me, until we have understood each other."

°°°°She took her friend's arm, and they went together into the next room. There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

°°°°"I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself. You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words. One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night; do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night, Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail, I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?"

°°°°"Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!" called the Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was waiting there.

°°°°The student knelt to kiss his cousin's hand.

°°°°"Good-bye, Antoinette!" said Mme. de Beauseant. "May you be happy."--She turned to the student. "You are young," she said; "you have some beliefs still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of this world."

°°°°It was nearly five o'clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

°°°°"There is no hope for poor Father Goriot," said Bianchon, as Rastignac came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then he turned to his friend. "Dear fellow, you are content with the modest career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world, nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden away under the covering of gems and gold."

°°°°At two o'clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

°°°°"Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours," he said; "but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result, nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he had not a farthing of his own. What have you?"

°°°°"I have twenty francs left," said Rastignac; "but I will take them to the roulette table, I shall be sure to win."

°°°°"And if you lose?"

°°°°"Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for money."

°°°°"And suppose they refuse?" Bianchon retorted. "The most pressing thing just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides, Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him till I come back."

°°°°The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying. Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot's face, so livid, distorted, and feeble.

°°°°"How are you, papa?" he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came into his eyes.

°°°°"Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?"

°°°°"No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the smell was something horrible.

°°°°"MON DIEU!" said Rastignac. "To think of those daughters of his."

°°°°"One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this," said the house student, pointing to a large white jar. "If he begins to groan, and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon, a pupil of Gall's came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised; whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here," said Bianchon, touching the back of the head, "very strange things have been known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives."

°°°°"Did they enjoy themselves?" It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had recognized Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters," said Bianchon. "Scores of times last night he said to me, 'They are dancing now! She has her dress.' He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take it, calling with that tone in his voice, for 'Delphine! my little Delphine! and Nasie!' Upon my word," said the medical student, "it was enough to make any one burst out crying."

°°°°"Delphine," said the old man, "she is there, isn't she? I knew she was there," and his eyes sought the door.

°°°°"I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready," said Bianchon. "They ought to go on at once."

°°°°Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was shocking to see.

°°°°"Noble natures cannot dwell in this world," he said; "Mme de Beauseant has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and feelings?"

°°°°Pictures of yesterday's ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

°°°°"I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to the base of the spine, and send round for us."

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," exclaimed Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view," said the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

°°°°"So!" said Eugene. "Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old man for his own sake?"

°°°°"You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning," returned Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. "Doctors who have seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my dear fellow, I can see the patient still."

°°°°He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

°°°°"Ah! dear boy, is that you?" said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

°°°°"Do you feel better?" asked the law student, taking his hand.

°°°°"Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man here, who has burned up all my bark fuel."

°°°°"I can hear Christophe coming upstairs," Eugene answered. "He is bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you."

°°°°"Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!) Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left now."

°°°°Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man's ear, "I will pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble."

°°°°"My daughters told you that they were coming, didn't they, Christophe? Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once again before I die. Tell them that, but don't alarm them more than you can help."

°°°°Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

°°°°"They will come before long," the old man went on. "I know them so well. My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die; and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning. 'Good-morning, papa!' they used to say, and I would take them on my knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they loved me with all their hearts. MON DIEU! why could they not always be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah! forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for you have used me to endure pain. MON DIEU! if only I held their hands in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. HE will see them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked. They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this is! what pain this is! . . . ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they MUST have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make millions. (Oh! this is agony!)"

°°°°Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength to endure the pain.

°°°°"If they were here, I should not complain," he said. "So why should I complain now?"

°°°°He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

°°°°"First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse," he said; "but she and her husband were so busy that I couldn't get to speak to her. When I insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and went on like this: 'M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important business, when it is all finished she can go.' The gentleman looked angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said, 'Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.' As for Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, 'Ah yes, but madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It will be time enough then to tell her bad news!' I begged and I prayed, but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was out."

°°°°"To think that neither of his daughters should come!" exclaimed Rastignac. "I will write to them both."

°°°°"Neither of them!" cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. "They are busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not. Not until you are dying do you know your children. . . . Oh! my friend, do not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it. No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it."

°°°°The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

°°°°"Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and THEY would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money? If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God! who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh! this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was 'My kind father' here, 'My dear father' there. There was always a place for me at their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought. How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening parties. In fact, they acknowleged me their father; publicly they owned that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see, and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence, but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law's ear, 'Who may that gentleman be?'--'The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very rich.'--'The devil, e is!' they would say, and look again at me with the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one thing I did learn thoroughly --I knew that I was not wanted here on earth.

°°°°"The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that was how they both turned me out of the house.

°°°°"Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured; Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to- day? Have I not more than expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

°°°°"Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see, my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! MON DIEU! These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie! Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to ruin if a father's rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see. The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them, my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know what it means to trample on a father's corpse? There is a God in heaven who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

°°°°"Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss; one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault. I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so. It is no one's affair but mine; man's justice and God's justice have nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly; I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch, I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through love.

°°°°"My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should be present at their father's deathbed; the law is on my side. It would only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit, as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine, mine!" and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak spoke of menace.

°°°°"There, there, dear father," said Eugene, "lie down again; I will write to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them myself, if they do not come before."

°°°°"If they do not come?" repeated the old man, sobbing. "Why, I shall be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life; they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one. . . . Go to them; just tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud as I do now, 'Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who has been so kind to you is lying ill!'--Not a sound; no one comes! Then am I do die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them. I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all, my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh? . . . What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister. . . . Eugene, you are my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me nothing but my heart."

°°°°"Christophe!" shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man moaned, and by his cries, "go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to you."

°°°°"Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military, anything and everything, but make them come!" He looked at Eugene, and a last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. "Go to the authorities, to the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!"

°°°°"But you have cursed them."

°°°°"Who said that!" said the old man in dull amazement. "You know quite well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I can see them. . . . Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay their hands there, I think I should get better. . . . MON DIEU! who will recover their money for them when I am gone? . . . I will manufacture vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes."

°°°°"Here is something to drink," said Eugene, supporting the dying man on his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot's lips.

°°°°"How you must love your own father and mother!" said the old man, and grasped the student's hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling grasp. "I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that has been my life for the last ten years. . . . I have no daughters, my sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl's mind and contaminates her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid them! . . . Kill them! . . . Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They have murdered me between them! . . . Death or my daughters! . . . Ah! it is too late, I am dying, and they are not here! . . . Dying without them! . . . Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----"

°°°°"Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest; don't worry yourself, don't think."

°°°°"I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!"

°°°°"You SHALL see them."

°°°°"Really?" cried the old man, still wandering. "Oh! shall I see them; I shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my fingers . . . their hair . . ."

°°°°His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his daughters' hair.

°°°°"My blessing on them . . ." he said, making an effort, "my blessing . . ."

°°°°His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

°°°°"I met Christophe," he said; "he is gone for your cab."

°°°°Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath had grown.

°°°°"He will not get over this, I am sure," said Bianchon. He felt the old man's pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

°°°°"The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be better for him to die."

°°°°"Ah! my word, it would!"

°°°°"What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death."

°°°°"Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard. . . . There is a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

°°°°"We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come from?"

°°°°Rastignac took out his watch.

°°°°"There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall have to pay the cabman when I get home again."

°°°°Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder. The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de Restaud's house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could see no one.

°°°°"But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying," Rastignac told the man.

°°°°"The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----"

°°°°"If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at once."

°°°°The man went out.

°°°°Eugene waited for a long while. "Perhaps her father is dying at this moment," he thought.

°°°°Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte," said Rastignac, "M. Goriot, your father-in- law, is lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter. He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----"

°°°°"I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are aware," the Count answered coolly. "His character has been compromised in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much more important matters to think about than the things that fools and chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a few seconds; it lies entirely with her----"

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct; you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her, and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I ask."

°°°°"You can tell her yourself," the Count answered, impressed by the thrill of indignation in Eugene's voice.

°°°°The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her. Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to speak.

°°°°"I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all he would forgive me. . . . I did not think there was such torture in the world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not give way as long as I live," she said, turning to her husband. "I am a mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of appearances!" she cried aloud in her despair.

°°°°Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess' life. M. de Restaud's manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in bed.

°°°°"Poor dear Eugene, I am ill," she said. "I caught cold after the ball, and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come."

°°°°"If you were at death's door," Eugene broke in, "you must be carried somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer."

°°°°"Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just as you wish. As for HIM, he would die of grief I know if I went out to see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as I have seen the doctor.--Ah!" she cried out, "you are not wearing your watch, how is that?"

°°°°Eugene reddened.

°°°°"Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it. . . . Oh! it would be very wrong of you!"

°°°°The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, "Do you want to know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch has been pawned, for I had nothing either."

°°°°Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

°°°°"I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why, I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before you.--Therese," she called to the waiting-woman, "ask M. de Nucingen to come upstairs at once and speak to me."

°°°°Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve; he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine's purse for money, so as to dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse. He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient's back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of science, and it was tried in vain.

°°°°"Can you feel them?" asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of Rastignac, and answered, "They are coming, are they not?"

°°°°"There is hope yet," said the surgeon; "he can speak."

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene, "Delphine is coming."

°°°°"Oh! that is nothing!" said Bianchon; "he has been talking about his daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for water, they say----"

°°°°"We may as well give up," said the physician, addressing the surgeon. "Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless."

°°°°Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his loathsome bed.

°°°°"But the sheets ought to be changed," added the physician. "Even if there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come back again, Bianchon," he said, turning to the medical student. "If he complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm."

°°°°He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

°°°°"Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy," said Bianchon, as soon as they were alone; "we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help us to make the bed."

°°°°Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a customer.

°°°°"My dear Monsieur Eugene," she said, when he had spoken, "you know quite as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes, you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you; altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make."

°°°°Eugene hurried up to Goriot's room.

°°°°"Bianchon," he cried, "the money or the watch?"

°°°°"There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money."

°°°°Rastignac hurried downstairs.

°°°°"Here, madame" he said in disgust, "let us square accounts. M. Goriot will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----"

°°°°"Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman," she said, counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

°°°°"Let us get this over," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen."

°°°°"You won't forget Sylvie," said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene's ear; "she has been sitting up these two nights."

°°°°As soon as Eugene's back was turned, the old woman hurried after her handmaid.

°°°°"Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number 7. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse," she said in Sylvie's ear.

°°°°Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear the elderly economist.

°°°°"Quick," said Bianchon, "let us change his shirt. Hold him upright."

°°°°Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

°°°°"Ah! yes!" cried Bianchon. "It is the little locket and the chain made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on the chimney-piece."

°°°°Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded golden hair--Mme. Goriot's hair, no doubt. He read the name on the little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other. It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes, the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students, that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a shrill cry of delight.

°°°°"Nasie! Fifine!"

°°°°"There is life in him yet," said Bianchon.

°°°°"What does he go on living for?" said Sylvie.

°°°°"To suffer," answered Rastignac.

°°°°Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the students' heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair, they heard a faint whisper:

°°°°"Ah! my angels!"

°°°°Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which fled forth with them as they left his lips.

°°°°"Poor dear!" cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most ghastly and involuntary of lies.

°°°°The father's last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

°°°°"He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last, that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the throat. The brain must be completely suffused."

°°°°As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman hastened up, panting for breath.

°°°°"She has come too late," said Rastignac.

°°°°But it was not Delphine; it was Therese, her waiting-woman, who stood in the doorway.

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene," she said, "monsieur and madame have had a terrible scene about some money that Madame (poor thing!) wanted for her father. She fainted, and the doctor came, and she had to be bled, calling out all the while, 'My father is dying; I want to see papa!' It was heartbreaking to hear her----"

°°°°"That will do, Therese. If she came now, it would be trouble thrown away. M. Goriot cannot recognize any one now."

°°°°"Poor, dear gentleman, is he as bad at that?" said Therese.

°°°°"You don't want me now, I must go and look after my dinner; it is half-past four," remarked Sylvie. The next instant she all but collided with Mme. de Restaud on the landing outside.

°°°°There was something awful and appalling in the sudden apparition of the Countess. She saw the bed of death by the dim light of the single candle, and her tears flowed at the sight of her father's passive features, from which the life had almost ebbed. Bianchon with thoughtful tact left the room.

°°°°"I could not escape soon enough," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°The student bowed sadly in reply. Mme. de Restaud took her father's hand and kissed it.

°°°°"Forgive me, father! You used to say that my voice would call you back from the grave; ah! come back for one moment to bless your penitent daughter. Do you hear me? Oh! this is fearful! No one on earth will ever bless me henceforth; every one hates me; no one loves me but you in all the world. My own children will hate me. Take me with you, father; I will love you, I will take care of you. He does not hear me . . . I am mad . . ."

°°°°She fell on her knees, and gazed wildly at the human wreck before her.

°°°°"My cup of misery is full," she said, turning her eyes upon Eugene. "M. de Trailles has fled, leaving enormous debts behind him, and I have found out that he was deceiving me. My husband will never forgive me, and I have left my fortune in his hands. I have lost all my illusions. Alas! I have forsaken the one heart that loved me (she pointed to her father as she spoke), and for whom? I have held his kindness cheap, and slighted his affection; many and many a time I have given him pain, ungrateful wretch that I am!"

°°°°"He knew it," said Rastignac.

°°°°Just then Goriot's eyelids unclosed; it was only a muscular contraction, but the Countess' sudden start of reviving hope was no less dreadful than the dying eyes.

°°°°"Is it possible that he can hear me?" cried the Countess. "No," she answered herself, and sat down beside the bed. As Mme. de Restaud seemed to wish to sit by her father, Eugene went down to take a little food. The boarders were already assembled.

°°°°"Well," remarked the painter, as he joined them, "it seems that there is to be a death-orama upstairs."

°°°°"Charles, I think you might find something less painful to joke about," said Eugene.

°°°°"So we may not laugh here?" returned the painter. "What harm does it do? Bianchon said that the old man was quite insensible."

°°°°"Well, then," said the employe from the Museum, "he will die as he has lived."

°°°°"My father is dead!" shrieked the Countess.

°°°°The terrible cry brought Sylvie, Rastignac, and Bianchon; Mme. de Restaud had fainted away. When she recovered they carried her downstairs, and put her into the cab that stood waiting at the door. Eugene sent Therese with her, and bade the maid take the Countess to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Bianchon came down to them.

°°°°"Yes, he is dead," he said.

°°°°"Come, sit down to dinner, gentlemen," said Mme. Vauquer, "or the soup will be cold."

°°°°The two students sat down together.

°°°°"What is the next thing to be done?" Eugene asked of Bianchon.

°°°°"I have closed his eyes and composed his limbs," said Bianchon. "When the certificate has been officially registered at the Mayor's office, we will sew him in his winding sheet and bury him somewhere. What do you think we ought to do?"

°°°°"He will not smell at his bread like this any more," said the painter, mimicking the old man's little trick.

°°°°"Oh, hang it all!" cried the tutor, "let Father Goriot drop, and let us have something else for a change. He is a standing dish, and we have had him with every sauce this hour or more. It is one of the privileges of the good city of Paris that anybody may be born, or live, or die there without attracting any attention whatsoever. Let us profit by the advantages of civilization. There are fifty or sixty deaths every day; if you have a mind to do it, you can sit down at any time and wail over whole hecatombs of dead in Paris. Father Goriot has gone off the hooks, has he? So much the better for him. If you venerate his memory, keep it to yourselves, and let the rest of us feed in peace."

°°°°"Oh, to be sure," said the widow, "it is all the better for him that he is dead. It looks as though he had had trouble enough, poor soul, while he was alive."

°°°°And this was all the funeral oration delivered over him who had been for Eugene the type and embodiment of Fatherhood.

°°°°The fifteen lodgers began to talk as usual. When Bianchon and Eugene had satisfied their hunger, the rattle of spoons and forks, the boisterous conversation, the expressions on the faces that bespoke various degrees of want of feeling, gluttony, or indifference, everything about them made them shiver with loathing. They went out to find a priest to watch that night with the dead. It was necessary to measure their last pious cares by the scanty sum of money that remained. Before nine o'clock that evening the body was laid out on the bare sacking of the bedstead in the desolate room; a lighted candle stood on either side, and the priest watched at the foot. Rastignac made inquiries of this latter as to the expenses of the funeral, and wrote to the Baron de Nucingen and the Comte de Restaud, entreating both gentlemen to authorize their man of business to defray the charges of laying their father-in-law in the grave. He sent Christophe with the letters; then he went to bed, tired out, and slept.

°°°°Next day Bianchon and Rastignac were obliged to take the certificate to the registrar themselves, and by twelve o'clock the formalities were completed. Two hours went by, no word came from the Count nor from the Baron; nobody appeared to act for them, and Rastignac had already been obliged to pay the priest. Sylvie asked ten francs for sewing the old man in his winding- sheet and making him ready for the grave, and Eugene and Bianchon calculated that they had scarcely sufficient to pay for the funeral, if nothing was forthcoming from the dead man's family. So it was the medical student who laid him in a pauper's coffin, despatched from Bianchon's hospital, whence he obtained it at a cheaper rate.

°°°°"Let us play those wretches a trick," said he. "Go to the cemetery, buy a grave for five years at Pere-Lachaise, and arrange with the Church and the undertaker to have a third-class funeral. If the daughters and their husbands decline to repay you, you can carve this on the headstone--'HERE LIES M. GORIOT, FATHER OF THE COMTESSE DE RESTAUD AND THE BARONNE DE NUCINGEN, INTERRED AT THE EXPENSE OF TWO STUDENTS.' "

°°°°Eugene took part of his friend's advice, but only after he had gone in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

°°°°"Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their father, and are in deep grief over their loss."

°°°°Eugene's Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was impossible to reach Delphine.

°°°°"Sell some of your ornaments," he wrote hastily in the porter's room, "so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place."

°°°°He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the lodging-house about three o'clock. In spite of himself, the tears came into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth, was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs. A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

°°°°Bianchon's duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he had made for the burial service. The house student's note told Rastignac that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading Bianchon's scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot's two daughters in Mme. Vauquer's hands.

°°°°"How dared you take it?" he asked.

°°°°"Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?" retorted Sylvie. "It is gold."

°°°°"Of course it shall!" Eugene answered indignantly; "he shall at any rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with him."

°°°°When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man's breast the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were innocent little maidens, before they began "to think for themselves," as he had moaned out in his agony.

°°°°Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker's men were the only followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. When the coffin had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked round in vain for Goriot's two daughters or their husbands. Christophe was his only fellow- mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe's hand. He could not utter a word just then.

°°°°"Yes, Monsieur Eugene," said Christophe, "he was a good and worthy man, who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any harm, and gave nobody any trouble."

°°°°The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

°°°°The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the Libera nos and the De profundis. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with Eugene and Christophe.

°°°°"There is no one else to follow us," remarked the priest, "so we may as well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five."

°°°°But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen, arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o'clock Goriot's coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters' servants standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that fell on Father Goriot's grave, Eugene Rastignac's youth ended. He folded his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

°°°°He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste of its honey, and said magniloquently:

°°°°"Henceforth there is war between us."

°°°°And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine with Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°ADDENDUM

°°°°The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

°°°°Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d'   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Secrets of a Princess   Beatrix

°°°°Beauseant, Marquis   An Episode under the Terror

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomte de   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomtesse de   The Deserted Woman   Albert Savarus

°°°°Bianchon, Horace   The Atheist's Mass   Cesar Birotteau   The Commission in Lunacy   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   A Bachelor's Establishment   The Secrets of a Princess   The Government Clerks   Pierrette   A Study of Woman   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Honorine   The Seamy Side of History   The Magic Skin   A Second Home   A Prince of Bohemia   Letters of Two Brides   The Muse of the Department   The Imaginary Mistress   The Middle Classes   Cousin Betty   The Country Parson In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:   Another Study of Woman   La Grande Breteche

°°°°Bibi-Lupin (chief of secret police, called himself Gondureau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de   Sarrasine

°°°°Collin, Jacques   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Derville   Gobseck   A Start in Life   The Gondreville Mystery   Colonel Chabert   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Franchessini, Colonel   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Galathionne, Princess   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van   Gobseck   Cesar Birotteau   The Government Clerks   The Unconscious Humoriists

°°°°Jacques (M. de Beauseant's butler)   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Langeais, Duchesse Antoinette de   The Thirteen

°°°°Marsay, Henri de   The Thirteen   The Unconscious Humorists   Another Study of Woman   The Lily of the Valley   Jealousies of a Country Town   Ursule Mirouet   A Marriage Settlement   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Letters of Two Brides   The Ball at Sceaux   Modest Mignon   The Secrets of a Princess   The Gondreville Mystery   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Maurice (de Restaud's valet)   Gobseck

°°°°Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de   The Thirteen   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Another Study of Woman   Pierrette   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Nucingen, Baron Frederic de   The Firm of Nucingen   Pierrette   Cesar Birotteau   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Another Study of Woman   The Secrets of a Princess   A Man of Business   Cousin Betty   The Muse of the Department   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de   The Thirteen   Eugenie Grandet   Cesar Birotteau   Melmoth Reconciled   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   The Commission in Lunacy   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Modeste Mignon   The Firm of Nucingen   Another Study of Woman   A Daughter of Eve   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Poiret   The Government Clerks   A Start in Life   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Poiret, Madame (nee Christine-Michelle Michonneau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de (Eugene's parents)   Lost Illusions

°°°°Rastignac, Eugene de   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Ball at Sceaux   The Interdiction   A Study of Woman   Another Study of Woman   The Magic Skin   The Secrets of a Princess   A Daughter of Eve   The Gondreville Mystery   The Firm of Nucingen   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Rastignac, Laure-Rose and Agathe de   Lost Illusions   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Rastignac, Monseigneur Gabriel de   The Country Parson   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Restaud, Comte de   Gobseck

°°°°Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de   Gobseck

°°°°Selerier   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Taillefer, Jean-Frederic   The Firm of Nucingen   The Magic Skin   The Red Inn

°°°°Taillefer, Victorine   The Red Inn

°°°°Therese   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Tissot, Pierre-Francois   A Prince of Bohemia

°°°°Trailles, Comte Maxime de   Cesar Birotteau   Gobseck   Ursule Mirouet   A Man of Business   The Member for Arcis   The Secrets of a Princess   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   Beatrix   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°End

°°°°Eugenie Grandet

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Maria.

°°°°May your name, that of one whose portrait is the noblest ornament

°°°°of this work, lie on its opening pages like a branch of sacred

°°°°box, taken from an unknown tree, but sanctified by religion, and

°°°°kept ever fresh and green by pious hands to bless the house.De Balzac.

°°°°EUGENIE GRANDET

°°°°I

°°°°There are houses in certain provincial towns whose aspect inspiresmelancholy, akin to that called forth by sombre cloisters, drearymoorlands, or the desolation of ruins. Within these houses there is,perhaps, the silence of the cloister, the barrenness of moors, theskeleton of ruins; life and movement are so stagnant there that astranger might think them uninhabited, were it not that he encounterssuddenly the pale, cold glance of a motionless person, whose half-monastic face peers beyond the window-casing at the sound of anunaccustomed step.

°°°°Such elements of sadness formed the physiognomy, as it were, of adwelling-house in Saumur which stands at the end of the steep streetleading to the chateau in the upper part of the town. This street--nowlittle frequented, hot in summer, cold in winter, dark in certainsections--is remarkable for the resonance of its little pebblypavement, always clean and dry, for the narrowness of its tortuousroad-way, for the peaceful stillness of its houses, which belong tothe Old town and are over-topped by the ramparts. Houses threecenturies old are still solid, though built of wood, and their diversaspects add to the originality which commends this portion of Saumurto the attention of artists and antiquaries.

°°°°It is difficult to pass these houses without admiring the enormousoaken beams, their ends carved into fantastic figures, which crownwith a black bas-relief the lower floor of most of them. In one placethese transverse timbers are covered with slate and mark a bluish linealong the frail wall of a dwelling covered by a roof /en colombage/which bends beneath the weight of years, and whose rotting shinglesare twisted by the alternate action of sun and rain. In another placeblackened, worn-out window-sills, with delicate sculptures nowscarcely discernible, seem too weak to bear the brown clay pots fromwhich springs the heart's-ease or the rose-bush of some poor working-woman. Farther on are doors studded with enormous nails, where thegenius of our forefathers has traced domestic hieroglyphics, of whichthe meaning is now lost forever. Here a Protestant attested hisbelief; there a Leaguer cursed Henry IV.; elsewhere some bourgeois hascarved the insignia of his /noblesse de cloches/, symbols of his long-forgotten magisterial glory. The whole history of France is there.Next to a tottering house with roughly plastered walls, where anartisan enshrines his tools, rises the mansion of a country gentleman,on the stone arch of which above the door vestiges of armorialbearings may still be seen, battered by the many revolutions that haveshaken France since 1789. In this hilly street the ground-floors ofthe merchants are neither shops nor warehouses; lovers of the MiddleAges will here find the /ouvrouere/ of our forefathers in all itsnaive simplicity. These low rooms, which have no shop-frontage, noshow-windows, in fact no glass at all, are deep and dark and withoutinterior or exterior decoration. Their doors open in two parts, eachroughly iron-bound; the upper half is fastened back within the room,the lower half, fitted with a spring-bell, swings continually to andfro. Air and light reach the damp den within, either through the upperhalf of the door, or through an open space between the ceiling and alow front wall, breast-high, which is closed by solid shutters thatare taken down every morning, put up every evening, and held in placeby heavy iron bars.

°°°°This wall serves as a counter for the merchandise. No delusive displayis there; only samples of the business, whatever it may chance to be,--such, for instance, as three or four tubs full of codfish and salt,a few bundles of sail-cloth, cordage, copper wire hanging from thejoists above, iron hoops for casks ranged along the wall, or a fewpieces of cloth upon the shelves. Enter. A neat girl, glowing withyouth, wearing a white kerchief, her arms red and bare, drops herknitting and calls her father or her mother, one of whom comes forwardand sells you what you want, phlegmatically, civilly, or arrogantly,according to his or her individual character, whether it be a matterof two sous' or twenty thousand francs' worth of merchandise. You maysee a cooper, for instance, sitting in his doorway and twirling histhumbs as he talks with a neighbor. To all appearance he owns nothingmore than a few miserable boat-ribs and two or three bundles of laths;but below in the port his teeming wood-yard supplies all the cooperagetrade of Anjou. He knows to a plank how many casks are needed if thevintage is good. A hot season makes him rich, a rainy season ruinshim; in a single morning puncheons worth eleven francs have been knownto drop to six. In this country, as in Touraine, atmosphericvicissitudes control commercial life. Wine-growers, proprietors, wood-merchants, coopers, inn-keepers, mariners, all keep watch of the sun.They tremble when they go to bed lest they should hear in the morningof a frost in the night; they dread rain, wind, drought, and wantwater, heat, and clouds to suit their fancy. A perpetual duel goes onbetween the heavens and their terrestrial interests. The barometersmooths, saddens, or makes merry their countenances, turn and turnabout. From end to end of this street, formerly the Grand'Rue deSaumur, the words: "Here's golden weather," are passed from door todoor; or each man calls to his neighbor: "It rains louis," knowingwell what a sunbeam or the opportune rainfall is bringing him.On Saturdays after midday, in the fine season, not one sou's worth ofmerchandise can be bought from these worthy traders. Each has hisvineyard, his enclosure of fields, and all spend two days in thecountry. This being foreseen, and purchases, sales, and profitsprovided for, the merchants have ten or twelve hours to spend inparties of pleasure, in making observations, in criticisms, and incontinual spying. A housewife cannot buy a partridge without theneighbors asking the husband if it were cooked to a turn. A young girlnever puts her head near a window that she is not seen by idlinggroups in the street. Consciences are held in the light; and thehouses, dark, silent, impenetrable as they seem, hide no mysteries.Life is almost wholly in the open air; every household sits at its ownthreshold, breakfasts, dines, and quarrels there. No one can passalong the street without being examined; in fact formerly, when astranger entered a provincial town he was bantered and made game offrom door to door. From this came many good stories, and the nickname/copieux/, which was applied to the inhabitants of Angers, whoexcelled in such urban sarcasms.

°°°°The ancient mansions of the old town of Saumur are at the top of thishilly street, and were formerly occupied by the nobility of theneighborhood. The melancholy dwelling where the events of thefollowing history took place is one of these mansions,--venerablerelics of a century in which men and things bore the characteristicsof simplicity which French manners and customs are losing day by day.Follow the windings of the picturesque thoroughfare, whoseirregularities awaken recollections that plunge the mind mechanicallyinto reverie, and you will see a somewhat dark recess, in the centreof which is hidden the door of the house of Monsieur Grandet. It isimpossible to understand the force of this provincial expression--thehouse of Monsieur Grandet--without giving the biography of MonsieurGrandet himself.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet enjoyed a reputation in Saumur whose causes andeffects can never be fully understood by those who have not, at onetime or another, lived in the provinces. In 1789 Monsieur Grandet--still called by certain persons le Pere Grandet, though the number ofsuch old persons has perceptibly diminished--was a master-cooper, ableto read, write, and cipher. At the period when the French Republicoffered for sale the church property in the arrondissement of Saumur,the cooper, then forty years of age, had just married the daughter ofa rich wood-merchant. Supplied with the ready money of his own fortuneand his wife's /dot/, in all about two thousand louis-d'or, Grandetwent to the newly established "district," where, with the help of twohundred double louis given by his father-in-law to the surlyrepublican who presided over the sales of the national domain, heobtained for a song, legally if not legitimately, one of the finestvineyards in the arrondissement, an old abbey, and several farms. Theinhabitants of Saumur were so little revolutionary that they thoughtPere Grandet a bold man, a republican, and a patriot with a mind opento all the new ideas; though in point of fact it was open only tovineyards. He was appointed a member of the administration of Saumur,and his pacific influence made itself felt politically andcommercially. Politically, he protected the ci-devant nobles, andprevented, to the extent of his power, the sale of the lands andproperty of the /emigres/; commercially, he furnished the Republicanarmies with two or three thousand puncheons of white wine, and tookhis pay in splendid fields belonging to a community of women whoselands had been reserved for the last lot.

°°°°Under the Consulate Grandet became mayor, governed wisely, andharvested still better pickings. Under the Empire he was calledMonsieur Grandet. Napoleon, however, did not like republicans, andsuperseded Monsieur Grandet (who was supposed to have worn thePhrygian cap) by a man of his own surroundings, a future baron of theEmpire. Monsieur Grandet quitted office without regret. He hadconstructed in the interests of the town certain fine roads which ledto his own property; his house and lands, very advantageouslyassessed, paid moderate taxes; and since the registration of hisvarious estates, the vineyards, thanks to his constant care, hadbecome the "head of the country,"--a local term used to denote thosethat produced the finest quality of wine. He might have asked for thecross of the Legion of honor.

°°°°This event occurred in 1806. Monsieur Grandet was then fifty-sevenyears of age, his wife thirty-six, and an only daughter, the fruit oftheir legitimate love, was ten years old. Monsieur Grandet, whomProvidence no doubt desired to compensate for the loss of hismunicipal honors, inherited three fortunes in the course of this year,--that of Madame de la Gaudiniere, born de la Bertelliere, the motherof Madame Grandet; that of old Monsieur de la Bertelliere, hergrandfather; and, lastly, that of Madame Gentillet, her grandmother onthe mother's side: three inheritances, whose amount was not known toany one. The avarice of the deceased persons was so keen that for along time they had hoarded their money for the pleasure of secretlylooking at it. Old Monsieur de la Bertelliere called an investment anextravagance, and thought he got better interest from the sight of hisgold than from the profits of usury. The inhabitants of Saumurconsequently estimated his savings according to "the revenues of thesun's wealth," as they said.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet thus obtained that modern title of nobility which ourmania for equality can never rub out. He became the most imposingpersonage in the arrondissement. He worked a hundred acres ofvineyard, which in fruitful years yielded seven or eight hundredhogsheads of wine. He owned thirteen farms, an old abbey, whosewindows and arches he had walled up for the sake of economy,--ameasure which preserved them,--also a hundred and twenty-seven acresof meadow-land, where three thousand poplars, planted in 1793, grewand flourished; and finally, the house in which he lived. Such was hisvisible estate; as to his other property, only two persons could giveeven a vague guess at its value: one was Monsieur Cruchot, a notaryemployed in the usurious investments of Monsieur Grandet; the otherwas Monsieur des Grassins, the richest banker in Saumur, in whoseprofits Grandet had a certain covenanted and secret share.Although old Cruchot and Monsieur des Grassins were both gifted withthe deep discretion which wealth and trust beget in the provinces,they publicly testified so much respect to Monsieur Grandet thatobservers estimated the amount of his property by the obsequiousattention which they bestowed upon him. In all Saumur there was no onenot persuaded that Monsieur Grandet had a private treasure, somehiding-place full of louis, where he nightly took ineffable delight ingazing upon great masses of gold. Avaricious people gathered proof ofthis when they looked at the eyes of the good man, to which the yellowmetal seemed to have conveyed its tints. The glance of a manaccustomed to draw enormous interest from his capital acquires, likethat of the libertine, the gambler, or the sycophant, certainindefinable habits,--furtive, eager, mysterious movements, which neverescape the notice of his co-religionists. This secret language is in acertain way the freemasonry of the passions. Monsieur Grandet inspiredthe respectful esteem due to one who owed no man anything, who,skilful cooper and experienced wine-grower that he was, guessed withthe precision of an astronomer whether he ought to manufacture athousand puncheons for his vintage, or only five hundred, who neverfailed in any speculation, and always had casks for sale when caskswere worth more than the commodity that filled them, who could storehis whole vintage in his cellars and bide his time to put thepuncheons on the market at two hundred francs, when the littleproprietors had been forced to sell theirs for five louis. His famousvintage of 1811, judiciously stored and slowly disposed of, broughthim in more than two hundred and forty thousand francs.

°°°°Financially speaking, Monsieur Grandet was something between a tigerand a boa-constrictor. He could crouch and lie low, watch his prey along while, spring upon it, open his jaws, swallow a mass of louis,and then rest tranquilly like a snake in process of digestion,impassible, methodical, and cold. No one saw him pass without afeeling of admiration mingled with respect and fear; had not every manin Saumur felt the rending of those polished steel claws? For thisone, Maitre Cruchot had procured the money required for the purchaseof a domain, but at eleven per cent. For that one, Monsieur desGrassins discounted bills of exchange, but at a frightful deduction ofinterest. Few days ever passed that Monsieur Grandet's name was notmentioned either in the markets or in social conversations at theevening gatherings. To some the fortune of the old wine-grower was anobject of patriotic pride. More than one merchant, more than oneinnkeeper, said to strangers with a certain complacency: "Monsieur, wehave two or three millionaire establishments; but as for MonsieurGrandet, he does not himself know how much he is worth."

°°°°In 1816 the best reckoners in Saumur estimated the landed property ofthe worthy man at nearly four millions; but as, on an average, he hadmade yearly, from 1793 to 1817, a hundred thousand francs out of thatproperty, it was fair to presume that he possessed in actual money asum nearly equal to the value of his estate. So that when, after agame of boston or an evening discussion on the matter of vines, thetalk fell upon Monsieur Grandet, knowing people said: "Le PereGrandet? le Pere Grandet must have at least five or six millions.""You are cleverer than I am; I have never been able to find out theamount," answered Monsieur Cruchot or Monsieur des Grassins, wheneither chanced to overhear the remark.

°°°°If some Parisian mentioned Rothschild or Monsieur Lafitte, the peopleof Saumur asked if he were as rich as Monsieur Grandet. When theParisian, with a smile, tossed them a disdainful affirmative, theylooked at each other and shook their heads with an incredulous air. Solarge a fortune covered with a golden mantle all the actions of thisman. If in early days some peculiarities of his life gave occasion forlaughter or ridicule, laughter and ridicule had long since died away.His least important actions had the authority of results repeatedlyshown. His speech, his clothing, his gestures, the blinking of hiseyes, were law to the country-side, where every one, after studyinghim as a naturalist studies the result of instinct in the loweranimals, had come to understand the deep mute wisdom of his slightestactions.

°°°°"It will be a hard winter," said one; "Pere Grandet has put on his furgloves."

°°°°"Pere Grandet is buying quantities of staves; there will be plenty ofwine this year."

°°°°Monsieur Grandet never bought either bread or meat. His farmerssupplied him weekly with a sufficiency of capons, chickens, eggs,butter, and his tithe of wheat. He owned a mill; and the tenant wasbound, over and above his rent, to take a certain quantity of grainand return him the flour and bran. La Grande Nanon, his only servant,though she was no longer young, baked the bread of the householdherself every Saturday. Monsieur Grandet arranged with kitchen-gardeners who were his tenants to supply him with vegetables. As tofruits, he gathered such quantities that he sold the greater part inthe market. His fire-wood was cut from his own hedgerows or taken fromthe half-rotten old sheds which he built at the corners of his fields,and whose planks the farmers carted into town for him, all cut up, andobligingly stacked in his wood-house, receiving in return his thanks.His only known expenditures were for the consecrated bread, theclothing of his wife and daughter, the hire of their chairs in church,the wages of la Grand Nanon, the tinning of the saucepans, lights,taxes, repairs on his buildings, and the costs of his variousindustries. He had six hundred acres of woodland, lately purchased,which he induced a neighbor's keeper to watch, under the promise of anindemnity. After the acquisition of this property he ate game for thefirst time.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet's manners were very simple. He spoke little. Heusually expressed his meaning by short sententious phrases uttered ina soft voice. After the Revolution, the epoch at which he first cameinto notice, the good man stuttered in a wearisome way as soon as hewas required to speak at length or to maintain an argument. Thisstammering, the incoherence of his language, the flux of words inwhich he drowned his thought, his apparent lack of logic, attributedto defects of education, were in reality assumed, and will besufficiently explained by certain events in the following history.Four sentences, precise as algebraic formulas, sufficed him usually tograsp and solve all difficulties of life and commerce: "I don't know;I cannot; I will not; I will see about it." He never said yes, or no,and never committed himself to writing. If people talked to him helistened coldly, holding his chin in his right hand and resting hisright elbow in the back of his left hand, forming in his own mindopinions on all matters, from which he never receded. He reflectedlong before making any business agreement. When his opponent, aftercareful conversation, avowed the secret of his own purposes, confidentthat he had secured his listener's assent, Grandet answered: "I candecide nothing without consulting my wife." His wife, whom he hadreduced to a state of helpless slavery, was a useful screen to him inbusiness. He went nowhere among friends; he neither gave nor accepteddinners; he made no stir or noise, seeming to economize in everything,even movement. He never disturbed or disarranged the things of otherpeople, out of respect for the rights of property. Nevertheless, inspite of his soft voice, in spite of his circumspect bearing, thelanguage and habits of a coarse nature came to the surface, especiallyin his own home, where he controlled himself less than elsewhere.Physically, Grandet was a man five feet high, thick-set, square-built,with calves twelve inches in circumference, knotted knee-joints, andbroad shoulders; his face was round, tanned, and pitted by the small-pox; his chin was straight, his lips had no curves, his teeth werewhite; his eyes had that calm, devouring expression which peopleattribute to the basilisk; his forehead, full of transverse wrinkles,was not without certain significant protuberances; his yellow-grayishhair was said to be silver and gold by certain young people who didnot realize the impropriety of making a jest about Monsieur Grandet.His nose, thick at the end, bore a veined wen, which the common peoplesaid, not without reason, was full of malice. The whole countenanceshowed a dangerous cunning, an integrity without warmth, the egotismof a man long used to concentrate every feeling upon the enjoyments ofavarice and upon the only human being who was anything whatever tohim,--his daughter and sole heiress, Eugenie. Attitude, manners,bearing, everything about him, in short, testified to that belief inhimself which the habit of succeeding in all enterprises never failsto give to a man.

°°°°Thus, though his manners were unctuous and soft outwardly, MonsieurGrandet's nature was of iron. His dress never varied; and those whosaw him to-day saw him such as he had been since 1791. His stout shoeswere tied with leathern thongs; he wore, in all weathers, thickwoollen stockings, short breeches of coarse maroon cloth with silverbuckles, a velvet waistcoat, in alternate stripes of yellow and puce,buttoned squarely, a large maroon coat with wide flaps, a blackcravat, and a quaker's hat. His gloves, thick as those of a gendarme,lasted him twenty months; to preserve them, he always laid themmethodically on the brim of his hat in one particular spot. Saumurknew nothing further about this personage.

°°°°Only six individuals had a right of entrance to Monsieur Grandet'shouse. The most important of the first three was a nephew of MonsieurCruchot. Since his appointment as president of the Civil courts ofSaumur this young man had added the name of Bonfons to that ofCruchot. He now signed himself C. de Bonfons. Any litigant so ill-advised as to call him Monsieur Cruchot would soon be made to feel hisfolly in court. The magistrate protected those who called him Monsieurle president, but he favored with gracious smiles those who addressedhim as Monsieur de Bonfons. Monsieur le president was thirty-threeyears old, and possessed the estate of Bonfons (Boni Fontis), worthseven thousand francs a year; he expected to inherit the property ofhis uncle the notary and that of another uncle, the Abbe Cruchot, adignitary of the chapter of Saint-Martin de Tours, both of whom werethought to be very rich. These three Cruchots, backed by a goodlynumber of cousins, and allied to twenty families in the town, formed aparty, like the Medici in Florence; like the Medici, the Cruchots hadtheir Pazzi.

°°°°Madame des Grassins, mother of a son twenty-three years of age, cameassiduously to play cards with Madame Grandet, hoping to marry herdear Adolphe to Mademoiselle Eugenie. Monsieur des Grassins, thebanker, vigorously promoted the schemes of his wife by means of secretservices constantly rendered to the old miser, and always arrived intime upon the field of battle. The three des Grassins likewise hadtheir adherents, their cousins, their faithful allies. On the Cruchotside the abbe, the Talleyrand of the family, well backed-up by hisbrother the notary, sharply contested every inch of ground with hisfemale adversary, and tried to obtain the rich heiress for his nephewthe president.

°°°°This secret warfare between the Cruchots and des Grassins, the prizethereof being the hand in marriage of Eugenie Grandet, kept thevarious social circles of Saumur in violent agitation. WouldMademoiselle Grandet marry Monsieur le president or Monsieur Adolphedes Grassins? To this problem some replied that Monsieur Grandet wouldnever give his daughter to the one or to the other. The old cooper,eaten up with ambition, was looking, they said, for a peer of France,to whom an income of three hundred thousand francs would make all thepast, present, and future casks of the Grandets acceptable. Othersreplied that Monsieur and Madame des Grassins were nobles, andexceedingly rich; that Adolphe was a personable young fellow; and thatunless the old man had a nephew of the pope at his beck and call, sucha suitable alliance ought to satisfy a man who came from nothing,--aman whom Saumur remembered with an adze in his hand, and who had,moreover, worn the /bonnet rouge/. Certain wise heads called attentionto the fact that Monsieur Cruchot de Bonfons had the right of entry tothe house at all times, whereas his rival was received only onSundays. Others, however, maintained that Madame des Grassins was moreintimate with the women of the house of Grandet than the Cruchotswere, and could put into their minds certain ideas which would lead,sooner or later, to success. To this the former retorted that the AbbeCruchot was the most insinuating man in the world: pit a woman againsta monk, and the struggle was even. "It is diamond cut diamond," said aSaumur wit.

°°°°The oldest inhabitants, wiser than their fellows, declared that theGrandets knew better than to let the property go out of the family,and that Mademoiselle Eugenie Grandet of Saumur would be married tothe son of Monsieur Grandet of Paris, a wealthy wholesale wine-merchant. To this the Cruchotines and the Grassinists replied: "In thefirst place, the two brothers have seen each other only twice inthirty years; and next, Monsieur Grandet of Paris has ambitiousdesigns for his son. He is mayor of an arrondissement, a deputy,colonel of the National Guard, judge in the commercial courts; hedisowns the Grandets of Saumur, and means to ally himself with someducal family,--ducal under favor of Napoleon." In short, was thereanything not said of an heiress who was talked of through acircumference of fifty miles, and even in the public conveyances fromAngers to Blois, inclusively!

°°°°At the beginning of 1811, the Cruchotines won a signal advantage overthe Grassinists. The estate of Froidfond, remarkable for its park, itsmansion, its farms, streams, ponds, forests, and worth about threemillions, was put up for sale by the young Marquis de Froidfond, whowas obliged to liquidate his possessions. Maitre Cruchot, thepresident, and the abbe, aided by their adherents, were able toprevent the sale of the estate in little lots. The notary concluded abargain with the young man for the whole property, payable in gold,persuading him that suits without number would have to be broughtagainst the purchasers of small lots before he could get the money forthem; it was better, therefore, to sell the whole to Monsieur Grandet,who was solvent and able to pay for the estate in ready money. Thefine marquisate of Froidfond was accordingly conveyed down the gulletof Monsieur Grandet, who, to the great astonishment of Saumur, paidfor it, under proper discount, with the usual formalities.This affair echoed from Nantes to Orleans. Monsieur Grandet tookadvantage of a cart returning by way of Froidfond to go and see hischateau. Having cast a master's eye over the whole property, hereturned to Saumur, satisfied that he had invested his money at fiveper cent, and seized by the stupendous thought of extending andincreasing the marquisate of Froidfond by concentrating all hisproperty there. Then, to fill up his coffers, now nearly empty, heresolved to thin out his woods and his forests, and to sell off thepoplars in the meadows.

°°°°II

°°°°It is now easy to understand the full meaning of the term, "the houseof Monsieur Grandet,"--that cold, silent, pallid dwelling, standingabove the town and sheltered by the ruins of the ramparts. The twopillars and the arch, which made the porte-cochere on which the dooropened, were built, like the house itself, of tufa,--a white stonepeculiar to the shores of the Loire, and so soft that it lasts hardlymore than two centuries. Numberless irregular holes, capriciouslybored or eaten out by the inclemency of the weather, gave anappearance of the vermiculated stonework of French architecture to thearch and the side walls of this entrance, which bore some resemblanceto the gateway of a jail. Above the arch was a long bas-relief, inhard stone, representing the four seasons, the faces already crumblingaway and blackened. This bas-relief was surmounted by a projectingplinth, upon which a variety of chance growths had sprung up,--yellowpellitory, bindweed, convolvuli, nettles, plantain, and even a littlecherry-tree, already grown to some height.

°°°°The door of the archway was made of solid oak, brown, shrunken, andsplit in many places; though frail in appearance, it was firmly heldin place by a system of iron bolts arranged in symmetrical patterns. Asmall square grating, with close bars red with rust, filled up themiddle panel and made, as it were, a motive for the knocker, fastenedto it by a ring, which struck upon the grinning head of a huge nail.This knocker, of the oblong shape and kind which our ancestors called/jaquemart/, looked like a huge note of exclamation; an antiquary whoexamined it attentively might have found indications of the figure,essentially burlesque, which it once represented, and which long usagehad now effaced. Through this little grating--intended in olden timesfor the recognition of friends in times of civil war--inquisitivepersons could perceive, at the farther end of the dark and slimyvault, a few broken steps which led to a garden, picturesquely shut inby walls that were thick and damp, and through which oozed a moisturethat nourished tufts of sickly herbage. These walls were the ruins ofthe ramparts, under which ranged the gardens of several neighboringhouses.

°°°°The most important room on the ground-floor of the house was a largehall, entered directly from beneath the vault of the porte-cochere.Few people know the importance of a hall in the little towns of Anjou,Touraine, and Berry. The hall is at one and the same time antechamber,salon, office, boudoir, and dining-room; it is the theatre of domesticlife, the common living-room. There the barber of the neighborhoodcame, twice a year, to cut Monsieur Grandet's hair; there the farmers,the cure, the under-prefect, and the miller's boy came on business.This room, with two windows looking on the street, was entirely ofwood. Gray panels with ancient mouldings covered the walls from top tobottom; the ceiling showed all its beams, which were likewise paintedgray, while the space between them had been washed over in white, nowyellow with age. An old brass clock, inlaid with arabesques, adornedthe mantel of the ill-cut white stone chimney-piece, above which was agreenish mirror, whose edges, bevelled to show the thickness of theglass, reflected a thread of light the whole length of a gothic framein damascened steel-work. The two copper-gilt candelabra whichdecorated the corners of the chimney-piece served a double purpose: bytaking off the side-branches, each of which held a socket, the mainstem--which was fastened to a pedestal of bluish marble tipped withcopper--made a candlestick for one candle, which was sufficient forordinary occasions. The chairs, antique in shape, were covered withtapestry representing the fables of La Fontaine; it was necessary,however, to know that writer well to guess at the subjects, for thefaded colors and the figures, blurred by much darning, were difficultto distinguish.

°°°°At the four corners of the hall were closets, or rather buffets,surmounted by dirty shelves. An old card-table in marquetry, of whichthe upper part was a chess-board, stood in the space between the twowindows. Above this table was an oval barometer with a black borderenlivened with gilt bands, on which the flies had so licentiouslydisported themselves that the gilding had become problematical. On thepanel opposite to the chimney-piece were two portraits in pastel,supposed to represent the grandfather of Madame Grandet, old Monsieurde la Bertelliere, as a lieutenant in the French guard, and thedeceased Madame Gentillet in the guise of a shepherdess. The windowswere draped with curtains of red /gros de Tours/ held back by silkencords with ecclesiastical tassels. This luxurious decoration, littlein keeping with the habits of Monsieur Grandet, had been, togetherwith the steel pier-glass, the tapestries, and the buffets, which wereof rose-wood, included in the purchase of the house.

°°°°By the window nearest to the door stood a straw chair, whose legs wereraised on castors to lift its occupant, Madame Grandet, to a heightfrom which she could see the passers-by. A work-table of stainedcherry-wood filled up the embrasure, and the little armchair ofEugenie Grandet stood beside it. In this spot the lives had flowedpeacefully onward for fifteen years, in a round of constant work fromthe month of April to the month of November. On the first day of thelatter month they took their winter station by the chimney. Not untilthat day did Grandet permit a fire to be lighted; and on the thirty-first of March it was extinguished, without regard either to thechills of the early spring or to those of a wintry autumn. A foot-warmer, filled with embers from the kitchen fire, which la GrandeNanon contrived to save for them, enabled Madame and MademoiselleGrandet to bear the chilly mornings and evenings of April and October.Mother and daughter took charge of the family linen, and spent theirdays so conscientiously upon a labor properly that of working-women,that if Eugenie wished to embroider a collar for her mother she wasforced to take the time from sleep, and deceive her father to obtainthe necessary light. For a long time the miser had given out thetallow candle to his daughter and la Grande Nanon just as he gave outevery morning the bread and other necessaries for the dailyconsumption.

°°°°La Grande Nanon was perhaps the only human being capable of acceptingwillingly the despotism of her master. The whole town envied Monsieurand Madame Grandet the possession of her. La Grande Nanon, so calledon account of her height, which was five feet eight inches, had livedwith Monsieur Grandet for thirty-five years. Though she received onlysixty francs a year in wages, she was supposed to be one of therichest serving-women in Saumur. Those sixty francs, accumulatingthrough thirty-five years, had recently enabled her to invest fourthousand francs in an annuity with Maitre Cruchot. This result of herlong and persistent economy seemed gigantic. Every servant in thetown, seeing that the poor sexagenarian was sure of bread for her oldage, was jealous of her, and never thought of the hard slavery throughwhich it had been won.

°°°°At twenty-two years of age the poor girl had been unable to find asituation, so repulsive was her face to almost every one. Yet thefeeling was certainly unjust: the face would have been much admired onthe shoulders of a grenadier of the guard; but all things, so theysay, should be in keeping. Forced to leave a farm where she kept thecows, because the dwelling-house was burned down, she came to Saumurto find a place, full of the robust courage that shrinks from nolabor. Le Pere Grandet was at that time thinking of marriage and aboutto set up his household. He espied the girl, rejected as she was fromdoor to door. A good judge of corporeal strength in his trade as acooper, he guessed the work that might be got out of a female creatureshaped like a Hercules, as firm on her feet as an oak sixty years oldon its roots, strong in the hips, square in the back, with the handsof a cartman and an honesty as sound as her unblemished virtue.Neither the warts which adorned her martial visage, nor the red-bricktints of her skin, nor the sinewy arms, nor the ragged garments of laGrande Nanon, dismayed the cooper, who was at that time still of anage when the heart shudders. He fed, shod, and clothed the poor girl,gave her wages, and put her to work without treating her too roughly.Seeing herself thus welcomed, la Grande Nanon wept secretly tears ofjoy, and attached herself in all sincerity to her master, who fromthat day ruled her and worked her with feudal authority. Nanon dideverything. She cooked, she made the lye, she washed the linen in theLoire and brought it home on her shoulders; she got up early, she wentto bed late; she prepared the food of the vine-dressers during theharvest, kept watch upon the market-people, protected the property ofher master like a faithful dog, and even, full of blind confidence,obeyed without a murmur his most absurd exactions.

°°°°In the famous year of 1811, when the grapes were gathered withunheard-of difficulty, Grandet resolved to give Nanon his old watch,--the first present he had made her during twenty years of service.Though he turned over to her his old shoes (which fitted her), it isimpossible to consider that quarterly benefit as a gift, for the shoeswere always thoroughly worn-out. Necessity had made the poor girl soniggardly that Grandet had grown to love her as we love a dog, andNanon had let him fasten a spiked collar round her throat, whosespikes no longer pricked her. If Grandet cut the bread with rather toomuch parsimony, she made no complaint; she gaily shared the hygienicbenefits derived from the severe regime of the household, in which noone was ever ill. Nanon was, in fact, one of the family; she laughedwhen Grandet laughed, felt gloomy or chilly, warmed herself, andtoiled as he did. What pleasant compensations there were in suchequality! Never did the master have occasion to find fault with theservant for pilfering the grapes, nor for the plums and nectarineseaten under the trees. "Come, fall-to, Nanon!" he would say in yearswhen the branches bent under the fruit and the farmers were obliged togive it to the pigs.

°°°°To the poor peasant who in her youth had earned nothing but harshtreatment, to the pauper girl picked up by charity, Grandet'sambiguous laugh was like a sunbeam. Moreover, Nanon's simple heart andnarrow head could hold only one feeling and one idea. For thirty-fiveyears she had never ceased to see herself standing before the wood-yard of Monsieur Grandet, ragged and barefooted, and to hear him say:"What do you want, young one?" Her gratitude was ever new. SometimesGrandet, reflecting that the poor creature had never heard aflattering word, that she was ignorant of all the tender sentimentsinspired by women, that she might some day appear before the throne ofGod even more chaste than the Virgin Mary herself,--Grandet, struckwith pity, would say as he looked at her, "Poor Nanon!" Theexclamation was always followed by an undefinable look cast upon himin return by the old servant. The words, uttered from time to time,formed a chain of friendship that nothing ever parted, and to whicheach exclamation added a link. Such compassion arising in the heart ofthe miser, and accepted gratefully by the old spinster, had somethinginconceivably horrible about it. This cruel pity, recalling, as itdid, a thousand pleasures to the heart of the old cooper, was forNanon the sum total of happiness. Who does not likewise say, "PoorNanon!" God will recognize his angels by the inflexions of theirvoices and by their secret sighs.

°°°°There were very many households in Saumur where the servants werebetter treated, but where the masters received far less satisfactionin return. Thus it was often said: "What have the Grandets ever doneto make their Grande Nanon so attached to them? She would go throughfire and water for their sake!" Her kitchen, whose barred windowslooked into the court, was always clean, neat, cold,--a true miser'skitchen, where nothing went to waste. When Nanon had washed herdishes, locked up the remains of the dinner, and put out her fire, sheleft the kitchen, which was separated by a passage from the living-room, and went to spin hemp beside her masters. One tallow candlesufficed the family for the evening. The servant slept at the end ofthe passage in a species of closet lighted only by a fan-light. Herrobust health enabled her to live in this hole with impunity; thereshe could hear the slightest noise through the deep silence whichreigned night and day in that dreary house. Like a watch-dog, sheslept with one ear open, and took her rest with a mind alert.A description of the other parts of the dwelling will be foundconnected with the events of this history, though the foregoing sketchof the hall, where the whole luxury of the household appears, mayenable the reader to surmise the nakedness of the upper floors.In 1819, at the beginning of an evening in the middle of November, laGrande Nanon lighted the fire for the first time. The autumn had beenvery fine. This particular day was a fete-day well known to theCruchotines and the Grassinists. The six antagonists, armed at allpoints, were making ready to meet at the Grandets and surpass eachother in testimonials of friendship. That morning all Saumur had seenMadame and Mademoiselle Grandet, accompanied by Nanon, on their way tohear Mass at the parish church, and every one remembered that the daywas the anniversary of Mademoiselle Eugenie's birth. Calculating thehour at which the family dinner would be over, Maitre Cruchot, theAbbe Cruchot, and Monsieur C. de Bonfons hastened to arrive before thedes Grassins, and be the first to pay their compliments toMademoiselle Eugenie. All three brought enormous bouquets, gathered intheir little green-houses. The stalks of the flowers which thepresident intended to present were ingeniously wound round with awhite satin ribbon adorned with gold fringe. In the morning MonsieurGrandet, following his usual custom on the days that commemorated thebirth and the fete of Eugenie, went to her bedside and solemnlypresented her with his paternal gift,--which for the last thirteenyears had consisted regularly of a curious gold-piece. Madame Grandetgave her daughter a winter dress or a summer dress, as the case mightbe. These two dresses and the gold-pieces, of which she received twoothers on New Year's day and on her father's fete-day, gave Eugenie alittle revenue of a hundred crowns or thereabouts, which Grandet lovedto see her amass. Was it not putting his money from one strong-box toanother, and, as it were, training the parsimony of his heiress? fromwhom he sometimes demanded an account of her treasure (formerlyincreased by the gifts of the Bertellieres), saying: "It is to be yourmarriage dozen."

°°°°The "marriage dozen" is an old custom sacredly preserved and still inforce in many parts of central France. In Berry and in Anjou, when ayoung girl marries, her family, or that of the husband, must give hera purse, in which they place, according to their means, twelve pieces,or twelve dozen pieces, or twelve hundred pieces of gold. The poorestshepherd-girl never marries without her dozen, be it only a dozencoppers. They still tell in Issoudun of a certain "dozen" presented toa rich heiress, which contained a hundred and forty-four /portugaisesd'or/. Pope Clement VII., uncle of Catherine de' Medici, gave her whenhe married her to Henri II. a dozen antique gold medals of pricelessvalue.

°°°°During dinner the father, delighted to see his Eugenie looking well ina new gown, exclaimed: "As it is Eugenie's birthday let us have afire; it will be a good omen."

°°°°"Mademoiselle will be married this year, that's certain," said laGrande Nanon, carrying away the remains of the goose,--the pheasant oftradesmen.

°°°°"I don't see any one suitable for her in Saumur," said Madame Grandet,glancing at her husband with a timid look which, considering heryears, revealed the conjugal slavery under which the poor womanlanguished.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter and exclaimed gaily,--

°°°°"She is twenty-three years old to-day, the child; we must soon beginto think of it."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother silently exchanged a glance of intelligence.Madame Grandet was a dry, thin woman, as yellow as a quince, awkward,slow, one of those women who are born to be down-trodden. She had bigbones, a big nose, a big forehead, big eyes, and presented at firstsight a vague resemblance to those mealy fruits that have neithersavor nor succulence. Her teeth were black and few in number, hermouth was wrinkled, her chin long and pointed. She was an excellentwoman, a true la Bertelliere. L'abbe Cruchot found occasionalopportunity to tell her that she had not done ill; and she believedhim. Angelic sweetness, the resignation of an insect tortured bychildren, a rare piety, a good heart, an unalterable equanimity ofsoul, made her universally pitied and respected. Her husband nevergave her more than six francs at a time for her personal expenses.Ridiculous as it may seem, this woman, who by her own fortune and hervarious inheritances brought Pere Grandet more than three hundredthousand francs, had always felt so profoundly humiliated by herdependence and the slavery in which she lived, against which thegentleness of her spirit prevented her from revolting, that she hadnever asked for one penny or made a single remark on the deeds whichMaitre Cruchot brought for her signature. This foolish secret pride,this nobility of soul perpetually misunderstood and wounded byGrandet, ruled the whole conduct of the wife.

°°°°Madame Grandet was attired habitually in a gown of greenish levantinesilk, endeavoring to make it last nearly a year; with it she wore alarge kerchief of white cotton cloth, a bonnet made of plaited strawssewn together, and almost always a black-silk apron. As she seldomleft the house she wore out very few shoes. She never asked anythingfor herself. Grandet, seized with occasional remorse when heremembered how long a time had elapsed since he gave her the last sixfrancs, always stipulated for the "wife's pin-money" when he sold hisyearly vintage. The four or five louis presented by the Belgian or theDutchman who purchased the wine were the chief visible signs of MadameGrandet's annual revenues. But after she had received the five louis,her husband would often say to her, as though their purse were held incommon: "Can you lend me a few sous?" and the poor woman, glad to beable to do something for a man whom her confessor held up to her asher lord and master, returned him in the course of the winter severalcrowns out of the "pin-money." When Grandet drew from his pocket thefive-franc piece which he allowed monthly for the minor expenses,--thread, needles, and toilet,--of his daughter, he never failed to sayas he buttoned his breeches' pocket: "And you, mother, do you wantanything?"

°°°°"My friend," Madame Grandet would answer, moved by a sense of maternaldignity, "we will see about that later."

°°°°Wasted dignity! Grandet thought himself very generous to his wife.Philosophers who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, ofEugenie, have surely a right to say that irony is at the bottom of theways of Providence.

°°°°After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made toEugenie's marriage, Nanon went to fetch a bottle of black-currantratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly fell as shecame down the stairs.

°°°°"You great stupid!" said her master; "are you going to tumble aboutlike other people, hey?"

°°°°"Monsieur, it was that step on your staircase which has given way.""She is right," said Madame Grandet; "it ought to have been mendedlong ago. Yesterday Eugenie nearly twisted her ankle."

°°°°"Here," said Grandet to Nanon, seeing that she looked quite pale, "asit is Eugenie's birthday, and you came near falling, take a littleglass of ratafia to set you right."

°°°°"Faith! I've earned it," said Nanon; "most people would have brokenthe bottle; but I'd sooner have broken my elbow holding it up high.""Poor Nanon!" said Grandet, filling a glass.

°°°°"Did you hurt yourself?" asked Eugenie, looking kindly at her."No, I didn't fall; I threw myself back on my haunches."

°°°°"Well! as it is Eugenie's birthday," said Grandet, "I'll have the stepmended. You people don't know how to set your foot in the corner wherethe wood is still firm."

°°°°Grandet took the candle, leaving his wife, daughter, and servantwithout any other light than that from the hearth, where the flameswere lively, and went into the bakehouse to fetch planks, nails, andtools.

°°°°"Can I help you?" cried Nanon, hearing him hammer on the stairs."No, no! I'm an old hand at it," answered the former cooper.At the moment when Grandet was mending his worm-eaten staircase andwhistling with all his might, in remembrance of the days of his youth,the three Cruchots knocked at the door.

°°°°"Is it you, Monsieur Cruchot?" asked Nanon, peeping through the littlegrating.

°°°°"Yes," answered the president.

°°°°Nanon opened the door, and the light from the hearth, reflected on theceiling, enabled the three Cruchots to find their way into the room."Ha! you've come a-greeting," said Nanon, smelling the flowers."Excuse me, messieurs," cried Grandet, recognizing their voices; "I'llbe with you in a moment. I'm not proud; I am patching up a step on mystaircase."

°°°°"Go on, go on, Monsieur Grandet; a man's house is his castle," saidthe president sententiously.

°°°°Madame and Mademoiselle Grandet rose. The president, profiting by thedarkness, said to Eugenie:

°°°°"Will you permit me, mademoiselle, to wish you, on this the day ofyour birth, a series of happy years and the continuance of the healthwhich you now enjoy?"

°°°°He offered her a huge bouquet of choice flowers which were rare inSaumur; then, taking the heiress by the elbows, he kissed her on eachside of her neck with a complacency that made her blush. Thepresident, who looked like a rusty iron nail, felt that his courtshipwas progressing.

°°°°"Don't stand on ceremony," said Grandet, entering. "How well you dothings on fete-days, Monsieur le president!"

°°°°"When it concerns mademoiselle," said the abbe, armed with his ownbouquet, "every day is a fete-day for my nephew."

°°°°The abbe kissed Eugenie's hand. As for Maitre Cruchot, he boldlykissed her on both cheeks, remarking: "How we sprout up, to be sure!Every year is twelve months."

°°°°As he replaced the candlestick beside the clock, Grandet, who neverforgot his own jokes, and repeated them to satiety when he thoughtthem funny, said,--

°°°°"As this is Eugenie's birthday let us illuminate."

°°°°He carefully took off the branches of the candelabra, put a socket oneach pedestal, took from Nanon a new tallow candle with paper twistedround the end of it, put it into the hollow, made it firm, lit it, andthen sat down beside his wife, looking alternately at his friends, hisdaughter, and the two candles. The Abbe Cruchot, a plump, puffy littleman, with a red wig plastered down and a face like an old femalegambler, said as he stretched out his feet, well shod in stout shoeswith silver buckles: "The des Grassins have not come?"

°°°°"Not yet," said Grandet.

°°°°"But are they coming?" asked the old notary, twisting his face, whichhad as many holes as a collander, into a queer grimace.

°°°°"I think so," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Are your vintages all finished?" said Monsieur de Bonfons to Grandet."Yes, all of them," said the old man, rising to walk up and down theroom, his chest swelling with pride as he said the words, "all ofthem." Through the door of the passage which led to the kitchen he sawla Grande Nanon sitting beside her fire with a candle and preparing tospin there, so as not to intrude among the guests.

°°°°"Nanon," he said, going into the passage, "put out that fire and thatcandle, and come and sit with us. Pardieu! the hall is big enough forall."

°°°°"But monsieur, you are to have the great people."

°°°°"Are not you as good as they? They are descended from Adam, and so areyou."

°°°°Grandet came back to the president and said,--

°°°°"Have you sold your vintage?"

°°°°"No, not I; I shall keep it. If the wine is good this year, it will bebetter two years hence. The proprietors, you know, have made anagreement to keep up the price; and this year the Belgians won't getthe better of us. Suppose they are sent off empty-handed for once,faith! they'll come back."

°°°°"Yes, but let us mind what we are about," said Grandet in a tone whichmade the president tremble.

°°°°"Is he driving some bargain?" thought Cruchot.

°°°°At this moment the knocker announced the des Grassins family, andtheir arrival interrupted a conversation which had begun betweenMadame Grandet and the abbe.

°°°°Madame des Grassins was one of those lively, plump little women, withpink-and-white skins, who, thanks to the claustral calm of theprovinces and the habits of a virtuous life, keep their youth untilthey are past forty. She was like the last rose of autumn,--pleasantto the eye, though the petals have a certain frostiness, and theirperfume is slight. She dressed well, got her fashions from Paris, setthe tone to Saumur, and gave parties. Her husband, formerly aquartermaster in the Imperial guard, who had been desperately woundedat Austerlitz, and had since retired, still retained, in spite of hisrespect for Grandet, the seeming frankness of an old soldier."Good evening, Grandet," he said, holding out his hand and affecting asort of superiority, with which he always crushed the Cruchots."Mademoiselle," he added, turning to Eugenie, after bowing to MadameGrandet, "you are always beautiful and good, and truly I do not knowwhat to wish you." So saying, he offered her a little box which hisservant had brought and which contained a Cape heather,--a flowerlately imported into Europe and very rare.

°°°°Madame des Grassins kissed Eugenie very affectionately, pressed herhand, and said: "Adolphe wishes to make you my little offering."A tall, blond young man, pale and slight, with tolerable manners andseemingly rather shy, although he had just spent eight or ten thousandfrancs over his allowance in Paris, where he had been sent to studylaw, now came forward and kissed Eugenie on both cheeks, offering hera workbox with utensils in silver-gilt,--mere show-case trumpery, inspite of the monogram E.G. in gothic letters rather well engraved,which belonged properly to something in better taste. As she openedit, Eugenie experienced one of those unexpected and perfect delightswhich make a young girl blush and quiver and tremble with pleasure.She turned her eyes to her father as if to ask permission to acceptit, and Monsieur Grandet replied: "Take it, my daughter," in a tonewhich would have made an actor illustrious.

°°°°The three Cruchots felt crushed as they saw the joyous, animated lookcast upon Adolphe des Grassins by the heiress, to whom such richeswere unheard-of. Monsieur des Grassins offered Grandet a pinch ofsnuff, took one himself, shook off the grains as they fell on theribbon of the Legion of honor which was attached to the button-hole ofhis blue surtout; then he looked at the Cruchots with an air thatseemed to say, "Parry that thrust if you can!" Madame des Grassinscast her eyes on the blue vases which held the Cruchot bouquets,looking at the enemy's gifts with the pretended interest of asatirical woman. At this delicate juncture the Abbe Cruchot left thecompany seated in a circle round the fire and joined Grandet at thelower end of the hall. As the two men reached the embrasure of thefarthest window the priest said in the miser's ear: "Those peoplethrow money out of the windows."

°°°°"What does that matter if it gets into my cellar?" retorted the oldwine-grower.

°°°°"If you want to give gilt scissors to your daughter, you have themeans," said the abbe.

°°°°"I give her something better than scissors," answered Grandet."My nephew is a blockhead," thought the abbe as he looked at thepresident, whose rumpled hair added to the ill grace of his browncountenance. "Couldn't he have found some little trifle which costmoney?"

°°°°"We will join you at cards, Madame Grandet," said Madame des Grassins."We might have two tables, as we are all here."

°°°°"As it is Eugenie's birthday you had better play loto all together,"said Pere Grandet: "the two young ones can join"; and the old cooper,who never played any game, motioned to his daughter and Adolphe."Come, Nanon, set the tables."

°°°°"We will help you, Mademoiselle Nanon," said Madame des Grassinsgaily, quite joyous at the joy she had given Eugenie.

°°°°"I have never in my life been so pleased," the heiress said to her; "Ihave never seen anything so pretty."

°°°°"Adolphe brought it from Paris, and he chose it," Madame des Grassinswhispered in her ear.

°°°°"Go on! go on! damned intriguing thing!" thought the president. "Ifyou ever have a suit in court, you or your husband, it shall go hardwith you."

°°°°The notary, sitting in his corner, looked calmly at the abbe, sayingto himself: "The des Grassins may do what they like; my property andmy brother's and that of my nephew amount in all to eleven hundredthousand francs. The des Grassins, at the most, have not half that;besides, they have a daughter. They may give what presents they like;heiress and presents too will be ours one of these days."At half-past eight in the evening the two card-tables were set out.Madame des Grassins succeeded in putting her son beside Eugenie. Theactors in this scene, so full of interest, commonplace as it seems,were provided with bits of pasteboard striped in many colors andnumbered, and with counters of blue glass, and they appeared to belistening to the jokes of the notary, who never drew a number withoutmaking a remark, while in fact they were all thinking of MonsieurGrandet's millions. The old cooper, with inward self-conceit, wascontemplating the pink feathers and the fresh toilet of Madame desGrassins, the martial head of the banker, the faces of Adolphe, thepresident, the abbe, and the notary, saying to himself:--"They are all after my money. Hey! neither the one nor the other shallhave my daughter; but they are useful--useful as harpoons to fishwith."

°°°°This family gaiety in the old gray room dimly lighted by two tallowcandles; this laughter, accompanied by the whirr of Nanon's spinning-wheel, sincere only upon the lips of Eugenie or her mother; thistriviality mingled with important interests; this young girl, who,like certain birds made victims of the price put upon them, was nowlured and trapped by proofs of friendship of which she was the dupe,--all these things contributed to make the scene a melancholy comedy. Isit not, moreover, a drama of all times and all places, though herebrought down to its simplest expression? The figure of Grandet,playing his own game with the false friendship of the two families andgetting enormous profits from it, dominates the scene and throws lightupon it. The modern god,--the only god in whom faith is preserved,--money, is here, in all its power, manifested in a single countenance.The tender sentiments of life hold here but a secondary place; onlythe three pure, simple hearts of Nanon, of Eugenie, and of her motherwere inspired by them. And how much of ignorance there was in thesimplicity of these poor women! Eugenie and her mother knew nothing ofGrandet's wealth; they could only estimate the things of life by theglimmer of their pale ideas, and they neither valued nor despisedmoney, because they were accustomed to do without it. Their feelings,bruised, though they did not know it, but ever-living, were the secretspring of their existence, and made them curious exceptions in themidst of these other people whose lives were purely material.Frightful condition of the human race! there is no one of its joysthat does not come from some species of ignorance.

°°°°At the moment when Madame Grandet had won a loto of sixteen sous,--thelargest ever pooled in that house,--and while la Grande Nanon waslaughing with delight as she watched madame pocketing her riches, theknocker resounded on the house-door with such a noise that the womenall jumped in their chairs.

°°°°"There is no man in Saumur who would knock like that," said thenotary.

°°°°"How can they bang in that way!" exclaimed Nanon; "do they want tobreak in the door?"

°°°°"Who the devil is it?" cried Grandet.

°°°°III

°°°°Nanon took one of the candles and went to open the door, followed byher master.

°°°°"Grandet! Grandet!" cried his wife, moved by a sudden impulse of fear,and running to the door of the room.

°°°°All the players looked at each other.

°°°°"Suppose we all go?" said Monsieur des Grassins; "that knock strikesme as evil-intentioned."

°°°°Hardly was Monsieur des Grassins allowed to see the figure of a youngman, accompanied by a porter from the coach-office carrying two largetrunks and dragging a carpet-bag after him, than Monsieur Grandetturned roughly on his wife and said,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, go back to your loto; leave me to speak withmonsieur."

°°°°Then he pulled the door quickly to, and the excited players returnedto their seats, but did not continue the game.

°°°°"Is it any one belonging to Saumur, Monsieur des Grassins?" asked hiswife.

°°°°"No, it is a traveller."

°°°°"He must have come from Paris."

°°°°"Just so," said the notary, pulling out his watch, which was twoinches thick and looked like a Dutch man-of-war; "it's nine o'clock;the diligence of the Grand Bureau is never late."

°°°°"Is the gentleman young?" inquired the Abbe Cruchot.

°°°°"Yes," answered Monsieur des Grassins, "and he has brought luggagewhich must weigh nearly three tons."

°°°°"Nanon does not come back," said Eugenie.

°°°°"It must be one of your relations," remarked the president."Let us go on with our game," said Madame Grandet gently. "I know fromMonsieur Grandet's tone of voice that he is annoyed; perhaps he wouldnot like to find us talking of his affairs."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said Adolphe to his neighbor, "it is no doubt yourcousin Grandet,--a very good-looking young man; I met him at the ballof Monsieur de Nucingen." Adolphe did not go on, for his mother trodon his toes; and then, asking him aloud for two sous to put on herstake, she whispered: "Will you hold your tongue, you great goose!"At this moment Grandet returned, without la Grande Nanon, whose steps,together with those of the porter, echoed up the staircase; and he wasfollowed by the traveller who had excited such curiosity and so filledthe lively imaginations of those present that his arrival at thisdwelling, and his sudden fall into the midst of this assembly, canonly be likened to that of a snail into a beehive, or the introductionof a peacock into some village poultry-yard.

°°°°"Sit down near the fire," said Grandet.

°°°°Before seating himself, the young stranger saluted the assembledcompany very gracefully. The men rose to answer by a courteousinclination, and the women made a ceremonious bow.

°°°°"You are cold, no doubt, monsieur," said Madame Grandet; "you have,perhaps, travelled from--"

°°°°"Just like all women!" said the old wine-grower, looking up from aletter he was reading. "Do let monsieur rest himself!"

°°°°"But, father, perhaps monsieur would like to take something," saidEugenie.

°°°°"He has got a tongue," said the old man sternly.

°°°°The stranger was the only person surprised by this scene; all theothers were well-used to the despotic ways of the master. However,after the two questions and the two replies had been exchanged, thenewcomer rose, turned his back towards the fire, lifted one foot so asto warm the sole of its boot, and said to Eugenie,--

°°°°"Thank you, my cousin, but I dined at Tours. And," he added, lookingat Grandet, "I need nothing; I am not even tired."

°°°°"Monsieur has come from the capital?" asked Madame des Grassins.Monsieur Charles,--such was the name of the son of Monsieur Grandet ofParis,--hearing himself addressed, took a little eye-glass, suspendedby a chain from his neck, applied it to his right eye to examine whatwas on the table, and also the persons sitting round it. He ogledMadame des Grassins with much impertinence, and said to her, after hehad observed all he wished,--

°°°°"Yes, madame. You are playing at loto, aunt," he added. "Do not let meinterrupt you, I beg; go on with your game: it is too amusing toleave."

°°°°"I was certain it was the cousin," thought Madame des Grassins,casting repeated glances at him.

°°°°"Forty-seven!" cried the old abbe. "Mark it down, Madame des Grassins.Isn't that your number?"

°°°°Monsieur des Grassins put a counter on his wife's card, who satwatching first the cousin from Paris and then Eugenie, withoutthinking of her loto, a prey to mournful presentiments. From time totime the young the heiress glanced furtively at her cousin, and thebanker's wife easily detected a /crescendo/ of surprise and curiosityin her mind.

°°°°Monsieur Charles Grandet, a handsome young man of twenty-two,presented at this moment a singular contrast to the worthyprovincials, who, considerably disgusted by his aristocratic manners,were all studying him with sarcastic intent. This needs anexplanation. At twenty-two, young people are still so near childhoodthat they often conduct themselves childishly. In all probability, outof every hundred of them fully ninety-nine would have behavedprecisely as Monsieur Charles Grandet was now behaving.

°°°°Some days earlier than this his father had told him to go and spendseveral months with his uncle at Saumur. Perhaps Monsieur Grandet wasthinking of Eugenie. Charles, sent for the first time in his life intothe provinces, took a fancy to make his appearance with thesuperiority of a man of fashion, to reduce the whole arrondissement todespair by his luxury, and to make his visit an epoch, importing intothose country regions all the refinements of Parisian life. In short,to explain it in one word, he mean to pass more time at Saumur inbrushing his nails than he ever thought of doing in Paris, and toassume the extra nicety and elegance of dress which a young man offashion often lays aside for a certain negligence which in itself isnot devoid of grace. Charles therefore brought with him a completehunting-costume, the finest gun, the best hunting-knife in theprettiest sheath to be found in all Paris. He brought his wholecollection of waistcoats. They were of all kinds,--gray, black, white,scarabaeus-colored: some were shot with gold, some spangled, some/chined/; some were double-breasted and crossed like a shawl, otherswere straight in the collar; some had turned-over collars, somebuttoned up to the top with gilt buttons. He brought every variety ofcollar and cravat in fashion at that epoch. He brought two ofBuisson's coats and all his finest linen He brought his pretty goldtoilet-set,--a present from his mother. He brought all his dandyknick-knacks, not forgetting a ravishing little desk presented to himby the most amiable of women,--amiable for him, at least,--a fine ladywhom he called Annette and who at this moment was travelling,matrimonially and wearily, in Scotland, a victim to certain suspicionswhich required a passing sacrifice of happiness; in the desk was muchpretty note-paper on which to write to her once a fortnight.In short, it was as complete a cargo of Parisian frivolities as it waspossible for him to get together,--a collection of all the implementsof husbandry with which the youth of leisure tills his life, from thelittle whip which helps to begin a duel, to the handsomely chasedpistols which end it. His father having told him to travel alone andmodestly, he had taken the coupe of the diligence all to himself,rather pleased at not having to damage a delightful travelling-carriage ordered for a journey on which he was to meet his Annette,the great lady who, etc.,--whom he intended to rejoin at Baden in thefollowing June. Charles expected to meet scores of people at hisuncle's house, to hunt in his uncle's forests,--to live, in short, theusual chateau life; he did not know that his uncle was in Saumur, andhad only inquired about him incidentally when asking the way toFroidfond. Hearing that he was in town, he supposed that he shouldfind him in a suitable mansion.

°°°°In order that he might make a becoming first appearance before hisuncle either at Saumur or at Froidfond, he had put on his most eleganttravelling attire, simple yet exquisite,--"adorable," to use the wordwhich in those days summed up the special perfections of a man or athing. At Tours a hairdresser had re-curled his beautiful chestnutlocks; there he changed his linen and put on a black satin cravat,which, combined with a round shirt-collar, framed his fair and smilingcountenance agreeably. A travelling great-coat, only half buttoned up,nipped in his waist and disclosed a cashmere waistcoat crossed infront, beneath which was another waistcoat of white material. Hiswatch, negligently slipped into a pocket, was fastened by a short goldchain to a buttonhole. His gray trousers, buttoned up at the sides,were set off at the seams with patterns of black silk embroidery. Hegracefully twirled a cane, whose chased gold knob did not mar thefreshness of his gray gloves. And to complete all, his cap was inexcellent taste. None but a Parisian, and a Parisian of the upperspheres, could thus array himself without appearing ridiculous; noneother could give the harmony of self-conceit to all these fopperies,which were carried off, however, with a dashing air,--the air of ayoung man who has fine pistols, a sure aim, and Annette.

°°°°Now if you wish to understand the mutual amazement of the provincialparty and the young Parisian; if you would clearly see the brilliancewhich the traveller's elegance cast among the gray shadows of the roomand upon the faces of this family group,--endeavor to picture to yourminds the Cruchots. All three took snuff, and had long ceased torepress the habit of snivelling or to remove the brown blotches whichstrewed the frills of their dingy shirts and the yellowing creases oftheir crumpled collars. Their flabby cravats were twisted into ropesas soon as they wound them about their throats. The enormous quantityof linen which allowed these people to have their clothing washed onlyonce in six months, and to keep it during that time in the depths oftheir closets, also enabled time to lay its grimy and decaying stainsupon it. There was perfect unison of ill-grace and senility aboutthem; their faces, as faded as their threadbare coats, as creased astheir trousers, were worn-out, shrivelled-up, and puckered. As for theothers, the general negligence of their dress, which was incompleteand wanting in freshness,--like the toilet of all country places,where insensibly people cease to dress for others and come to thinkseriously of the price of a pair of gloves,--was in keeping with thenegligence of the Cruchots. A horror of fashion was the only point onwhich the Grassinists and the Cruchotines agreed.

°°°°When the Parisian took up his eye-glass to examine the strangeaccessories of this dwelling,--the joists of the ceiling, the color ofthe woodwork, and the specks which the flies had left there insufficient number to punctuate the "Moniteur" and the "Encyclopaediaof Sciences,"--the loto-players lifted their noses and looked at himwith as much curiosity as they might have felt about a giraffe.Monsieur des Grassins and his son, to whom the appearance of a man offashion was not wholly unknown, were nevertheless as much astonishedas their neighbors, whether it was that they fell under theindefinable influence of the general feeling, or that they reallyshared it as with satirical glances they seemed to say to theircompatriots,--

°°°°"That is what you see in Paris!"

°°°°They were able to examine Charles at their leisure without fearing todisplease the master of the house. Grandet was absorbed in the longletter which he held in his hand; and to read it he had taken the onlycandle upon the card-table, paying no heed to his guests or theirpleasure. Eugenie, to whom such a type of perfection, whether of dressor of person, was absolutely unknown, thought she beheld in her cousina being descended from seraphic spheres. She inhaled with delight thefragrance wafted from the graceful curls of that brilliant head. Shewould have liked to touch the soft kid of the delicate gloves. Sheenvied Charles his small hands, his complexion, the freshness andrefinement of his features. In short,--if it is possible to sum up theeffect this elegant being produced upon an ignorant young girlperpetually employed in darning stockings or in mending her father'sclothes, and whose life flowed on beneath these unclean rafters,seeing none but occasional passers along the silent street,--thisvision of her cousin roused in her soul an emotion of delicate desirelike that inspired in a young man by the fanciful pictures of womendrawn by Westall for the English "Keepsakes," and that engraved by theFindens with so clever a tool that we fear, as we breathe upon thepaper, that the celestial apparitions may be wafted away. Charles drewfrom his pocket a handkerchief embroidered by the great lady nowtravelling in Scotland. As Eugenie saw this pretty piece of work, donein the vacant hours which were lost to love, she looked at her cousinto see if it were possible that he meant to make use of it. Themanners of the young man, his gestures, the way in which he took uphis eye-glass, his affected superciliousness, his contemptuous glanceat the coffer which had just given so much pleasure to the richheiress, and which he evidently regarded as without value, or even asridiculous,--all these things, which shocked the Cruchots and the desGrassins, pleased Eugenie so deeply that before she slept she dreamedlong dreams of her phoenix cousin.

°°°°The loto-numbers were drawn very slowly, and presently the game camesuddenly to an end. La Grand Nanon entered and said aloud: "Madame, Iwant the sheets for monsieur's bed."

°°°°Madame Grandet followed her out. Madame des Grassins said in a lowvoice: "Let us keep our sous and stop playing." Each took his or hertwo sous from the chipped saucer in which they had been put; then theparty moved in a body toward the fire.

°°°°"Have you finished your game?" said Grandet, without looking up fromhis letter.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" replied Madame des Grassins, taking a seat near Charles.Eugenie, prompted by a thought often born in the heart of a young girlwhen sentiment enters it for the first time, left the room to go andhelp her mother and Nanon. Had an able confessor then questioned hershe would, no doubt, have avowed to him that she thought neither ofher mother nor of Nanon, but was pricked by a poignant desire to lookafter her cousin's room and concern herself with her cousin; to supplywhat might be needed, to remedy any forgetfulness, to see that all wasdone to make it, as far as possible, suitable and elegant; and, infact, she arrived in time to prove to her mother and Nanon thateverything still remained to be done. She put into Nanon's head thenotion of passing a warming-pan between the sheets. She herselfcovered the old table with a cloth and requested Nanon to change itevery morning; she convinced her mother that it was necessary to lighta good fire, and persuaded Nanon to bring up a great pile of wood intothe corridor without saying anything to her father. She ran to get,from one of the corner-shelves of the hall, a tray of old lacquerwhich was part of the inheritance of the late Monsieur de laBertelliere, catching up at the same time a six-sided crystal goblet,a little tarnished gilt spoon, an antique flask engraved with cupids,all of which she put triumphantly on the corner of her cousin'schimney-piece. More ideas surged through her head in one quarter of anhour than she had ever had since she came into the world."Mamma," she said, "my cousin will never bear the smell of a tallowcandle; suppose we buy a wax one?" And she darted, swift as a bird, toget the five-franc piece which she had just received for her monthlyexpenses. "Here, Nanon," she cried, "quick!"

°°°°"What will your father say?" This terrible remonstrance was uttered byMadame Grandet as she beheld her daughter armed with an old Sevressugar-basin which Grandet had brought home from the chateau ofFroidfond. "And where will you get the sugar? Are you crazy?""Mamma, Nanon can buy some sugar as well as the candle."

°°°°"But your father?"

°°°°"Surely his nephew ought not to go without a glass of /eau sucree/?Besides, he will not notice it."

°°°°"Your father sees everything," said Madame Grandet, shaking her head.Nanon hesitated; she knew her master.

°°°°"Come, Nanon, go,--because it is my birthday."

°°°°Nanon gave a loud laugh as she heard the first little jest her youngmistress had ever made, and then obeyed her.

°°°°While Eugenie and her mother were trying to embellish the bedroomassigned by Monsieur Grandet for his nephew, Charles himself was theobject of Madame des Grassins' attentions; to all appearances she wassetting her cap at him.

°°°°"You are very courageous, monsieur," she said to the young dandy, "toleave the pleasures of the capital at this season and take up yourabode in Saumur. But if we do not frighten you away, you will findthere are some amusements even here."

°°°°She threw him the ogling glance of the provinces, where women put somuch prudence and reserve into their eyes that they impart to them theprudish concupiscence peculiar to certain ecclesiastics to whom allpleasure is either a theft or an error. Charles was so completely outof his element in this abode, and so far from the vast chateau and thesumptuous life with which his fancy had endowed his uncle, that as helooked at Madame des Grassins he perceived a dim likeness to Parisianfaces. He gracefully responded to the species of invitation addressedto him, and began very naturally a conversation, in which Madame desGrassins gradually lowered her voice so as to bring it into harmonywith the nature of the confidences she was making. With her, as withCharles, there was the need of conference; so after a few momentsspent in coquettish phrases and a little serious jesting, the cleverprovincial said, thinking herself unheard by the others, who werediscussing the sale of wines which at that season filled the heads ofevery one in Saumur,--

°°°°"Monsieur if you will do us the honor to come and see us, you willgive as much pleasure to my husband as to myself. Our salon is theonly one in Saumur where you will find the higher business circlesmingling with the nobility. We belong to both societies, who meet atour house simply because they find it amusing. My husband--I say itwith pride--is as much valued by the one class as by the other. Wewill try to relieve the monotony of your visit here. If you stay allthe time with Monsieur Grandet, good heavens! what will become of you?Your uncle is a sordid miser who thinks of nothing but his vines; youraunt is a pious soul who can't put two ideas together; and your cousinis a little fool, without education, perfectly common, no fortune, whowill spend her life in darning towels."

°°°°"She is really very nice, this woman," thought Charles Grandet as heduly responded to Madame des Grassins' coquetries.

°°°°"It seems to me, wife, that you are taking possession of monsieur,"said the stout banker, laughing.

°°°°On this remark the notary and the president said a few words that weremore or less significant; but the abbe, looking at them slyly, broughttheir thoughts to a focus by taking a pinch of snuff and saying as hehanded round his snuff-box: "Who can do the honors of Saumur formonsieur so well as madame?"

°°°°"Ah! what do you mean by that, monsieur l'abbe?" demanded Monsieur desGrassins.

°°°°"I mean it in the best possible sense for you, for madame, for thetown of Saumur, and for monsieur," said the wily old man, turning toCharles.

°°°°The Abbe Cruchot had guessed the conversation between Charles andMadame des Grassins without seeming to pay attention to it."Monsieur," said Adolphe to Charles with an air which he tried to makefree and easy, "I don't know whether you remember me, but I had thehonor of dancing as your /vis-a-vis/ at a ball given by the Baron deNucingen, and--"

°°°°"Perfectly; I remember perfectly, monsieur," answered Charles, pleasedto find himself the object of general attention.

°°°°"Monsieur is your son?" he said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°The abbe looked at her maliciously.

°°°°"Yes, monsieur," she answered.

°°°°"Then you were very young when you were in Paris?" said Charles,addressing Adolphe.

°°°°"You must know, monsieur," said the abbe, "that we send them toBabylon as soon as they are weaned."

°°°°Madame des Grassins examined the abbe with a glance of extremepenetration.

°°°°"It is only in the provinces," he continued, "that you will find womenof thirty and more years as fresh as madame, here, with a son about totake his degree. I almost fancy myself back in the days when the youngmen stood on chairs in the ball-room to see you dance, madame," saidthe abbe, turning to his female adversary. "To me, your triumphs arebut of yesterday--"

°°°°"The old rogue!" thought Madame Grassins; "can he have guessed myintentions?"

°°°°"It seems that I shall have a good deal of success in Saumur," thoughtCharles as he unbuttoned his great-coat, put a hand into hiswaistcoat, and cast a glance into the far distance, to imitate theattitude which Chantrey has given to Lord Byron.

°°°°The inattention of Pere Grandet, or, to speak more truly, thepreoccupation of mind into which the reading of the letter had plungedhim, did not escape the vigilance of the notary and the president, whotried to guess the contents of the letter by the almost imperceptiblemotions of the miser's face, which was then under the full light ofthe candle. He maintained the habitual calm of his features withevident difficulty; we may, in fact, picture to ourselves thecountenance such a man endeavored to preserve as he read the fatalletter which here follows:--

°°°°My Brother,--It is almost twenty-three years since we have seen

°°°°each other. My marriage was the occasion of our last interview,

°°°°after which we parted, and both of us were happy. Assuredly I

°°°°could not then foresee that you would one day be the prop of the

°°°°family whose prosperity you then predicted.

°°°°When you hold this letter within your hands I shall be no longer

°°°°living. In the position I now hold I cannot survive the disgrace

°°°°of bankruptcy. I have waited on the edge of the gulf until the

°°°°last moment, hoping to save myself. The end has come, I must sink

°°°°into it. The double bankruptcies of my broker and of Roguin, my

°°°°notary, have carried off my last resources and left me nothing. I

°°°°have the bitterness of owing nearly four millions, with assets not

°°°°more than twenty-five per cent in value to pay them. The wines in

°°°°my warehouses suffer from the fall in prices caused by the

°°°°abundance and quality of your vintage. In three days Paris will

°°°°cry out: "Monsieur Grandet was a knave!" and I, an honest man,

°°°°shall be lying in my winding-sheet of infamy. I deprive my son of

°°°°a good name, which I have stained, and the fortune of his mother,

°°°°which I have lost. He knows nothing of all this,--my unfortunate

°°°°child whom I idolize! We parted tenderly. He was ignorant,

°°°°happily, that the last beatings of my heart were spent in that

°°°°farewell. Will he not some day curse me? My brother, my brother!

°°°°the curses of our children are horrible; they can appeal against

°°°°ours, but theirs are irrevocable. Grandet, you are my elder

°°°°brother, you owe me your protection; act for me so that Charles

°°°°may cast no bitter words upon my grave! My brother, if I were

°°°°writing with my blood, with my tears, no greater anguish could I

°°°°put into this letter,--nor as great, for then I should weep, I

°°°°should bleed, I should die, I should suffer no more, but now I

°°°°suffer and look at death with dry eyes.

°°°°From henceforth you are my son's father; he has no relations, as

°°°°you well know, on his mother's side. Why did I not consider social

°°°°prejudices? Why did I yield to love? Why did I marry the natural

°°°°daughter of a great lord? Charles has no family. Oh, my unhappy

°°°°son! my son! Listen, Grandet! I implore nothing for myself,--

°°°°besides, your property may not be large enough to carry a mortgage

°°°°of three millions,--but for my son! Brother, my suppliant hands

°°°°are clasped as I think of you; behold them! Grandet, I confide my

°°°°son to you in dying, and I look at the means of death with less

°°°°pain as I think that you will be to him a father. He loved me

°°°°well, my Charles; I was good to him, I never thwarted him; he will

°°°°not curse me. Ah, you see! he is gentle, he is like his mother, he

°°°°will cause you no grief. Poor boy! accustomed to all the

°°°°enjoyments of luxury, he knows nothing of the privations to which

°°°°you and I were condemned by the poverty of our youth. And I leave

°°°°him ruined! alone! Yes, all my friends will avoid him, and it is I

°°°°who have brought this humiliation upon him! Would that I had the

°°°°force to send him with one thrust into the heavens to his mother's

°°°°side! Madness! I come back to my disaster--to his. I send him to

°°°°you that you may tell him in some fitting way of my death, of his

°°°°future fate. Be a father to him, but a good father. Do not tear

°°°°him all at once from his idle life, it would kill him. I beg him

°°°°on my knees to renounce all rights that, as his mother's heir, he

°°°°may have on my estate. But the prayer is superfluous; he is

°°°°honorable, and he will feel that he must not appear among my

°°°°creditors. Bring him to see this at the right time; reveal to him

°°°°the hard conditions of the life I have made for him: and if he

°°°°still has tender thoughts of me, tell him in my name that all is

°°°°not lost for him. Yes, work, labor, which saved us both, may give

°°°°him back the fortune of which I have deprived him; and if he

°°°°listens to his father's voice as it reaches him from the grave, he

°°°°will go the Indies. My brother, Charles is an upright and

°°°°courageous young man; give him the wherewithal to make his

°°°°venture; he will die sooner than not repay you the funds which you

°°°°may lend him. Grandet! if you will not do this, you will lay up

°°°°for yourself remorse. Ah, should my child find neither tenderness

°°°°nor succor in you, I would call down the vengeance of God upon

°°°°your cruelty!

°°°°If I had been able to save something from the wreck, I might have

°°°°had the right to leave him at least a portion of his mother's

°°°°property; but my last monthly payments have absorbed everything. I

°°°°did not wish to die uncertain of my child's fate; I hoped to feel

°°°°a sacred promise in a clasp of your hand which might have warmed

°°°°my heart: but time fails me. While Charles is journeying to you I

°°°°shall be preparing my assignment. I shall endeavor to show by the

°°°°order and good faith of my accounts that my disaster comes neither

°°°°from a faulty life nor from dishonesty. It is for my son's sake

°°°°that I strive to do this.

°°°°Farewell, my brother! May the blessing of God be yours for the

°°°°generous guardianship I lay upon you, and which, I doubt not, you

°°°°will accept. A voice will henceforth and forever pray for you in

°°°°that world where we must all go, and where I am now as you read

°°°°these lines.

°°°°Victor-Ange-Guillaume Grandet.

°°°°"So you are talking?" said Pere Grandet as he carefully folded theletter in its original creases and put it into his waistcoat-pocket.He looked at his nephew with a humble, timid air, beneath which he hidhis feelings and his calculations. "Have you warmed yourself?" he saidto him.

°°°°"Thoroughly, my dear uncle."

°°°°"Well, where are the women?" said his uncle, already forgetting thathis nephew was to sleep at the house. At this moment Eugenie andMadame Grandet returned.

°°°°"Is the room all ready?" said Grandet, recovering his composure."Yes, father."

°°°°"Well then, my nephew, if you are tired, Nanon shall show you yourroom. It isn't a dandy's room; but you will excuse a poor wine-growerwho never has a penny to spare. Taxes swallow up everything.""We do not wish to intrude, Grandet," said the banker; "you may wantto talk to your nephew, and therefore we will bid you good-night."At these words the assembly rose, and each made a parting bow inkeeping with his or her own character. The old notary went to the doorto fetch his lantern and came back to light it, offering to accompanythe des Grassins on their way. Madame des Grassins had not foreseenthe incident which brought the evening prematurely to an end, herservant therefore had not arrived.

°°°°"Will you do me the honor to take my arm, madame?" said the abbe."Thank you, monsieur l'abbe, but I have my son," she answered dryly."Ladies cannot compromise themselves with me," said the abbe."Take Monsieur Cruchot's arm," said her husband.

°°°°The abbe walked off with the pretty lady so quickly that they weresoon some distance in advance of the caravan.

°°°°"That is a good-looking young man, madame," he said, pressing her arm."Good-by to the grapes, the vintage is done. It is all over with us.We may as well say adieu to Mademoiselle Grandet. Eugenie will belongto the dandy. Unless this cousin is enamoured of some Parisian woman,your son Adolphe will find another rival in--"

°°°°"Not at all, monsieur l'abbe. This young man cannot fail to see thatEugenie is a little fool,--a girl without the least freshness. Did younotice her to-night? She was as yellow as a quince."

°°°°"Perhaps you made the cousin notice it?"

°°°°"I did not take the trouble--"

°°°°"Place yourself always beside Eugenie, madame, and you need never takethe trouble to say anything to the young man against his cousin; hewill make his own comparisons, which--"

°°°°"Well, he has promised to dine with me the day after to-morrow.""Ah! if you only /would/, madame--" said the abbe.

°°°°"What is it that you wish me to do, monsieur l'abbe? Do you mean tooffer me bad advice? I have not reached the age of thirty-nine,without a stain upon my reputation, thank God! to compromise myselfnow, even for the empire of the Great Mogul. You and I are of an agewhen we both know the meaning of words. For an ecclesiastic, youcertainly have ideas that are very incongruous. Fie! it is worthy ofFaublas!"

°°°°"You have read Faublas?"

°°°°"No, monsieur l'abbe; I meant to say the /Liaisons dangereuses/.""Ah! that book is infinitely more moral," said the abbe, laughing."But you make me out as wicked as a young man of the present day; Ionly meant--"

°°°°"Do you dare to tell me you were not thinking of putting wicked thingsinto my head? Isn't it perfectly clear? If this young man--who I admitis very good-looking--were to make love to me, he would not think ofhis cousin. In Paris, I know, good mothers do devote themselves inthis way to the happiness and welfare of their children; but we livein the provinces, monsieur l'abbe."

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"And," she continued, "I do not want, and Adolphe himself would notwant, a hundred millions brought at such a price."

°°°°"Madame, I said nothing about a hundred millions; that temptationmight be too great for either of us to withstand. Only, I do thinkthat an honest woman may permit herself, in all honor, certainharmless little coquetries, which are, in fact, part of her socialduty and which--"

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"Are we not bound, madame, to make ourselves agreeable to each other?--Permit me to blow my nose.--I assure you, madame," he resumed, "thatthe young gentleman ogled you through his glass in a more flatteringmanner than he put on when he looked at me; but I forgive him fordoing homage to beauty in preference to old age--"

°°°°"It is quite apparent," said the president in his loud voice, "thatMonsieur Grandet of Paris has sent his son to Saumur with extremelymatrimonial intentions."

°°°°"But in that case the cousin wouldn't have fallen among us like acannon-ball," answered the notary.

°°°°"That doesn't prove anything," said Monsieur des Grassins; "the oldmiser is always making mysteries."

°°°°"Des Grassins, my friend, I have invited the young man to dinner. Youmust go and ask Monsieur and Madame de Larsonniere and the du Hautoys,with the beautiful demoiselle du Hautoy, of course. I hope she will beproperly dressed; that jealous mother of hers does make such a frightof her! Gentlemen, I trust that you will all do us the honor to come,"she added, stopping the procession to address the two Cruchots."Here you are at home, madame," said the notary.

°°°°After bowing to the three des Grassins, the three Cruchots returnedhome, applying their provincial genius for analysis to studying, underall its aspects, the great event of the evening, which undoubtedlychanged the respective positions of Grassinists and Cruchotines. Theadmirable common-sense which guided all the actions of these greatmachinators made each side feel the necessity of a momentary allianceagainst a common enemy. Must they not mutually hinder Eugenie fromloving her cousin, and the cousin from thinking of Eugenie? Could theParisian resist the influence of treacherous insinuations, soft-spokencalumnies, slanders full of faint praise and artless denials, whichshould be made to circle incessantly about him and deceive him?IV

°°°°When the four relations were left alone, Monsieur Grandet said to hisnephew,--

°°°°"We must go to bed. It is too late to talk about the matters whichhave brought you here; to-morrow we will take a suitable moment. Webreakfast at eight o'clock; at midday we eat a little fruit or a bitof bread, and drink a glass of white wine; and we dine, like theParisians, at five o'clock. That's the order of the day. If you liketo go and see the town and the environs you are free to do so. Youwill excuse me if my occupations do not permit me to accompany you.You may perhaps hear people say that I am rich,--Monsieur Grandetthis, Monsieur Grandet that. I let them talk; their gossip does nothurt my credit. But I have not a penny; I work in my old age like anapprentice whose worldly goods are a bad plane and two good arms.Perhaps you'll soon know yourself what a franc costs when you have gotto sweat for it. Nanon, where are the candles?"

°°°°"I trust, my nephew, that you will find all you want," said MadameGrandet; "but if you should need anything else, you can call Nanon.""My dear aunt, I shall need nothing; I have, I believe, broughteverything with me. Permit me to bid you good-night, and my youngcousin also."

°°°°Charles took a lighted wax candle from Nanon's hand,--an Anjou candle,very yellow in color, and so shopworn that it looked like tallow anddeceived Monsieur Grandet, who, incapable of suspecting its presenceunder his roof, did not perceive this magnificence.

°°°°"I will show you the way," he said.

°°°°Instead of leaving the hall by the door which opened under thearchway, Grandet ceremoniously went through the passage which dividedthe hall from the kitchen. A swing-door, furnished with a large ovalpane of glass, shut this passage from the staircase, so as to fend offthe cold air which rushed through it. But the north wind whistled nonethe less keenly in winter, and, in spite of the sand-bags at thebottom of the doors of the living-room, the temperature within couldscarcely be kept at a proper height. Nanon went to bolt the outerdoor; then she closed the hall and let loose a wolf-dog, whose barkwas so strangled that he seemed to have laryngitis. This animal, notedfor his ferocity, recognized no one but Nanon; the two untutoredchildren of the fields understood each other.

°°°°When Charles saw the yellow, smoke-stained walls of the well of thestaircase, where each worm-eaten step shook under the heavy foot-fallof his uncle, his expectations began to sober more and more. Hefancied himself in a hen-roost. His aunt and cousin, to whom he turnedan inquiring look, were so used to the staircase that they did notguess the cause of his amazement, and took the glance for anexpression of friendliness, which they answered by a smile that madehim desperate.

°°°°"Why the devil did my father send me to such a place?" he said tohimself.

°°°°When they reached the first landing he saw three doors painted inEtruscan red and without casings,--doors sunk in the dusty walls andprovided with iron bars, which in fact were bolts, each ending withthe pattern of a flame, as did both ends of the long sheath of thelock. The first door at the top of the staircase, which opened into aroom directly above the kitchen, was evidently walled up. In fact, theonly entrance to that room was through Grandet's bedchamber; the roomitself was his office. The single window which lighted it, on the sideof the court, was protected by a lattice of strong iron bars. No one,not even Madame Grandet, had permission to enter it. The old man choseto be alone, like an alchemist in his laboratory. There, no doubt,some hiding-place had been ingeniously constructed; there the title-deeds of property were stored; there hung the scales on which to weighthe louis; there were devised, by night and secretly, the estimates,the profits, the receipts, so that business men, finding Grandetprepared at all points, imagined that he got his cue from fairies ordemons; there, no doubt, while Nanon's loud snoring shook the rafters,while the wolf-dog watched and yawned in the courtyard, while Madameand Mademoiselle Grandet were quietly sleeping, came the old cooper tocuddle, to con over, to caress and clutch and clasp his gold. Thewalls were thick, the screens sure. He alone had the key of thislaboratory, where--so people declared--he studied the maps on whichhis fruit-trees were marked, and calculated his profits to a vine, andalmost to a twig.

°°°°The door of Eugenie's chamber was opposite to the walled-up entranceto this room. At the other end of the landing were the appartements ofthe married pair, which occupied the whole front of the house. MadameGrandet had a room next to that of Eugenie, which was entered througha glass door. The master's chamber was separated from that of his wifeby a partition, and from the mysterious strong-room by a thick wall.Pere Grandet lodged his nephew on the second floor, in the highmansarde attic which was above his own bedroom, so that he might hearhim if the young man took it into his head to go and come. WhenEugenie and her mother reached the middle of the landing they kissedeach other for good-night; then with a few words of adieu to Charles,cold upon the lips, but certainly very warm in the heart of the younggirl, they withdrew into their own chambers.

°°°°"Here you are in your room, my nephew," said Pere Grandet as he openedthe door. "If you need to go out, call Nanon; without her, beware! thedog would eat you up without a word. Sleep well. Good-night. Ha! why,they have made you a fire!" he cried.

°°°°At this moment Nanon appeared with the warming pan.

°°°°"Here's something more!" said Monsieur Grandet. "Do you take my nephewfor a lying-in woman? Carry off your brazier, Nanon!"

°°°°"But, monsieur, the sheets are damp, and this gentleman is as delicateas a woman."

°°°°"Well, go on, as you've taken it into your head," said Grandet,pushing her by the shoulders; "but don't set things on fire." Sosaying, the miser went down-stairs, grumbling indistinct sentences.Charles stood aghast in the midst of his trunks. After casting hiseyes on the attic-walls covered with that yellow paper sprinkled withbouquets so well known in dance-houses, on the fireplace of ribbedstone whose very look was chilling, on the chairs of yellow wood withvarnished cane seats that seemed to have more than the usual fourangles, on the open night-table capacious enough to hold a smallsergeant-at-arms, on the meagre bit of rag-carpet beside the bed, onthe tester whose cloth valance shook as if, devoured by moths, it wasabout to fall, he turned gravely to la Grande Nanon and said,--"Look here! my dear woman, just tell me, am I in the house of MonsieurGrandet, formerly mayor of Saumur, and brother to Monsieur Grandet ofParis?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur; and a very good, a very kind, a very perfectgentleman. Shall I help you to unpack your trunks?"

°°°°"Faith! yes, if you will, my old trooper. Didn't you serve in themarines of the Imperial Guard?"

°°°°"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Nanon. "What's that,--the marines of the guard?Is it salt? Does it go in the water?"

°°°°"Here, get me my dressing-gown out of that valise; there's the key."Nanon was wonder-struck by the sight of a dressing-gown made of greensilk, brocaded with gold flowers of an antique design.

°°°°"Are you going to put that on to go to bed with?" she asked."Yes."

°°°°"Holy Virgin! what a beautiful altar-cloth it would make for theparish church! My dear darling monsieur, give it to the church, andyou'll save your soul; if you don't, you'll lose it. Oh, how nice youlook in it! I must call mademoiselle to see you."

°°°°"Come, Nanon, if Nanon you are, hold your tongue; let me go to bed.I'll arrange my things to-morrow. If my dressing-gown pleases you somuch, you shall save your soul. I'm too good a Christian not to giveit to you when I go away, and you can do what you like with it."Nanon stood rooted to the ground, gazing at Charles and unable to putfaith into his words.

°°°°"Good night, Nanon."

°°°°"What in the world have I come here for?" thought Charles as he wentto sleep. "My father is not a fool; my journey must have some object.Pshaw! put off serious thought till the morrow, as some Greek idiotsaid."

°°°°"Blessed Virgin! how charming he is, my cousin!" Eugenie was saying,interrupting her prayers, which that night at least were neverfinished.

°°°°Madame Grandet had no thoughts at all as she went to bed. She heardthe miser walking up and down his room through the door ofcommunication which was in the middle of the partition. Like all timidwomen, she had studied the character of her lord. Just as the petrelforesees the storm, she knew by imperceptible signs when an inwardtempest shook her husband; and at such times, to use an expression ofher own, she "feigned dead."

°°°°Grandet gazed at the door lined with sheet-iron which he lately put tohis sanctum, and said to himself,--

°°°°"What a crazy idea of my brother to bequeath his son to me! A finelegacy! I have not fifty francs to give him. What are fifty francs toa dandy who looked at my barometer as if he meant to make firewood ofit!"

°°°°In thinking over the consequences of that legacy of anguish Grandetwas perhaps more agitated than his brother had been at the moment ofwriting it.

°°°°"I shall have that golden robe," thought Nanon, who went to sleeptricked out in her altar-cloth, dreaming for the first time in herlife of flowers, embroidery, and damask, just as Eugenie was dreamingof love.

°°°°*****

°°°°In the pure and monotonous life of young girls there comes a delicioushour when the sun sheds its rays into their soul, when the flowersexpress their thoughts, when the throbbings of the heart send upwardto the brain their fertilizing warmth and melt all thoughts into avague desire,--day of innocent melancholy and of dulcet joys! Whenbabes begin to see, they smile; when a young girl first perceives thesentiment of nature, she smiles as she smiled when an infant. If lightis the first love of life, is not love a light to the heart? Themoment to see within the veil of earthly things had come for Eugenie.An early riser, like all provincial girls, she was up betimes and saidher prayers, and then began the business of dressing,--a businesswhich henceforth was to have a meaning. First she brushed and smoothedher chestnut hair and twisted its heavy masses to the top of her headwith the utmost care, preventing the loose tresses from straying, andgiving to her head a symmetry which heightened the timid candor of herface; for the simplicity of these accessories accorded well with theinnocent sincerity of its lines. As she washed her hands again andagain in the cold water which hardened and reddened the skin, shelooked at her handsome round arms and asked herself what her cousindid to make his hands so softly white, his nails so delicately curved.She put on new stockings and her prettiest shoes. She laced her corsetstraight, without skipping a single eyelet. And then, wishing for thefirst time in her life to appear to advantage, she felt the joy ofhaving a new gown, well made, which rendered her attractive.As she finished her toilet the clock of the parish church struck thehour; to her astonishment, it was only seven. The desire of havingplenty of time for dressing carefully had led her to get up too early.Ignorant of the art of retouching every curl and studying everyeffect, Eugenie simply crossed her arms, sat down by the window, andlooked at the court-yard, the narrow garden, and the high terracedwalls that over-topped it: a dismal, hedged-in prospect, yet notwholly devoid of those mysterious beauties which belong to solitary oruncultivated nature. Near the kitchen was a well surrounded by a curb,with a pulley fastened to a bent iron rod clasped by a vine whoseleaves were withered, reddened, and shrivelled by the season. Fromthence the tortuous shoots straggled to the wall, clutched it, and ranthe whole length of the house, ending near the wood-pile, where thelogs were ranged with as much precision as the books in a library. Thepavement of the court-yard showed the black stains produced in time bylichens, herbage, and the absence of all movement or friction. Thethick walls wore a coating of green moss streaked with waving brownlines, and the eight stone steps at the bottom of the court-yard whichled up to the gate of the garden were disjointed and hidden beneathtall plants, like the tomb of a knight buried by his widow in the daysof the Crusades. Above a foundation of moss-grown, crumbling stoneswas a trellis of rotten wood, half fallen from decay; over themclambered and intertwined at will a mass of clustering creepers. Oneach side of the latticed gate stretched the crooked arms of twostunted apple-trees. Three parallel walks, gravelled and separatedfrom each other by square beds, where the earth was held in by box-borders, made the garden, which terminated, beneath a terrace of theold walls, in a group of lindens. At the farther end were raspberry-bushes; at the other, near the house, an immense walnut-tree droopedits branches almost into the window of the miser's sanctum.A clear day and the beautiful autumnal sun common to the banks of theLoire was beginning to melt the hoar-frost which the night had laid onthese picturesque objects, on the walls, and on the plants whichswathed the court-yard. Eugenie found a novel charm in the aspect ofthings lately so insignificant to her. A thousand confused thoughtscame to birth in her mind and grew there, as the sunbeams grew withoutalong the wall. She felt that impulse of delight, vague, inexplicable,which wraps the moral being as a cloud wraps the physical body. Herthoughts were all in keeping with the details of this strangelandscape, and the harmonies of her heart blended with the harmoniesof nature. When the sun reached an angle of the wall where the "Venus-hair" of southern climes drooped its thick leaves, lit with thechanging colors of a pigeon's breast, celestial rays of hope illuminedthe future to her eyes, and thenceforth she loved to gaze upon thatpiece of wall, on its pale flowers, its blue harebells, its wiltingherbage, with which she mingled memories as tender as those ofchildhood. The noise made by each leaf as it fell from its twig in thevoid of that echoing court gave answer to the secret questionings ofthe young girl, who could have stayed there the livelong day withoutperceiving the flight of time. Then came tumultuous heavings of thesoul. She rose often, went to her glass, and looked at herself, as anauthor in good faith looks at his work to criticise it and blame it inhis own mind.

°°°°"I am not beautiful enough for him!" Such was Eugenie's thought,--ahumble thought, fertile in suffering. The poor girl did not do herselfjustice; but modesty, or rather fear, is among the first of love'svirtues. Eugenie belonged to the type of children with sturdyconstitutions, such as we see among the lesser bourgeoisie, whosebeauties always seem a little vulgar; and yet, though she resembledthe Venus of Milo, the lines of her figure were ennobled by the softerChristian sentiment which purifies womanhood and gives it adistinction unknown to the sculptors of antiquity. She had an enormoushead, with the masculine yet delicate forehead of the Jupiter ofPhidias, and gray eyes, to which her chaste life, penetrating fullyinto them, carried a flood of light. The features of her round face,formerly fresh and rosy, were at one time swollen by the small-pox,which destroyed the velvet texture of the skin, though it kindly leftno other traces, and her cheek was still so soft and delicate that hermother's kiss made a momentary red mark upon it. Her nose was somewhattoo thick, but it harmonized well with the vermilion mouth, whoselips, creased in many lines, were full of love and kindness. Thethroat was exquisitely round. The bust, well curved and carefullycovered, attracted the eye and inspired reverie. It lacked, no doubt,the grace which a fitting dress can bestow; but to a connoisseur thenon-flexibility of her figure had its own charm. Eugenie, tall andstrongly made, had none of the prettiness which pleases the masses;but she was beautiful with a beauty which the spirit recognizes, andnone but artists truly love. A painter seeking here below for a typeof Mary's celestial purity, searching womankind for those proud modesteyes which Raphael divined, for those virgin lines, often due tochances of conception, which the modesty of Christian life alone canbestow or keep unchanged,--such a painter, in love with his ideal,would have found in the face of Eugenie the innate nobleness that isignorant of itself; he would have seen beneath the calmness of thatbrow a world of love; he would have felt, in the shape of the eyes, inthe fall of the eyelids, the presence of the nameless something thatwe call divine. Her features, the contour of her head, which noexpression of pleasure had ever altered or wearied, were like thelines of the horizon softly traced in the far distance across thetranquil lakes. That calm and rosy countenance, margined with lightlike a lovely full-blown flower, rested the mind, held the eye, andimparted the charm of the conscience that was there reflected. Eugeniewas standing on the shore of life where young illusions flower, wheredaisies are gathered with delights ere long to be unknown; and thusshe said, looking at her image in the glass, unconscious as yet oflove: "I am too ugly; he will not notice me."

°°°°Then she opened the door of her chamber which led to the staircase,and stretched out her neck to listen for the household noises. "He isnot up," she thought, hearing Nanon's morning cough as the good soulwent and came, sweeping out the halls, lighting her fire, chaining thedog, and speaking to the beasts in the stable. Eugenie at once wentdown and ran to Nanon, who was milking the cow.

°°°°"Nanon, my good Nanon, make a little cream for my cousin's breakfast.""Why, mademoiselle, you should have thought of that yesterday," saidNanon, bursting into a loud peal of laughter. "I can't make cream.Your cousin is a darling, a darling! oh, that he is! You should haveseen him in his dressing-gown, all silk and gold! I saw him, I did! Hewears linen as fine as the surplice of monsieur le cure.""Nanon, please make us a /galette/."

°°°°"And who'll give me wood for the oven, and flour and butter for thecakes?" said Nanon, who in her function of prime-minister to Grandetassumed at times enormous importance in the eyes of Eugenie and hermother. "Mustn't rob the master to feast the cousin. You ask him forbutter and flour and wood: he's your father, perhaps he'll give yousome. See! there he is now, coming to give out the provisions."Eugenie escaped into the garden, quite frightened as she heard thestaircase shaking under her father's step. Already she felt theeffects of that virgin modesty and that special consciousness ofhappiness which lead us to fancy, not perhaps without reason, that ourthoughts are graven on our foreheads and are open to the eyes of all.Perceiving for the first time the cold nakedness of her father'shouse, the poor girl felt a sort of rage that she could not put it inharmony with her cousin's elegance. She felt the need of doingsomething for him,--what, she did not know. Ingenuous and truthful,she followed her angelic nature without mistrusting her impressions orher feelings. The mere sight of her cousin had wakened within her thenatural yearnings of a woman,--yearnings that were the more likely todevelop ardently because, having reached her twenty-third year, shewas in the plenitude of her intelligence and her desires. For thefirst time in her life her heart was full of terror at the sight ofher father; in him she saw the master of the fate, and she fanciedherself guilty of wrong-doing in hiding from his knowledge certainthoughts. She walked with hasty steps, surprised to breathe a purerair, to feel the sun's rays quickening her pulses, to absorb fromtheir heat a moral warmth and a new life. As she turned over in hermind some stratagem by which to get the cake, a quarrel--an event asrare as the sight of swallows in winter--broke out between la GrandeNanon and Grandet. Armed with his keys, the master had come to doleout provisions for the day's consumption.

°°°°"Is there any bread left from yesterday?" he said to Nanon."Not a crumb, monsieur."

°°°°Grandet took a large round loaf, well floured and moulded in one ofthe flat baskets which they use for baking in Anjou, and was about tocut it, when Nanon said to him,--

°°°°"We are five, to-day, monsieur."

°°°°"That's true," said Grandet, "but your loaves weigh six pounds;there'll be some left. Besides, these young fellows from Paris don'teat bread, you'll see."

°°°°"Then they must eat /frippe/?" said Nanon.

°°°°/Frippe/ is a word of the local lexicon of Anjou, and means anyaccompaniment of bread, from butter which is spread upon it, thecommonest kind of /frippe/, to peach preserve, the most distinguishedof all the /frippes/; those who in their childhood have licked the/frippe/ and left the bread, will comprehend the meaning of Nanon'sspeech.

°°°°"No," answered Grandet, "they eat neither bread nor /frippe/; they aresomething like marriageable girls."

°°°°After ordering the meals for the day with his usual parsimony, thegoodman, having locked the closets containing the supplies, was aboutto go towards the fruit-garden, when Nanon stopped him to say,--"Monsieur, give me a little flour and some butter, and I'll make a/galette/ for the young ones."

°°°°"Are you going to pillage the house on account of my nephew?""I wasn't thinking any more of your nephew than I was of your dog,--not more than you think yourself; for, look here, you've only forkedout six bits of sugar. I want eight."

°°°°"What's all this, Nanon? I have never seen you like this before. Whathave you got in your head? Are you the mistress here? You sha'n't havemore than six pieces of sugar."

°°°°"Well, then, how is your nephew to sweeten his coffee?"

°°°°"With two pieces; I'll go without myself."

°°°°"Go without sugar at your age! I'd rather buy you some out of my ownpocket."

°°°°"Mind your own business."

°°°°In spite of the recent fall in prices, sugar was still in Grandet'seyes the most valuable of all the colonial products; to him it wasalways six francs a pound. The necessity of economizing it, acquiredunder the Empire, had grown to be the most inveterate of his habits.All women, even the greatest ninnies, know how to dodge and dodge toget their ends; Nanon abandoned the sugar for the sake of getting the/galette/.

°°°°"Mademoiselle!" she called through the window, "do you want some/galette/?"

°°°°"No, no," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Come, Nanon," said Grandet, hearing his daughter's voice. "See here."He opened the cupboard where the flour was kept, gave her a cupful,and added a few ounces of butter to the piece he had already cut off."I shall want wood for the oven," said the implacable Nanon."Well, take what you want," he answered sadly; "but in that case youmust make us a fruit-tart, and you'll cook the whole dinner in theoven. In that way you won't need two fires."

°°°°"Goodness!" cried Nanon, "you needn't tell me that."

°°°°Grandet cast a look that was well-nigh paternal upon his faithfuldeputy.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she cried, when his back was turned, "we shall havethe /galette/."

°°°°Pere Grandet returned from the garden with the fruit and arranged aplateful on the kitchen-table.

°°°°"Just see, monsieur," said Nanon, "what pretty boots your nephew has.What leather! why it smells good! What does he clean it with, Iwonder? Am I to put your egg-polish on it?"

°°°°"Nanon, I think eggs would injure that kind of leather. Tell him youdon't know how to black morocco; yes, that's morocco. He will get yousomething himself in Saumur to polish those boots with. I have heardthat they put sugar into the blacking to make it shine."

°°°°"They look good to eat," said the cook, putting the boots to her nose."Bless me! if they don't smell like madame's eau-de-cologne. Ah! howfunny!"

°°°°"Funny!" said her master. "Do you call it funny to put more money intoboots than the man who stands in them is worth?"

°°°°"Monsieur," she said, when Grandet returned the second time, afterlocking the fruit-garden, "won't you have the /pot-au-feu/ put on onceor twice a week on account of your nephew?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Am I to go to the butcher's?"

°°°°"Certainly not. We will make the broth of fowls; the farmers willbring them. I shall tell Cornoiller to shoot some crows; they make thebest soup in the world."

°°°°"Isn't it true, monsieur, that crows eat the dead?"

°°°°"You are a fool, Nanon. They eat what they can get, like the rest ofthe world. Don't we all live on the dead? What are legacies?"Monsieur Grandet, having no further orders to give, drew out hiswatch, and seeing that he had half an hour to dispose of beforebreakfast, he took his hat, went and kissed his daughter, and said toher:

°°°°"Do you want to come for a walk in the fields, down by the Loire? Ihave something to do there."

°°°°Eugenie fetched her straw bonnet, lined with pink taffeta; then thefather and daughter went down the winding street to the shore."Where are you going at this early hour?" said Cruchot, the notary,meeting them.

°°°°"To see something," answered Grandet, not duped by the matutinalappearance of his friend.

°°°°When Pere Grandet went to "see something," the notary knew byexperience there was something to be got by going with him; so hewent.

°°°°"Come, Cruchot," said Grandet, "you are one of my friends. I'll showyou what folly it is to plant poplar-trees on good ground.""Do you call the sixty thousand francs that you pocketed for thosethat were in your fields down by the Loire, folly?" said MaitreCruchot, opening his eyes with amazement. "What luck you have had! Tocut down your trees at the very time they ran short of white-wood atNantes, and to sell them at thirty francs!"

°°°°Eugenie listened, without knowing that she approached the most solemnmoment of her whole life, and that the notary was about to bring downupon her head a paternal and supreme sentence. Grandet had now reachedthe magnificent fields which he owned on the banks of the Loire, wherethirty workmen were employed in clearing away, filling up, andlevelling the spots formerly occupied by the poplars.

°°°°"Maitre Cruchot, see how much ground this tree once took up! Jean," hecried to a laborer, "m-m-measure with your r-r-rule, b-both ways.""Four times eight feet," said the man.

°°°°"Thirty-two feet lost," said Grandet to Cruchot. "I had three hundredpoplars in this one line, isn't that so? Well, then, three h-h-hundredtimes thir-thirty-two lost m-m-me five hundred in h-h-hay; add twiceas much for the side rows,--fifteen hundred; the middle rows as muchmore. So we may c-c-call it a th-thousand b-b-bales of h-h-hay--""Very good," said Cruchot, to help out his friend; "a thousand balesare worth about six hundred francs."

°°°°"Say t-t-twelve hundred, be-c-cause there's three or four hundredfrancs on the second crop. Well, then, c-c-calculate that t-twelvethousand francs a year for f-f-forty years with interest c-c-comesto--"

°°°°"Say sixty thousand francs," said the notary.

°°°°"I am willing; c-c-comes t-t-to sixty th-th-thousand. Very good,"continued Grandet, without stuttering: "two thousand poplars fortyyears old will only yield me fifty thousand francs. There's a loss. Ihave found that myself," said Grandet, getting on his high horse."Jean, fill up all the holes except those at the bank of the river;there you are to plant the poplars I have bought. Plant 'em there, andthey'll get nourishment from the government," he said, turning toCruchot, and giving a slight motion to the wen on his nose, whichexpressed more than the most ironical of smiles.

°°°°"True enough; poplars should only be planted on poor soil," saidCruchot, amazed at Grandet's calculations.

°°°°"Y-y-yes, monsieur," answered the old man satirically.

°°°°Eugenie, who was gazing at the sublime scenery of the Loire, andpaying no attention to her father's reckonings, presently turned anear to the remarks of Cruchot when she heard him say,--

°°°°"So you have brought a son-in-law from Paris. All Saumur is talkingabout your nephew. I shall soon have the marriage-contract to draw up,hey! Pere Grandet?"

°°°°"You g-g-got up very early to t-t-tell me that," said Grandet,accompanying the remark with a motion of his wen. "Well, oldc-c-comrade, I'll be frank, and t-t-tell you what you want t-t-toknow. I would rather, do you see, f-f-fling my daughter into the Loirethan g-g-give her to her c-c-cousin. You may t-t-tell that everywhere,--no, never mind; let the world t-t-talk."

°°°°This answer dazzled and blinded the young girl with sudden light. Thedistant hopes upspringing in her heart bloomed suddenly, became real,tangible, like a cluster of flowers, and she saw them cut down andwilting on the earth. Since the previous evening she had attachedherself to Charles by those links of happiness which bind soul tosoul; from henceforth suffering was to rivet them. Is it not the nobledestiny of women to be more moved by the dark solemnities of griefthan by the splendors of fortune? How was it that fatherly feeling haddied out of her father's heart? Of what crime had Charles been guilty?Mysterious questions! Already her dawning love, a mystery so profound,was wrapping itself in mystery. She walked back trembling in all herlimbs; and when she reached the gloomy street, lately so joyous toher, she felt its sadness, she breathed the melancholy which time andevents had printed there. None of love's lessons lacked. A few stepsfrom their own door she went on before her father and waited at thethreshold. But Grandet, who saw a newspaper in the notary's hand,stopped short and asked,--

°°°°"How are the Funds?"

°°°°"You never listen to my advice, Grandet," answered Cruchot. "Buy soon;you will still make twenty per cent in two years, besides getting anexcellent rate of interest,--five thousand a year for eighty thousandfrancs fifty centimes."

°°°°"We'll see about that," answered Grandet, rubbing his chin."Good God!" exclaimed the notary.

°°°°"Well, what?" cried Grandet; and at the same moment Cruchot put thenewspaper under his eyes and said:

°°°°"Read that!"

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, one of the most respected merchants in Paris,

°°°°blew his brains out yesterday, after making his usual appearance

°°°°at the Bourse. He had sent his resignation to the president of the

°°°°Chamber of Deputies, and had also resigned his functions as a

°°°°judge of the commercial courts. The failures of Monsieur Roguin

°°°°and Monsieur Souchet, his broker and his notary, had ruined him.

°°°°The esteem felt for Monsieur Grandet and the credit he enjoyed

°°°°were nevertheless such that he might have obtained the necessary

°°°°assistance from other business houses. It is much to be regretted

°°°°that so honorable a man should have yielded to momentary despair,"

°°°°etc.

°°°°"I knew it," said the old wine-grower to the notary.

°°°°The words sent a chill of horror through Maitre Cruchot, who,notwithstanding his impassibility as a notary, felt the cold runningdown his spine as he thought that Grandet of Paris had possiblyimplored in vain the millions of Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"And his son, so joyous yesterday--"

°°°°"He knows nothing as yet," answered Grandet, with the same composure."Adieu! Monsieur Grandet," said Cruchot, who now understood the stateof the case, and went off to reassure Monsieur de Bonfons.On entering, Grandet found breakfast ready. Madame Grandet, roundwhose neck Eugenie had flung her arms, kissing her with the quickeffusion of feeling often caused by secret grief, was already seatedin her chair on castors, knitting sleeves for the coming winter."You can begin to eat," said Nanon, coming downstairs four steps at atime; "the young one is sleeping like a cherub. Isn't he a darlingwith his eyes shut? I went in and I called him: no answer.""Let him sleep," said Grandet; "he'll wake soon enough to hear ill-tidings."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Eugenie, putting into her coffee the two littlebits of sugar weighing less than half an ounce which the old miseramused himself by cutting up in his leisure hours. Madame Grandet, whodid not dare to put the question, gazed at her husband.

°°°°"His father has blown his brains out."

°°°°"My uncle?" said Eugenie.

°°°°"Poor young man!" exclaimed Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Poor indeed!" said Grandet; "he isn't worth a sou!"

°°°°"Eh! poor boy, and he's sleeping like the king of the world!" saidNanon in a gentle voice.

°°°°Eugenie stopped eating. Her heart was wrung, as the young heart iswrung when pity for the suffering of one she loves overflows, for thefirst time, the whole being of a woman. The poor girl wept."What are you crying about? You didn't know your uncle," said herfather, giving her one of those hungry tigerish looks he doubtlessthrew upon his piles of gold.

°°°°"But, monsieur," said Nanon, "who wouldn't feel pity for the pooryoung man, sleeping there like a wooden shoe, without knowing what'scoming?"

°°°°"I didn't speak to you, Nanon. Hold your tongue!"

°°°°Eugenie learned at that moment that the woman who loves must be ableto hide her feelings. She did not answer.

°°°°"You will say nothing to him about it, Ma'ame Grandet, till I return,"said the old man. "I have to go and straighten the line of my hedgealong the high-road. I shall be back at noon, in time for the secondbreakfast, and then I will talk with my nephew about his affairs. Asfor you, Mademoiselle Eugenie, if it is for that dandy you are crying,that's enough, child. He's going off like a shot to the Indies. Youwill never see him again."

°°°°The father took his gloves from the brim of his hat, put them on withhis usual composure, pushed them in place by shoving the fingers ofboth hands together, and went out.

°°°°"Mamma, I am suffocating!" cried Eugenie when she was alone with hermother; "I have never suffered like this."

°°°°Madame Grandet, seeing that she turned pale, opened the window and lether breathe fresh air.

°°°°"I feel better!" said Eugenie after a moment.

°°°°This nervous excitement in a nature hitherto, to all appearance, calmand cold, reacted on Madame Grandet; she looked at her daughter withthe sympathetic intuition with which mothers are gifted for theobjects of their tenderness, and guessed all. In truth the life of theHungarian sisters, bound together by a freak of nature, could scarcelyhave been more intimate than that of Eugenie and her mother,--alwaystogether in the embrasure of that window, and sleeping together in thesame atmosphere.

°°°°"My poor child!" said Madame Grandet, taking Eugenie's head and layingit upon her bosom.

°°°°At these words the young girl raised her head, questioned her motherby a look, and seemed to search out her inmost thought.

°°°°"Why send him to the Indies?" she said. "If he is unhappy, ought henot to stay with us? Is he not our nearest relation?"

°°°°"Yes, my child, it seems natural; but your father has his reasons: wemust respect them."

°°°°The mother and daughter sat down in silence, the former upon herraised seat, the latter in her little armchair, and both took up theirwork. Swelling with gratitude for the full heart-understanding hermother had given her, Eugenie kissed the dear hand, saying,--"How good you are, my kind mamma!"

°°°°The words sent a glow of light into the motherly face, worn andblighted as it was by many sorrows.

°°°°"You like him?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°Madame Grandet only smiled in reply. Then, after a moment's silence,she said in a low voice: "Do you love him already? That is wrong.""Wrong?" said Eugenie. "Why is it wrong? You are pleased with him,Nanon is pleased with him; why should he not please me? Come, mamma,let us set the table for his breakfast."

°°°°She threw down her work, and her mother did the same, saying, "Foolishchild!" But she sanctioned the child's folly by sharing it. Eugeniecalled Nanon.

°°°°"What do you want now, mademoiselle?"

°°°°"Nanon, can we have cream by midday?"

°°°°"Ah! midday, to be sure you can," answered the old servant."Well, let him have his coffee very strong; I heard Monsieur desGrassins say that they make the coffee very strong in Paris. Put in agreat deal."

°°°°"Where am I to get it?"

°°°°"Buy some."

°°°°"Suppose monsieur meets me?"

°°°°"He has gone to his fields."

°°°°"I'll run, then. But Monsieur Fessard asked me yesterday if the Magihad come to stay with us when I bought the wax candle. All the townwill know our goings-on."

°°°°"If your father finds it out," said Madame Grandet, "he is capable ofbeating us."

°°°°"Well, let him beat us; we will take his blows on our knees."Madame Grandet for all answer raised her eyes to heaven. Nanon put onher hood and went off. Eugenie got out some clean table-linen, andwent to fetch a few bunches of grapes which she had amused herself byhanging on a string across the attic; she walked softly along thecorridor, so as not to waken her cousin, and she could not helplistening at the door to his quiet breathing.

°°°°"Sorrow is watching while he sleeps," she thought.

°°°°She took the freshest vine-leaves and arranged her dish of grapes ascoquettishly as a practised house-keeper might have done, and placedit triumphantly on the table. She laid hands on the pears counted outby her father, and piled them in a pyramid mixed with leaves. She wentand came, and skipped and ran. She would have liked to lay undercontribution everything in her father's house; but the keys were inhis pocket. Nanon came back with two fresh eggs. At sight of themEugenie almost hugged her round the neck.

°°°°"The farmer from Lande had them in his basket. I asked him for them,and he gave them to me, the darling, for nothing, as an attention!"VAfter two hours' thought and care, during which Eugenie jumped uptwenty times from her work to see if the coffee were boiling, or to goand listen to the noise her cousin made in dressing, she succeeded inpreparing a simple little breakfast, very inexpensive, but which,nevertheless, departed alarmingly from the inveterate customs of thehouse. The midday breakfast was always taken standing. Each took aslice of bread, a little fruit or some butter, and a glass of wine. AsEugenie looked at the table drawn up near the fire with an arm-chairplaced before her cousin's plate, at the two dishes of fruit, the egg-cup, the bottle of white wine, the bread, and the sugar heaped up in asaucer, she trembled in all her limbs at the mere thought of the lookher father would give her if he should come in at that moment. Sheglanced often at the clock to see if her cousin could breakfast beforethe master's return.

°°°°"Don't be troubled, Eugenie; if your father comes in, I will take itall upon myself," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Eugenie could not repress a tear.

°°°°"Oh, my good mother!" she cried, "I have never loved you enough."Charles, who had been tramping about his room for some time, singingto himself, now came down. Happily, it was only eleven o'clock. Thetrue Parisian! he had put as much dandyism into his dress as if hewere in the chateau of the noble lady then travelling in Scotland. Hecame into the room with the smiling, courteous manner so becoming toyouth, which made Eugenie's heart beat with mournful joy. He had takenthe destruction of his castles in Anjou as a joke, and came up to hisaunt gaily.

°°°°"Have you slept well, dear aunt? and you, too, my cousin?""Very well, monsieur; did you?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"I? perfectly."

°°°°"You must be hungry, cousin," said Eugenie; "will you take your seat?""I never breakfast before midday; I never get up till then. However, Ifared so badly on the journey that I am glad to eat something at once.Besides--" here he pulled out the prettiest watch Breguet ever made."Dear me! I am early, it is only eleven o'clock!"

°°°°"Early?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Yes; but I wanted to put my things in order. Well, I shall be glad tohave anything to eat,--anything, it doesn't matter what, a chicken, apartridge."

°°°°"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Nanon, overhearing the words.

°°°°"A partridge!" whispered Eugenie to herself; she would gladly havegiven the whole of her little hoard for a partridge.

°°°°"Come and sit down," said his aunt.

°°°°The young dandy let himself drop into an easy-chair, just as a prettywoman falls gracefully upon a sofa. Eugenie and her mother tookordinary chairs and sat beside him, near the fire.

°°°°"Do you always live here?" said Charles, thinking the room uglier bydaylight than it had seemed the night before.

°°°°"Always," answered Eugenie, looking at him, "except during thevintage. Then we go and help Nanon, and live at the Abbaye desNoyers."

°°°°"Don't you ever take walks?"

°°°°"Sometimes on Sunday after vespers, when the weather is fine," saidMadame Grandet, "we walk on the bridge, or we go and watch thehaymakers."

°°°°"Have you a theatre?"

°°°°"Go to the theatre!" exclaimed Madame Grandet, "see a play! Why,monsieur, don't you know it is a mortal sin?"

°°°°"See here, monsieur," said Nanon, bringing in the eggs, "here are yourchickens,--in the shell."

°°°°"Oh! fresh eggs," said Charles, who, like all people accustomed toluxury, had already forgotten about his partridge, "that is delicious:now, if you will give me the butter, my good girl."

°°°°"Butter! then you can't have the /galette/."

°°°°"Nanon, bring the butter," cried Eugenie.

°°°°The young girl watched her cousin as he cut his sippets, with as muchpleasure as a grisette takes in a melodrama where innocence and virtuetriumph. Charles, brought up by a charming mother, improved, andtrained by a woman of fashion, had the elegant, dainty, foppishmovements of a coxcomb. The compassionate sympathy and tenderness of ayoung girl possess a power that is actually magnetic; so that Charles,finding himself the object of the attentions of his aunt and cousin,could not escape the influence of feelings which flowed towards him,as it were, and inundated him. He gave Eugenie a bright, caressinglook full of kindness,--a look which seemed itself a smile. Heperceived, as his eyes lingered upon her, the exquisite harmony offeatures in the pure face, the grace of her innocent attitude, themagic clearness of the eyes, where young love sparkled and desireshone unconsciously.

°°°°"Ah! my dear cousin, if you were in full dress at the Opera, I assureyou my aunt's words would come true,--you would make the men committhe mortal sin of envy, and the women the sin of jealousy."The compliment went to Eugenie's heart and set it beating, though shedid not understand its meaning.

°°°°"Oh! cousin," she said, "you are laughing at a poor little countrygirl."

°°°°"If you knew me, my cousin, you would know that I abhor ridicule; itwithers the heart and jars upon all my feelings." Here he swallowedhis buttered sippet very gracefully. "No, I really have not enoughmind to make fun of others; and doubtless it is a great defect. InParis, when they want to disparage a man, they say: 'He has a goodheart.' The phrase means: 'The poor fellow is as stupid as arhinoceros.' But as I am rich, and known to hit the bull's-eye atthirty paces with any kind of pistol, and even in the open fields,ridicule respects me."

°°°°"My dear nephew, that bespeaks a good heart."

°°°°"You have a very pretty ring," said Eugenie; "is there any harm inasking to see it?"

°°°°Charles held out his hand after loosening the ring, and Eugenieblushed as she touched the pink nails of her cousin with the tips ofher fingers.

°°°°"See, mamma, what beautiful workmanship."

°°°°"My! there's a lot of gold!" said Nanon, bringing in the coffee."What is that?" exclaimed Charles, laughing, as he pointed to anoblong pot of brown earthenware, glazed on the inside, and edged witha fringe of ashes, from the bottom of which the coffee-grounds werebubbling up and falling in the boiling liquid.

°°°°"It is boiled coffee," said Nanon.

°°°°"Ah! my dear aunt, I shall at least leave one beneficent trace of myvisit here. You are indeed behind the age! I must teach you to makegood coffee in a Chaptal coffee-pot."

°°°°He tried to explain the process of a Chaptal coffee-pot.

°°°°"Gracious! if there are so many things as all that to do," said Nanon,"we may as well give up our lives to it. I shall never make coffeethat way; I know that! Pray, who is to get the fodder for the cowwhile I make the coffee?"

°°°°"I will make it," said Eugenie.

°°°°"Child!" said Madame Grandet, looking at her daughter.

°°°°The word recalled to their minds the sorrow that was about to fallupon the unfortunate young man; the three women were silent, andlooked at him with an air of commiseration that caught his attention."Is anything the matter, my cousin?" he said.

°°°°"Hush!" said Madame Grandet to Eugenie, who was about to answer; "youknow, my daughter, that your father charged us not to speak tomonsieur--"

°°°°"Say Charles," said young Grandet.

°°°°"Ah! you are called Charles? What a beautiful name!" cried Eugenie.Presentiments of evil are almost always justified. At this momentNanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie, who had all three been thinkingwith a shudder of the old man's return, heard the knock whose echoesthey knew but too well.

°°°°"There's papa!" said Eugenie.

°°°°She removed the saucer filled with sugar, leaving a few pieces on thetable-cloth; Nanon carried off the egg-cup; Madame Grandet sat up likea frightened hare. It was evidently a panic, which amazed Charles, whowas wholly unable to understand it.

°°°°"Why! what is the matter?" he asked.

°°°°"My father has come," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, what of that?"

°°°°Monsieur Grandet entered the room, threw his keen eye upon the table,upon Charles, and saw the whole thing.

°°°°"Ha! ha! so you have been making a feast for your nephew; very good,very good, very good indeed!" he said, without stuttering. "When thecat's away, the mice will play."

°°°°"Feast!" thought Charles, incapable of suspecting or imagining therules and customs of the household.

°°°°"Give me my glass, Nanon," said the master

°°°°Eugenie brought the glass. Grandet drew a horn-handled knife with abig blade from his breeches' pocket, cut a slice of bread, took asmall bit of butter, spread it carefully on the bread, and ate itstanding. At this moment Charlie was sweetening his coffee. PereGrandet saw the bits of sugar, looked at his wife, who turned pale,and made three steps forward; he leaned down to the poor woman's earand said,--

°°°°"Where did you get all that sugar?"

°°°°"Nanon fetched it from Fessard's; there was none."

°°°°It is impossible to picture the profound interest the three women tookin this mute scene. Nanon had left her kitchen and stood looking intothe room to see what would happen. Charles, having tasted his coffee,found it bitter and glanced about for the sugar, which Grandet hadalready put away.

°°°°"What do you want?" said his uncle.

°°°°"The sugar."

°°°°"Put in more milk," answered the master of the house; "your coffeewill taste sweeter."

°°°°Eugenie took the saucer which Grandet had put away and placed it onthe table, looking calmly at her father as she did so. Most assuredly,the Parisian woman who held a silken ladder with her feeble arms tofacilitate the flight of her lover, showed no greater courage thanEugenie displayed when she replaced the sugar upon the table. Thelover rewarded his mistress when she proudly showed him her beautifulbruised arm, and bathed every swollen vein with tears and kisses tillit was cured with happiness. Charles, on the other hand, never so muchas knew the secret of the cruel agitation that shook and bruised theheart of his cousin, crushed as it was by the look of the old miser."You are not eating your breakfast, wife."

°°°°The poor helot came forward with a piteous look, cut herself a pieceof bread, and took a pear. Eugenie boldly offered her father somegrapes, saying,--

°°°°"Taste my preserves, papa. My cousin, you will eat some, will you not?I went to get these pretty grapes expressly for you."

°°°°"If no one stops them, they will pillage Saumur for you, nephew. Whenyou have finished, we will go into the garden; I have something totell you which can't be sweetened."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother cast a look on Charles whose meaning the youngman could not mistake.

°°°°"What is it you mean, uncle? Since the death of my poor mother"--atthese words his voice softened--"no other sorrow can touch me.""My nephew, who knows by what afflictions God is pleased to try us?"said his aunt.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta," said Grandet, "there's your nonsense beginning. I amsorry to see those white hands of yours, nephew"; and he showed theshoulder-of-mutton fists which Nature had put at the end of his ownarms. "There's a pair of hands made to pick up silver pieces. You'vebeen brought up to put your feet in the kid out of which we make thepurses we keep our money in. A bad look-out! Very bad!"

°°°°"What do you mean, uncle? I'll be hanged if I understand a single wordof what you are saying."

°°°°"Come!" said Grandet.

°°°°The miser closed the blade of his knife with a snap, drank the last ofhis wine, and opened the door.

°°°°"My cousin, take courage!"

°°°°The tone of the young girl struck terror to Charles's heart, and hefollowed his terrible uncle, a prey to disquieting thoughts. Eugenie,her mother, and Nanon went into the kitchen, moved by irresistiblecuriosity to watch the two actors in the scene which was about to takeplace in the garden, where at first the uncle walked silently ahead ofthe nephew. Grandet was not at all troubled at having to tell Charlesof the death of his father; but he did feel a sort of compassion inknowing him to be without a penny, and he sought for some phrase orformula by which to soften the communication of that cruel truth. "Youhave lost your father," seemed to him a mere nothing to say; fathersdie before their children. But "you are absolutely without means,"--all the misfortunes of life were summed up in those words! Grandetwalked round the garden three times, the gravel crunching under hisheavy step.

°°°°In the crucial moments of life our minds fasten upon the localitywhere joys or sorrows overwhelm us. Charles noticed with minuteattention the box-borders of the little garden, the yellow leaves asthey fluttered down, the dilapidated walls, the gnarled fruit-trees,--picturesque details which were destined to remain forever in hismemory, blending eternally, by the mnemonics that belong exclusivelyto the passions, with the recollections of this solemn hour."It is very fine weather, very warm," said Grandet, drawing a longbreath.

°°°°"Yes, uncle; but why--"

°°°°"Well, my lad," answered his uncle, "I have some bad news to give you.Your father is ill--"

°°°°"Then why am I here?" said Charles. "Nanon," he cried, "order post-horses! I can get a carriage somewhere?" he added, turning to hisuncle, who stood motionless.

°°°°"Horses and carriages are useless," answered Grandet, looking atCharles, who remained silent, his eyes growing fixed. "Yes, my poorboy, you guess the truth,--he is dead. But that's nothing; there issomething worse: he blew out his brains."

°°°°"My father!"

°°°°"Yes, but that's not the worst; the newspapers are all talking aboutit. Here, read that."

°°°°Grandet, who had borrowed the fatal article from Cruchot, thrust thepaper under his nephew's eyes. The poor young man, still a child,still at an age when feelings wear no mask, burst into tears."That's good!" thought Grandet; "his eyes frightened me. He'll be allright if he weeps,--That is not the worst, my poor nephew," he saidaloud, not noticing whether Charles heard him, "that is nothing; youwill get over it: but--"

°°°°"Never, never! My father! Oh, my father!"

°°°°"He has ruined you, you haven't a penny."

°°°°"What does that matter? My father! Where is my father?"

°°°°His sobs resounded horribly against those dreary walls andreverberated in the echoes. The three women, filled with pity, weptalso; for tears are often as contagious as laughter. Charles, withoutlistening further to his uncle, ran through the court and up thestaircase to his chamber, where he threw himself across the bed andhid his face in the sheets, to weep in peace for his lost parents."The first burst must have its way," said Grandet, entering theliving-room, where Eugenie and her mother had hastily resumed theirseats and were sewing with trembling hands, after wiping their eyes."But that young man is good for nothing; his head is more taken upwith the dead than with his money."

°°°°Eugenie shuddered as she heard her father's comment on the most sacredof all griefs. From that moment she began to judge him. Charles'ssobs, though muffled, still sounded through the sepulchral house; andhis deep groans, which seemed to come from the earth beneath, onlyceased towards evening, after growing gradually feebler.

°°°°"Poor young man!" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Fatal exclamation! Pere Grandet looked at his wife, at Eugenie, and atthe sugar-bowl. He recollected the extraordinary breakfast preparedfor the unfortunate youth, and he took a position in the middle of theroom.

°°°°"Listen to me," he said, with his usual composure. "I hope that youwill not continue this extravagance, Madame Grandet. I don't give youMY money to stuff that young fellow with sugar."

°°°°"My mother had nothing to do with it," said Eugenie; "it was I who--""Is it because you are of age," said Grandet, interrupting hisdaughter, "that you choose to contradict me? Remember, Eugenie--""Father, the son of your brother ought to receive from us--""Ta, ta, ta, ta!" exclaimed the cooper on four chromatic tones; "theson of my brother this, my nephew that! Charles is nothing at all tous; he hasn't a farthing, his father has failed; and when this dandyhas cried his fill, off he goes from here. I won't have himrevolutionize my household."

°°°°"What is 'failing,' father?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°"To fail," answered her father, "is to commit the most dishonorableaction that can disgrace a man."

°°°°"It must be a great sin," said Madame Grandet, "and our brother may bedamned."

°°°°"There, there, don't begin with your litanies!" said Grandet,shrugging his shoulders. "To fail, Eugenie," he resumed, "is to commita theft which the law, unfortunately, takes under its protection.People have given their property to Guillaume Grandet trusting to hisreputation for honor and integrity; he has made away with it all, andleft them nothing but their eyes to weep with. A highway robber isbetter than a bankrupt: the one attacks you and you can defendyourself, he risks his own life; but the other--in short, Charles isdishonored."

°°°°The words rang in the poor girl's heart and weighed it down with theirheavy meaning. Upright and delicate as a flower born in the depths ofa forest, she knew nothing of the world's maxims, of its deceitfularguments and specious sophisms; she therefore believed the atrociousexplanation which her father gave her designedly, concealing thedistinction which exists between an involuntary failure and anintentional one.

°°°°"Father, could you not have prevented such a misfortune?""My brother did not consult me. Besides, he owes four millions.""What is a 'million,' father?" she asked, with the simplicity of achild which thinks it can find out at once all that it wants to know."A million?" said Grandet, "why, it is a million pieces of twenty souseach, and it takes five twenty sous pieces to make five francs.""Dear me!" cried Eugenie, "how could my uncle possibly have had fourmillions? Is there any one else in France who ever had so manymillions?" Pere Grandet stroked his chin, smiled, and his wen seemedto dilate. "But what will become of my cousin Charles?"

°°°°"He is going off to the West Indies by his father's request, and hewill try to make his fortune there."

°°°°"Has he got the money to go with?"

°°°°"I shall pay for his journey as far as--yes, as far as Nantes."Eugenie sprang into his arms.

°°°°"Oh, father, how good you are!"

°°°°She kissed him with a warmth that almost made Grandet ashamed ofhimself, for his conscience galled him a little.

°°°°"Will it take much time to amass a million?" she asked.

°°°°"Look here!" said the old miser, "you know what a napoleon is? Well,it takes fifty thousand napoleons to make a million."

°°°°"Mamma, we must say a great many /neuvaines/ for him."

°°°°"I was thinking so," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"That's the way, always spending my money!" cried the father. "Do youthink there are francs on every bush?"

°°°°At this moment a muffled cry, more distressing than all the others,echoed through the garrets and struck a chill to the hearts of Eugenieand her mother.

°°°°"Nanon, go upstairs and see that he does not kill himself," saidGrandet. "Now, then," he added, looking at his wife and daughter, whohad turned pale at his words, "no nonsense, you two! I must leave you;I have got to see about the Dutchmen who are going away to-day. Andthen I must find Cruchot, and talk with him about all this."He departed. As soon as he had shut the door Eugenie and her motherbreathed more freely. Until this morning the young girl had never feltconstrained in the presence of her father; but for the last few hoursevery moment wrought a change in her feelings and ideas.

°°°°"Mamma, how many louis are there in a cask of wine?"

°°°°"Your father sells his from a hundred to a hundred and fifty francs,sometimes two hundred,--at least, so I've heard say."

°°°°"Then papa must be rich?"

°°°°"Perhaps he is. But Monsieur Cruchot told me he bought Froidfond twoyears ago; that may have pinched him."

°°°°Eugenie, not being able to understand the question of her father'sfortune, stopped short in her calculations.

°°°°"He didn't even see me, the darling!" said Nanon, coming back from hererrand. "He's stretched out like a calf on his bed and crying like theMadeleine, and that's a blessing! What's the matter with the poor dearyoung man!"

°°°°"Let us go and console him, mamma; if any one knocks, we can comedown."

°°°°Madame Grandet was helpless against the sweet persuasive tones of herdaughter's voice. Eugenie was sublime: she had become a woman. Thetwo, with beating hearts, went up to Charles's room. The door wasopen. The young man heard and saw nothing; plunged in grief, he onlyuttered inarticulate cries.

°°°°"How he loves his father!" said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°In the utterance of those words it was impossible to mistake the hopesof a heart that, unknown to itself, had suddenly become passionate.Madame Grandet cast a mother's look upon her daughter, and thenwhispered in her ear,--

°°°°"Take care, you will love him!"

°°°°"Love him!" answered Eugenie. "Ah! if you did but know what my fathersaid to Monsieur Cruchot."

°°°°Charles turned over, and saw his aunt and cousin.

°°°°"I have lost my father, my poor father! If he had told me his secrettroubles we might have worked together to repair them. My God! my poorfather! I was so sure I should see him again that I think I kissed himquite coldly--"

°°°°Sobs cut short the words.

°°°°"We will pray for him," said Madame Grandet. "Resign yourself to thewill of God."

°°°°"Cousin," said Eugenie, "take courage! Your loss is irreparable;therefore think only of saving your honor."

°°°°With the delicate instinct of a woman who intuitively puts her mindinto all things, even at the moment when she offers consolation,Eugenie sought to cheat her cousin's grief by turning his thoughtsinward upon himself.

°°°°"My honor?" exclaimed the young man, tossing aside his hair with animpatient gesture as he sat up on his bed and crossed his arms. "Ah!that is true. My uncle said my father had failed." He uttered a heart-rending cry, and hid his face in his hands. "Leave me, leave me,cousin! My God! my God! forgive my father, for he must have sufferedsorely!"

°°°°There was something terribly attractive in the sight of this youngsorrow, sincere without reasoning or afterthought. It was a virgingrief which the simple hearts of Eugenie and her mother were fitted tocomprehend, and they obeyed the sign Charles made them to leave him tohimself. They went downstairs in silence and took their accustomedplaces by the window and sewed for nearly an hour without exchanging aword. Eugenie had seen in the furtive glance that she cast about theyoung man's room--that girlish glance which sees all in the twinklingof an eye--the pretty trifles of his dressing-case, his scissors, hisrazors embossed with gold. This gleam of luxury across her cousin'sgrief only made him the more interesting to her, possibly by way ofcontrast. Never before had so serious an event, so dramatic a sight,touched the imaginations of these two passive beings, hitherto sunk inthe stillness and calm of solitude.

°°°°"Mamma," said Eugenie, "we must wear mourning for my uncle.""Your father will decide that," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°They relapsed into silence. Eugenie drew her stitches with a uniformmotion which revealed to an observer the teeming thoughts of hermeditation. The first desire of the girl's heart was to share hercousin's mourning.

°°°°VI

°°°°About four o'clock an abrupt knock at the door struck sharply on theheart of Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What can have happened to your father?" she said to her daughter.Grandet entered joyously. After taking off his gloves, he rubbed hishands hard enough to take off their skin as well, if his epidermis hadnot been tanned and cured like Russia leather,--saving, of course, theperfume of larch-trees and incense. Presently his secret escaped him."Wife," he said, without stuttering, "I've trapped them all! Our wineis sold! The Dutch and the Belgians have gone. I walked about themarket-place in front of their inn, pretending to be doing nothing.That Belgian fellow--you know who I mean--came up to me. The owners ofall the good vineyards have kept back their vintages, intending towait; well, I didn't hinder them. The Belgian was in despair; I sawthat. In a minute the bargain was made. He takes my vintage at twohundred francs the puncheon, half down. He paid me in gold; the notesare drawn. Here are six louis for you. In three months wines will havefallen."

°°°°These words, uttered in a quiet tone of voice, were nevertheless sobitterly sarcastic that the inhabitants of Saumur, grouped at thismoment in the market-place and overwhelmed by the news of the saleGrandet had just effected, would have shuddered had they heard them.Their panic would have brought the price of wines down fifty per centat once.

°°°°"Did you have a thousand puncheons this year, father?"

°°°°"Yes, little one."

°°°°That term applied to his daughter was the superlative expression ofthe old miser's joy.

°°°°"Then that makes two hundred thousand pieces of twenty sous each?""Yes, Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"Then, father, you can easily help Charles."

°°°°The amazement, the anger, the stupefaction of Belshazzar when he sawthe /Mene-Tekel-Upharsin/ before his eyes is not to be compared withthe cold rage of Grandet, who, having forgotten his nephew, now foundhim enshrined in the heart and calculations of his daughter."What's this? Ever since that dandy put foot in MY house everythinggoes wrong! You behave as if you had the right to buy sugar-plums andmake feasts and weddings. I won't have that sort of thing. I hope Iknow my duty at my time of life! I certainly sha'n't take lessons frommy daughter, or from anybody else. I shall do for my nephew what it isproper to do, and you have no need to poke your nose into it. As foryou, Eugenie," he added, facing her, "don't speak of this again, orI'll send you to the Abbaye des Noyers with Nanon, see if I don't; andno later than to-morrow either, if you disobey me! Where is thatfellow, has he come down yet?"

°°°°"No, my friend," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What is he doing then?"

°°°°"He is weeping for his father," said Eugenie.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter without finding a word to say; afterall, he was a father. He made a couple of turns up and down the room,and then went hurriedly to his secret den to think over an investmenthe was meditating in the public Funds. The thinning out of his twothousand acres of forest land had yielded him six hundred thousandfrancs: putting this sum to that derived from the sale of his poplarsand to his other gains for the last year and for the current year, hehad amassed a total of nine hundred thousand francs, without countingthe two hundred thousand he had got by the sale just concluded. Thetwenty per cent which Cruchot assured him would gain in a short timefrom the Funds, then quoted at seventy, tempted him. He figured outhis calculation on the margin of the newspaper which gave the accountof his brother's death, all the while hearing the moans of his nephew,but without listening to them. Nanon came and knocked on the wall tosummon him to dinner. On the last step of the staircase he was sayingto himself as he came down,--

°°°°"I'll do it; I shall get eight per cent interest. In two years I shallhave fifteen hundred thousand francs, which I will then draw out ingood gold,--Well, where's my nephew?"

°°°°"He says he doesn't want anything to eat," answered Nanon; "that's notgood for him."

°°°°"So much saved," retorted her master.

°°°°"That's so," she said.

°°°°"Bah! he won't cry long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the woods."The dinner was eaten in silence.

°°°°"My good friend," said Madame Grandet, when the cloth was removed, "wemust put on mourning."

°°°°"Upon my word, Madame Grandet! what will you invent next to spendmoney on? Mourning is in the heart, and not in the clothes.""But mourning for a brother is indispensable; and the Church commandsus to--"

°°°°"Buy your mourning out of your six louis. Give me a hat-band; that'senough for me."

°°°°Eugenie raised her eyes to heaven without uttering a word. Hergenerous instincts, slumbering and long repressed but now suddenly andfor the first time awakened, were galled at every turn. The eveningpassed to all appearance like a thousand other evenings of theirmonotonous life, yet it was certainly the most horrible. Eugenie sewedwithout raising her head, and did not use the workbox which Charleshad despised the night before. Madame Grandet knitted her sleeves.Grandet twirled his thumbs for four hours, absorbed in calculationswhose results were on the morrow to astonish Saumur. No one came tovisit the family that day. The whole town was ringing with the news ofthe business trick just played by Grandet, the failure of his brother,and the arrival of his nephew. Obeying the desire to gossip over theirmutual interests, all the upper and middle-class wine-growers inSaumur met at Monsieur des Grassins, where terrible imprecations werebeing fulminated against the ex-mayor. Nanon was spinning, and thewhirr of her wheel was the only sound heard beneath the gray raftersof that silent hall.

°°°°"We don't waste our tongues," she said, showing her teeth, as largeand white as peeled almonds.

°°°°"Nothing should be wasted," answered Grandet, rousing himself from hisreverie. He saw a perspective of eight millions in three years, and hewas sailing along that sheet of gold. "Let us go to bed. I will bid mynephew good-night for the rest of you, and see if he will takeanything."

°°°°Madame Grandet remained on the landing of the first storey to hear theconversation that was about to take place between the goodman and hisnephew. Eugenie, bolder than her mother, went up two stairs."Well, nephew, you are in trouble. Yes, weep, that's natural. A fatheris a father; but we must bear our troubles patiently. I am a gooduncle to you, remember that. Come, take courage! Will you have alittle glass of wine?" (Wine costs nothing in Saumur, and they offerit as tea is offered in China.) "Why!" added Grandet, "you have got nolight! That's bad, very bad; you ought to see what you are about," andhe walked to the chimney-piece. "What's this?" he cried. "A waxcandle! How the devil did they filch a wax candle? The spendthriftswould tear down the ceilings of my house to boil the fellow's eggs."Hearing these words, mother and daughter slipped back into their roomsand burrowed in their beds, with the celerity of frightened micegetting back to their holes.

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you found a mine?" said the man, coming into thechamber of his wife.

°°°°"My friend, wait; I am saying my prayers," said the poor mother in atrembling voice.

°°°°"The devil take your good God!" growled Grandet in reply.Misers have no belief in a future life; the present is their all inall. This thought casts a terrible light upon our present epoch, inwhich, far more than at any former period, money sways the laws andpolitics and morals.  Institutions, books, men, and dogmas, allconspire to undermine belief in a future life,--a belief upon whichthe social edifice has rested for eighteen hundred years. The grave,as a means of transition, is little feared in our day. The future,which once opened to us beyond the requiems, has now been importedinto the present. To obtain /per fas et nefas/ a terrestrial paradiseof luxury and earthly enjoyment, to harden the heart and macerate thebody for the sake of fleeting possessions, as the martyrs oncesuffered all things to reach eternal joys, this is now the universalthought--a thought written everywhere, even in the very laws which askof the legislator, "What do you pay?" instead of asking him, "What doyou think?" When this doctrine has passed down from the bourgeoisie tothe populace, where will this country be?

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you done?" asked the old man.

°°°°"My friend, I am praying for you."

°°°°"Very good! Good-night; to-morrow morning we will have a talk."The poor woman went to sleep like a schoolboy who, not having learnedhis lessons, knows he will see his master's angry face on the morrow.At the moment when, filled with fear, she was drawing the sheet aboveher head that she might stifle hearing, Eugenie, in her night-gown andwith naked feet, ran to her side and kissed her brow.

°°°°"Oh! my good mother," she said, "to-morrow I will tell him it was I.""No; he would send you to Noyers. Leave me to manage it; he cannot eatme."

°°°°"Do you hear, mamma?"

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"/He/ is weeping still."

°°°°"Go to bed, my daughter; you will take cold in your feet: the floor isdamp."

°°°°*****

°°°°Thus passed the solemn day which was destined to weight upon the wholelife of the rich and poor heiress, whose sleep was never again to beso calm, nor yet so pure, as it had been up to this moment. It oftenhappens that certain actions of human life seem, literally speaking,improbable, though actual. Is not this because we constantly omit toturn the stream of psychological light upon our impulsivedeterminations, and fail to explain the subtile reasons, mysteriouslyconceived in our minds, which impelled them? Perhaps Eugenie's deeppassion should be analyzed in its most delicate fibres; for it became,scoffers might say, a malady which influenced her whole existence.Many people prefer to deny results rather than estimate the force ofties and links and bonds, which secretly join one fact to another inthe moral order. Here, therefore, Eugenie's past life will offer toobservers of human nature an explanation of her naive want ofreflection and the suddenness of the emotions which overflowed hersoul. The more tranquil her life had been, the more vivid was herwomanly pity, the more simple-minded were the sentiments now developedin her soul.

°°°°Made restless by the events of the day, she woke at intervals tolisten to her cousin, thinking she heard the sighs which still echoedin her heart. Sometimes she saw him dying of his trouble, sometimesshe dreamed that he fainted from hunger. Towards morning she wascertain that she heard a startling cry. She dressed at once and ran,in the dawning light, with a swift foot to her cousin's chamber, thedoor of which he had left open. The candle had burned down to thesocket. Charles, overcome by nature, was sleeping, dressed and sittingin an armchair beside the bed, on which his head rested; he dreamed asmen dream on an empty stomach. Eugenie might weep at her ease; shemight admire the young and handsome face blotted with grief, the eyesswollen with weeping, that seemed, sleeping as they were, to wellforth tears. Charles felt sympathetically the young girl's presence;he opened his eyes and saw her pitying him.

°°°°"Pardon me, my cousin," he said, evidently not knowing the hour northe place in which he found himself.

°°°°"There are hearts who hear you, cousin, and /we/ thought you mightneed something. You should go to bed; you tire yourself by sittingthus."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, then, adieu!"

°°°°She escaped, ashamed and happy at having gone there. Innocence alonecan dare to be so bold. Once enlightened, virtue makes hercalculations as well as vice. Eugenie, who had not trembled beside hercousin, could scarcely stand upon her legs when she regained herchamber. Her ignorant life had suddenly come to an end; she reasoned,she rebuked herself with many reproaches.

°°°°"What will he think of me? He will think that I love him!"That was what she most wished him to think. An honest love has its ownprescience, and knows that love begets love. What an event for thispoor solitary girl thus to have entered the chamber of a young man!Are there not thoughts and actions in the life of love which tocertain souls bear the full meaning of the holiest espousals? An hourlater she went to her mother and dressed her as usual. Then they bothcame down and sat in their places before the window waiting forGrandet, with that cruel anxiety which, according to the individualcharacter, freezes the heart or warms it, shrivels or dilates it, whena scene is feared, a punishment expected,--a feeling so natural thateven domestic animals possess it, and whine at the slightest pain ofpunishment, though they make no outcry when they inadvertently hurtthemselves. The goodman came down; but he spoke to his wife with anabsent manner, kissed Eugenie, and sat down to table without appearingto remember his threats of the night before.

°°°°"What has become of my nephew? The lad gives no trouble.""Monsieur, he is asleep," answered Nanon.

°°°°"So much the better; he won't want a wax candle," said Grandet in ajeering tone.

°°°°This unusual clemency, this bitter gaiety, struck Madame Grandet withamazement, and she looked at her husband attentively. The goodman--here it may be well to explain that in Touraine, Anjou, Pitou, andBretagne the word "goodman," already used to designate Grandet, isbestowed as often upon harsh and cruel men as upon those of kindlytemperament, when either have reached a certain age; the title meansnothing on the score of individual gentleness--the goodman took hishat and gloves, saying as he went out,--

°°°°"I am going to loiter about the market-place and find Cruchot.""Eugenie, your father certainly has something on his mind."Grandet, who was a poor sleeper, employed half his nights in thepreliminary calculations which gave such astonishing accuracy to hisviews and observations and schemes, and secured to them the unfailingsuccess at sight of which his townsmen stood amazed. All human poweris a compound of time and patience. Powerful beings will and wait. Thelife of a miser is the constant exercise of human power put to theservice of self. It rests on two sentiments only,--self-love and self-interest; but self-interest being to a certain extent compact andintelligent self-love, the visible sign of real superiority, itfollows that self-love and self-interest are two parts of the samewhole,--egotism. From this arises, perhaps, the excessive curiosityshown in the habits of a miser's life whenever they are put before theworld. Every nature holds by a thread to those beings who challengeall human sentiments by concentrating all in one passion. Where is theman without desire? and what social desire can be satisfied withoutmoney?

°°°°Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

°°°°In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

°°°°"My cousin!"

°°°°"Yes, cousin."

°°°°"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

°°°°"Where you like."

°°°°"How do you feel?"

°°°°"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

°°°°This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

°°°°She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

°°°°That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

°°°°"What troubles you?" she said.

°°°°"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

°°°°Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

°°°°When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

°°°°"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

°°°°"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

°°°°Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

°°°°"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

°°°°"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

°°°°The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

°°°°"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

°°°°Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

°°°°"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

°°°°"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

°°°°*****

°°°°About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

°°°°VII

°°°°At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

°°°°The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

°°°°"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

°°°°"Certainly, nephew."

°°°°As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

°°°°He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

°°°°"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

°°°°"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

°°°°"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

°°°°"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

°°°°"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

°°°°"--is threatened with insolvency--"

°°°°"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

°°°°"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

°°°°"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

°°°°"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

°°°°"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

°°°°"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

°°°°"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

°°°°"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

°°°°"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

°°°°"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

°°°°Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

°°°°"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

°°°°"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

°°°°"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

°°°°"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Exactly so," said the president.

°°°°"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

°°°°"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

°°°°"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

°°°°"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

°°°°"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

°°°°"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

°°°°"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

°°°°"Bentham, an Englishman.'

°°°°"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

°°°°"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

°°°°"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

°°°°"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

°°°°"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

°°°°"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

°°°°"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

°°°°"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

°°°°"That's very true."

°°°°"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

°°°°"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

°°°°"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

°°°°"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

°°°°A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

°°°°"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

°°°°He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

°°°°"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

°°°°"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

°°°°These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

°°°°"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

°°°°"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

°°°°The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

°°°°"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

°°°°She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

°°°°"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

°°°°"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

°°°°"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

°°°°"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

°°°°"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

°°°°"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

°°°°"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

°°°°"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

°°°°"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

°°°°The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

°°°°"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

°°°°"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

°°°°"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

°°°°When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

°°°°"Are not they fuming, hein?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

°°°°"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

°°°°In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

°°°°When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

°°°°"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

°°°°So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

°°°°"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

°°°°Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

°°°°"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

°°°°"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

°°°°The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

°°°°"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

°°°°"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

°°°°"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

°°°°"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

°°°°"I didn't know where."

°°°°"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

°°°°"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

°°°°"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

°°°°"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

°°°°The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

°°°°VIII

°°°°"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

°°°°"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

°°°°"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

°°°°"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

°°°°These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

°°°°She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

°°°°"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

°°°°My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

°°°°great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

°°°°foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

°°°°fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

°°°°when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

°°°°yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

°°°°plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

°°°°If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

°°°°that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

°°°°fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

°°°°my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

°°°°me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

°°°°so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

°°°°the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

°°°°bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

°°°°killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

°°°°there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

°°°°ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

°°°°I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

°°°°last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

°°°°enterprise.

°°°°"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

°°°°She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

°°°°I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

°°°°hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

°°°°not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

°°°°even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

°°°°have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

°°°°to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

°°°°world like other men who have started young without a sou and

°°°°brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

°°°°faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

°°°°another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

°°°°so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

°°°°my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

°°°°life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

°°°°Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

°°°°young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

°°°°caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

°°°°family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

°°°°were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

°°°°Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

°°°°grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

°°°°with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

°°°°your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

°°°°expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

°°°°accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

°°°°Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

°°°°When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

°°°°ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

°°°°hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

°°°°your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

°°°°spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

°°°°cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

°°°°ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

°°°°depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

°°°°of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

°°°°poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

°°°°see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

°°°°life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

°°°°can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

°°°°necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

°°°°have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

°°°°face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

°°°°seems to me--

°°°°"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

°°°°Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

°°°°Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

°°°°"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

°°°°Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

°°°°Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

°°°°My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

°°°°friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

°°°°of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

°°°°settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

°°°°can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

°°°°have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

°°°°have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

°°°°and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

°°°°can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

°°°°horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

°°°°keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

°°°°the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

°°°°will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

°°°°these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

°°°°nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

°°°°give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

°°°°his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

°°°°travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

°°°°them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

°°°°do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

°°°°seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

°°°°British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

°°°°pay him--

°°°°"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

°°°°Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

°°°°"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

°°°°"I have read those letters."

°°°°Charles colored.

°°°°"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

°°°°"And what?" asked Charles.

°°°°"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

°°°°"My dear cousin--"

°°°°"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

°°°°Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

°°°°"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

°°°°Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

°°°°As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

°°°°"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

°°°°Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

°°°°"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

°°°°"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

°°°°"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

°°°°"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

°°°°Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

°°°°"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

°°°°"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

°°°°"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

°°°°"But he owns Froidfond."

°°°°"What is Froidfond worth?"

°°°°"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

°°°°"Nothing but a poor farm!"

°°°°"He has vineyards and fields."

°°°°"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

°°°°"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

°°°°Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

°°°°Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

°°°°It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

°°°°"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

°°°°"Nothing," answered the old man.

°°°°Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

°°°°"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

°°°°"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

°°°°"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

°°°°"Say /was/ worth--"

°°°°"Where the devil have they got any?"

°°°°"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

°°°°"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

°°°°"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

°°°°"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

°°°°"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

°°°°Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

°°°°"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

°°°°The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

°°°°"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

°°°°Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

°°°°"Dans les gardes francaises

°°°°J'avais un bon papa."

°°°°Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

°°°°"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

°°°°He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

°°°°"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

°°°°"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

°°°°"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

°°°°"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

°°°°IX

°°°°The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

°°°°For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

°°°°After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

°°°°Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

°°°°"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

°°°°"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

°°°°"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

°°°°"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

°°°°"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

°°°°"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

°°°°"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

°°°°"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

°°°°"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

°°°°"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

°°°°The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

°°°°"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

°°°°Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

°°°°"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

°°°°He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

°°°°"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

°°°°"I must," he said, bowing his head.

°°°°For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

°°°°"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

°°°°"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

°°°°When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

°°°°"Do you love me?" she said.

°°°°"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

°°°°"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

°°°°She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

°°°°"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

°°°°"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

°°°°The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

°°°°"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

°°°°"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

°°°°"Then my heart will be always there."

°°°°"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

°°°°No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

°°°°"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

°°°°At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

°°°°"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

°°°°"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

°°°°"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

°°°°Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

°°°°Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

°°°°"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

°°°°Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

°°°°In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

°°°°Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

°°°°In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

°°°°"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

°°°°Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

°°°°"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

°°°°"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

°°°°The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

°°°°But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

°°°°As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

°°°°"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

°°°°"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

°°°°"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

°°°°In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

°°°°*****

°°°°In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

°°°°"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

°°°°Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

°°°°"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

°°°°X

°°°°Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

°°°°"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

°°°°The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

°°°°"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

°°°°"Where could we have got the money?"

°°°°"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

°°°°"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

°°°°Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

°°°°"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

°°°°There was a moment's silence.

°°°°"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

°°°°"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

°°°°"I'm always gay,--

°°°°"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

°°°°Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

°°°°he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

°°°°Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

°°°°"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

°°°°The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

°°°°When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

°°°°"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

°°°°"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

°°°°"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

°°°°"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

°°°°"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

°°°°"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur."

°°°°"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

°°°°"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

°°°°Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

°°°°"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

°°°°"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

°°°°"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

°°°°"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

°°°°The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

°°°°"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

°°°°At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

°°°°"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

°°°°"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

°°°°The two women were dumb.

°°°°"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

°°°°Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

°°°°"I have not got /my/ gold."

°°°°"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

°°°°"No, I have not got it."

°°°°"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

°°°°"No."

°°°°"By the shears of my father!"

°°°°Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

°°°°"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

°°°°Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

°°°°"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

°°°°Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

°°°°"Yes, father."

°°°°She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

°°°°"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

°°°°"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

°°°°Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

°°°°"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

°°°°"What use?"

°°°°"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

°°°°"And this is mine."

°°°°"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

°°°°"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

°°°°"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

°°°°She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

°°°°"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

°°°°Eugenie was silent and impassive.

°°°°"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

°°°°"You are a child."

°°°°"Of age."

°°°°Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

°°°°He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

°°°°Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

°°°°"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

°°°°Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

°°°°"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

°°°°"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

°°°°"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

°°°°"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

°°°°Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

°°°°"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

°°°°"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

°°°°"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

°°°°"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

°°°°"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

°°°°"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

°°°°He looked fixedly at his wife.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

°°°°"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

°°°°"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

°°°°"I will ask God to punish only me."

°°°°"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

°°°°"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

°°°°"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

°°°°"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

°°°°*****

°°°°Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

°°°°"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

°°°°"It is grease I'm trying out."

°°°°"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

°°°°The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

°°°°"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

°°°°At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

°°°°"How is Madame Grandet?"

°°°°"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

°°°°"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

°°°°They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

°°°°"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

°°°°When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

°°°°"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

°°°°"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

°°°°XI

°°°°For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

°°°°"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

°°°°"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

°°°°Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

°°°°One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

°°°°"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

°°°°"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

°°°°"All" meant "him."

°°°°"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

°°°°"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

°°°°Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

°°°°"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

°°°°Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

°°°°When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

°°°°"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

°°°°At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

°°°°"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

°°°°"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

°°°°"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

°°°°On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

°°°°"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

°°°°"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

°°°°"What do you mean?"

°°°°"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

°°°°"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

°°°°These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

°°°°"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

°°°°"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

°°°°"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

°°°°"She has given away her gold!"

°°°°"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

°°°°"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

°°°°"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

°°°°"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

°°°°"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

°°°°"How much?"

°°°°"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

°°°°"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

°°°°After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

°°°°"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

°°°°"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

°°°°"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

°°°°"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

°°°°"She has not a month to live."

°°°°Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

°°°°"What can be done?"

°°°°"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

°°°°"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

°°°°"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

°°°°"The scoundrels!"

°°°°"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

°°°°"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

°°°°He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

°°°°"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

°°°°"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

°°°°But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

°°°°"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

°°°°He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

°°°°"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

°°°°"O God, have pity upon us!"

°°°°The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

°°°°"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

°°°°Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

°°°°"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

°°°°"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

°°°°"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

°°°°"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

°°°°"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

°°°°Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

°°°°"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

°°°°"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

°°°°The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

°°°°"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

°°°°"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

°°°°"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

°°°°Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

°°°°"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

°°°°Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

°°°°"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

°°°°"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

°°°°"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

°°°°"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

°°°°XII

°°°°On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

°°°°"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

°°°°"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

°°°°"Oh! father--"

°°°°"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

°°°°"What is it you wish me to do?"

°°°°"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

°°°°"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

°°°°"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

°°°°"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

°°°°"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

°°°°Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

°°°°"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

°°°°"I will do all you wish, father."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

°°°°"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

°°°°He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

°°°°"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

°°°°The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

°°°°"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

°°°°"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

°°°°"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

°°°°Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

°°°°*****

°°°°Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

°°°°At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

°°°°"Yes, my father," she would answer.

°°°°"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

°°°°Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

°°°°"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

°°°°When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

°°°°"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

°°°°"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

°°°°*****

°°°°Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

°°°°"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

°°°°The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

°°°°"Nanon, we are alone--"

°°°°"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

°°°°"The ocean is between us," she said.

°°°°While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

°°°°"Fast colors!" said the draper.

°°°°"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

°°°°"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

°°°°When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

°°°°At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

°°°°It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

°°°°"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

°°°°"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

°°°°"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

°°°°"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

°°°°Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

°°°°Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

°°°°"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

°°°°"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

°°°°XIII

°°°°While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

°°°°With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

°°°°Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

°°°°Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

°°°°"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

°°°°Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

°°°°Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

°°°°"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

°°°°*****

°°°°At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

°°°°"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

°°°°The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

°°°°"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

°°°°Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

°°°°"Read it, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

°°°°Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

°°°°My dear Cousin,--

°°°°"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

°°°°You--

°°°°"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

°°°°"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

°°°°"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

°°°°She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

°°°°My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

°°°°success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

°°°°rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

°°°°together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

°°°°des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

°°°°we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

°°°°Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

°°°°the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

°°°°be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

°°°°life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

°°°°To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

°°°°dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

°°°°realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

°°°°from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

°°°°forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

°°°°long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

°°°°Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

°°°°--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

°°°°forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

°°°°night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

°°°°to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

°°°°heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

°°°°Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

°°°°sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

°°°°deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

°°°°all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

°°°°present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

°°°°all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

°°°°Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

°°°°your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

°°°°will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

°°°°education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

°°°°with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

°°°°myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

°°°°to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

°°°°think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

°°°°be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

°°°°right to understand it and to judge it.

°°°°I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

°°°°francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

°°°°Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

°°°°me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

°°°°Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

°°°°dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

°°°°marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

°°°°advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

°°°°are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

°°°°my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

°°°°have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

°°°°year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

°°°°proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

°°°°You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

°°°°heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

°°°°years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

°°°°but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

°°°°remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

°°°°which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

°°°°and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

°°°°you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

°°°°convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

°°°°putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

°°°°of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

°°°°ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

°°°°simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

°°°°Your devoted cousin,

°°°°Charles.

°°°°"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

°°°°P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

°°°°thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

°°°°capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

°°°°am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

°°°°which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

°°°°gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

°°°°hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

°°°°"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

°°°°Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

°°°°"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

°°°°Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

°°°°This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

°°°°"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

°°°°"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

°°°°"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

°°°°"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

°°°°"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

°°°°At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

°°°°"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

°°°°"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

°°°°"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

°°°°"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

°°°°Eugenie read the following letter:--

°°°°My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

°°°°has been in Paris about a month--

°°°°"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

°°°°I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

°°°°Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

°°°°the banns are published--

°°°°"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

°°°°The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

°°°°will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

°°°°tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

°°°°business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

°°°°keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

°°°°fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

°°°°devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

°°°°/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

°°°°the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

°°°°francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

°°°°there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

°°°°creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

°°°°I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

°°°°Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

°°°°Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

°°°°for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

°°°°have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

°°°°happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

°°°°matter before you have spoken to her about it--

°°°°There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

°°°°"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

°°°°"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

°°°°"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

°°°°"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

°°°°"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

°°°°The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

°°°°"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

°°°°There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

°°°°"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

°°°°"A love game," said the notary.

°°°°Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

°°°°"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

°°°°"I am ready for all things," said the president.

°°°°"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

°°°°The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

°°°°"I will be your slave!" he said.

°°°°"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

°°°°The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

°°°°When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

°°°°The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

°°°°The president gave Charles the following letter:--

°°°°My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

°°°°place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

°°°°also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

°°°°sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

°°°°I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

°°°°Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

°°°°mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

°°°°I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

°°°°not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

°°°°according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

°°°°our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

°°°°your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

°°°°in your cousin

°°°°Eugenie.

°°°°The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

°°°°"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

°°°°"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

°°°°Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

°°°°"Seventeen mil--"

°°°°"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

°°°°"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

°°°°"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

°°°°"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

°°°°"In money?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

°°°°"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

°°°°"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

°°°°The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

°°°°"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

°°°°The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

°°°°"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

°°°°"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

°°°°Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

°°°°God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

°°°°The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

°°°°Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

°°°°End





°°°°Colonel Chabert

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage and Clara Bell

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Madame la Comtesse Ida de Bocarme nee du Chasteler.

°°°°COLONEL CHABERT

°°°°"HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!"

°°°°This exclamation was made by a lawyer's clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper--a messenger in fact--who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread with a hearty appetite. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

°°°°"Come, Simonnin, don't play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!" said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

°°°°The lawyer's messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and /billets-doux/ keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

°°°°"If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?" asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

°°°°And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

°°°°"What trick can we play that cove?" said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

°°°°Then he went on improvising:

°°°°"/But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth/--(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned-- you, as you engross it!)--/when he resumed the reins of Government, understood/--(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)--/the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!/--(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)--/and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents/--('numerous' is flattering, and ought to please the Bench)--/all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in/--Stop," said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, "that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.--Well," he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, "well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!"

°°°°And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating--"/given in/--Are you ready?"

°°°°"Yes," cried the three writers.

°°°°It all went all together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

°°°°"/Given in/--Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our /i/'s and cross our /t/'s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages."

°°°°"By Jingo!" repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

°°°°"What! have you written /by Jingo/?" cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

°°°°"Why, yes," said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor's copy, "he has written, '/We must dot our i's/' and spelt it /by Gingo/!"

°°°°All the clerks shouted with laughter.

°°°°"Why! Monsieur Hure, you take 'By Jingo' for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!" exclaimed Simonnin.

°°°°"Scratch it cleanly out," said the head clerk. "If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the 'Shoulder arms!' of the law."

°°°°"/Given in--in/?" asked Godeschal.--"Tell me when, Boucard."

°°°°"June 1814," replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

°°°°A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, "Come in!"

°°°°Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers--/broutilles/ (odds and ends) in French law jargon--and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

°°°°The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk's cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk's table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

°°°°The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,--all the glory of a lawyer's office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine --neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of /remainders/, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to /Chlet/)--a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

°°°°So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients--something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities--an attorney's office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

°°°°But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man's soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

°°°°"Where is my penknife?"

°°°°"I am eating my breakfast."

°°°°"You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen!"

°°°°These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

°°°°"Monsieur, is your master at home?"

°°°°The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, "I am deaf."

°°°°"What do you want, sir?" asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

°°°°"This is the fifth time I have called," replied the victim. "I wish to speak to M. Derville."

°°°°"On business?"

°°°°"Yes, but I can explain it to no one but--"

°°°°"M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to----"

°°°°The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers' clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the old man, "as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up."

°°°°Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

°°°°"It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning." The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in "parties," went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

°°°°"I will come again to-night," said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

°°°°The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

°°°°"What do you think of that for a cracked pot?" said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

°°°°"He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again," said a clerk.

°°°°"He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay," said the head clerk.

°°°°"No, he is a retired concierge," said Godeschal.

°°°°"I bet you he is a nobleman," cried Boucard.

°°°°"I bet you he has been a porter," retorted Godeschal. "Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body's. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch."

°°°°"He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch," cried Desroches. "It has been known!"

°°°°"No," Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, "I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic."

°°°°"I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Done with you," answered Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur! Monsieur!" shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

°°°°"What are you at now, Simonnin?" asked Boucard.

°°°°"I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know."

°°°°All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

°°°°"What can we say to him?" cried Godeschal.

°°°°"Leave it to me," replied Boucard.

°°°°The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Boucard, "will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know----"

°°°°"Chabert."

°°°°"The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?" asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

°°°°"The same, monsieur," replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

°°°°"Whew!"

°°°°"Done brown!"

°°°°"Poof!"

°°°°"Oh!"

°°°°"Ah!"

°°°°"Boum!"

°°°°"The old rogue!"

°°°°"Ting-a-ring-ting!"

°°°°"Sold again!"

°°°°"Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying," said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

°°°°There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopeia of the language would fail to represent.

°°°°"Which theatre shall we go to?"

°°°°"To the opera," cried the head clerk.

°°°°"In the first place," said Godeschal, "I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui."

°°°°"Madame Saqui is not the play."

°°°°"What is a play?" replied Godeschal. "First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen--"

°°°°"But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!" cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

°°°°"To be seen for money," Godeschal added.

°°°°"But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective," said Desroches.

°°°°"But do listen to me!"

°°°°"You are talking nonsense, my dear boy," said Boucard.

°°°°"Is Curtius' a play?" said Godeschal.

°°°°"No," said the head clerk, "it is a collection of figures--but it is a spectacle."

°°°°"I bet you a hundred francs to a sou," Godeschal resumed, "that Curtius' Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy."

°°°°"And so on, and so forth!" said Simonnin.

°°°°"You mind I don't box your ears!" said Godeschal.

°°°°The clerk shrugged their shoulders.

°°°°"Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us," he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. "On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients."

°°°°"Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow," said Boucard. "To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!"

°°°°"If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?" said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal's.

°°°°"Since nothing is settled," said Boucard, "let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in 'Nero.' Simonnin may go to the pit."

°°°°And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

°°°°"/Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen/ (in words)," said Godeschal. "Ready?"

°°°°"Yes," replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

°°°°"/And we hope that my lords on the Bench/," the extemporizing clerk went on. "Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself."

°°°°"Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines," said Boucard.

°°°°"/We hope/," Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, "/that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth/----"

°°°°"Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn't you like a glass of water?" said the little messenger.

°°°°"That imp of a boy!" said Boucard. "Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides."

°°°°"/Here set forth/," Godeschal went on. "Add /in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse/ (at full length) /de Grandlieu/."

°°°°"What!" cried the chief, "are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor--a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of 'inasmuch,' and go to the Courts myself."

°°°°This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, "Those were good times."

°°°°At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maitre Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

°°°°Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at finding the head clerk busily arranging in a convenient order on his master's dining-room table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take a seat, which the client did.

°°°°"On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you named such an hour for an interview," said the old man, with the forced mirth of a ruined man, who does his best to smile.

°°°°"The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too," replied the man, going on with his work. "M. Derville chooses this hour for studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect is freer at this hour--the only time when he can have the silence and quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case, read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business, then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money."

°°°°As he listened to this explanation, the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an expression so bereft of intelligence, that the clerk, after looking at him, thought no more about him.

°°°°A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers. The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius' collection to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This quiescence would not have been a subject for astonishment if it had not completed the supernatural aspect of the man's whole person. The old soldier was dry and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, if I may use such a vulgar expression, was as the face of the dead. Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

°°°°Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head was due to some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by Rembrandt, without a frame. The brim of the hat which covered the old man's brow cast a black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This grotesque effect, though natural, threw into relief by contrast the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a certain look of melancholy madness, and the deteriorating symptoms characteristic of senility, giving the face an indescribably ill- starred look which no human words could render.

°°°°But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had worn into this face, as drops of water from the sky falling on fine marble at last destroy its beauty. A physician, an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama at the sight of its sublime horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques which artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of the lithographic stone while chatting with a friend.

°°°°On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful reverie in silence and at night. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow to the young man; the leather lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was, "His intelligence must have escaped through that cut."

°°°°"If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!" thought Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Derville, "to whom have I the honor of speaking?"

°°°°"To Colonel Chabert."

°°°°"Which?"

°°°°"He who was killed at Eylau," replied the old man.

°°°°On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each other, as much as to say, "He is mad."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Colonel went on, "I wish to confide to you the secret of my position."

°°°°A thing worthy of note is the natural intrepidity of lawyers. Whether from the habit of receiving a great many persons, or from the deep sense of the protection conferred on them by the law, or from confidence in their missions, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing, like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

°°°°"During the day, sir," said the attorney, "I am not so miserly of my time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise. Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I may consider necessary. Speak."

°°°°Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he turned over the bundles of papers.

°°°°"You know, perhaps," said the dead man, "that I commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat's famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is a historical fact, recorded in /Victoires et Conquetes/, where it is related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor, after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the enemy's cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers, perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse. Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men, fifteen hundred of them--there might have been more! My death was announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution --for he was fond of me, was the master--wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and bring me into Hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, for he was very busy, 'Go and see whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.' These rascally saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse, and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was probably made out in accordance with the rules of military jurisprudence."

°°°°As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and relate a story so probable though so strange, the young lawyer ceased fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

°°°°"Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud," he said, interrupting the speaker, "Colonel Chabert's widow?"

°°°°"My wife--yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the custom in time of the war, and thrown into the common grave by the men ordered to bury the dead?

°°°°"Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded. Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a ball.

°°°°"When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. the little air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room. I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die. This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard--or I thought I heard, I will assert nothing--groans from the world of dead among whom I was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very indistinct, in spite of my impressions of far more acute suffering I was fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

°°°°"But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such as I have never known elsewhere--literally, the silence of the grave. At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would seem that, thanks to the carelessness and the haste with which we had been pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules! A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unhoped-for help, I must have perished. But with a fury you may imagine, I began to work my way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which had no doubt been thrown over us--I say us, as if there had been others living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms. This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw daylight, but through snow!

°°°°"At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse, who knows, had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow. However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole, where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the moment for saying, 'Respect courage in misfortune!' In short, monsieur, after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy, of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them they got me to their poor hovel.

°°°°"It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy--allow me to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which, from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

°°°°"You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave as naked as I came from my mother's; so that six months afterwards, when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert, and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man, named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

°°°°"Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence, nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond, begging my bread, treated as a madman when I have told my story, without ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert. For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample reason for shutting a man up.

°°°°"At the end of two years' detention, which I was compelled to submit to, after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, 'Here is a poor man who thinks he is Colonel Chabert' to people who would reply, 'Poor fellow!' I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh, monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I----"

°°°°Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study, which Derville respected.

°°°°"One fine day," his visitor resumed, "one spring day, they gave me the key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me. If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name, no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field- Marshal in Austria or Russia. Who knows?"

°°°°"Monsieur," said the attorney, "you have upset all my ideas. I feel as if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you."

°°°°"You are the only person," said the Colonel, with a melancholy look, "who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary documents to begin my lawsuit--"

°°°°"What lawsuit?" said the attorney, who had forgotten his client's painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

°°°°"Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a son. When I tell lawyers these things--men of sense; when I propose-- I, a beggar--to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I--a dead man--bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold politeness, which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler or a madman--it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts, under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!"

°°°°"Pray resume your narrative," said Derville.

°°°°" 'Pray resume it!' " cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer's hand. "That is the first polite word I have heard since----"

°°°°The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing and unutterable eloquence that lies in the eyes, in a gesture, even in silence, entirely convinced Derville, and touched him deeply.

°°°°"Listen, monsieur," said he; "I have this evening won three hundred francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his fortune to make. Proceed."

°°°°The Colonel, as he called himself, sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps it was in obedience to the inexplicable feeling, the latent germ in every man's heart, to which we owe the experiments of alchemists, the passion for glory, the discoveries of astronomy and of physics, everything which prompts man to expand his being by multiplying himself through deeds or ideas. In his mind the /Ego/ was now but a secondary object, just as the vanity of success or the pleasures of winning become dearer to the gambler than the object he has at stake. The young lawyer's words were as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer's office the ten gold pieces which had so long been refused him by so many people, and in so many ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured. There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us, it is like a thunderbolt; they burn us. The poor man's gratitude was too great to find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found his voice.

°°°°"Where was I?" said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier, and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in France.

°°°°"At Stuttgart. You were out of prison," said Derville.

°°°°"You know my wife?" asked the Colonel.

°°°°"Yes," said Derville, with a bow.

°°°°"What is she like?"

°°°°"Still quite charming."

°°°°The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation that is characteristic of men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, with a sort of cheerfulness--for he breathed again, the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave; he had just melted a covering of snow less easily thawed than that which had once before frozen his head; and he drew a deep breath, as if he had just escaped from a dungeon--"Monsieur, if I had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a /sans-culotte/. I was more like an Esquimaux than a Frenchman--I, who had formerly been considered one of the smartest of fops in 1799!--I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

°°°°"Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier's name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; but though I recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin's mouth opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known. It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was, then, unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former friends!

°°°°"I had once saved Boutin's life, but it was only the repayment of a debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but, like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I recalled them to his mind his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me, were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered triumphantly.

°°°°"He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon's first abdication. That news was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

°°°°"We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland, Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies. Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert. That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage, whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose only protector is the Almighty.--Nay, I am wrong! I had a father--the Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see /his Chabert/, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my wife's silence!

°°°°"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar. Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me. I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

°°°°"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu. There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me! Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

°°°°"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur, knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury, "when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

°°°°"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness; well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not know what will become of me!"

°°°°With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

°°°°"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg, it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

°°°°"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I fail, I can die--but not alone."

°°°°The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy, lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

°°°°"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

°°°°"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

°°°°"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to recover; you are rich."

°°°°This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

°°°°"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

°°°°The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville, and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

°°°°"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

°°°°The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs, and held a light for him.

°°°°"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the day."

°°°°When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

°°°°"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.

°°°°About three months after this interview, at night, in Derville's room, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville's account to his eccentric client, came to consult the attorney on a serious matter, and began by begging him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

°°°°"Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?" said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought up the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

°°°°"I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair," replied Derville. "My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty- five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism."

°°°°As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers his head clerk had laid out for him. His eye was struck by the appearance of the stamps--long, square, and triangular, in red and blue ink, which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

°°°°"Ah ha!" said he with a laugh, "here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!"

°°°°He took up the letter and opened it; but he could not read it; it was written in German.

°°°°"Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately," said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

°°°°The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, all perfectly regular and duly witnessed, and legally stamped to serve as evidence in law. He also informed him that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

°°°°"This looks like business," cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. "But look here, my boy," he went on, addressing the notary, "I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?"

°°°°"We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin," interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

°°°°"Well, was it not that ill-used man who has just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients' money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert's estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud."

°°°°"Yes," said Crottat. "It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollections, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at the time of his decease, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury."

°°°°"So that Comte Chabert's personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?"

°°°°"Consequently so it was, old fellow!" said Crottat. "You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other."

°°°°Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint- Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were rather too deep for cab wheels. Looking about him on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, "Vergniaud, dairyman." To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, all painted in white. The gate was open, and no doubt remained open all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels built in the neighborhood of Paris, which are like nothing else, not even the most wretched dwellings in the country, of which they have all the poverty without their poetry.

°°°°Indeed, in the midst of the fields, even a hovel may have a certain grace derived from the pure air, the verdure, the open country--a hill, a serpentine road, vineyards, quickset hedges, moss-grown thatch and rural implements; but poverty in Paris gains dignity only by horror. Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found a legitimate use; they had been collected from the various demolitions which are going on every day in Paris. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, "Fancy Goods." The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed to be the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil, and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall of this frail construction, which seemed rather more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred their numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes, the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough deal boards nailed so as to overlap, and shabbily thatched with rushes.

°°°°Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of the necessity for being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags that were used to clean them, fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat was munching the shoots of a starved and dusty vine that clung to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, was licking them over. The fowls, scared by Derville's approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

°°°°"And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!" said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the general effect of the squalid scene.

°°°°The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, in the hope that they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole thing tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither of them replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity, if I may combine those two words. Derville repeated his questions, but without success. Provoked by the saucy cunning of these three imps, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry which young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

°°°°The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold of his doorway with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely- colored pipe--a technical phrase to a smoker--a humble, short clay pipe of the kind called "/brule-queule/." He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join his benefactor the sooner, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

°°°°"Silence in the ranks!"

°°°°The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

°°°°"Why did you not write to me?" he said to Derville. "Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there," he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer's hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

°°°°Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; and, in fact, Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel's bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread two or three of those old fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating salt-petre, green with mould, and full of cracks, were so excessively damp that on the side where the Colonel's bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the /Bulletins de la Grande Armee/, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel's reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit to Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived in them traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

°°°°"Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?" he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

°°°°"But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!"

°°°°The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the deplorable experience which they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

°°°°"Here," said he to himself, "is a man who has of course spent my money in satisfying a trooper's three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!"

°°°°"To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----" And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--"I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace."

°°°°Derville reflected that there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums of money he had advanced, so he merely said:

°°°°"But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, but where you would have been better lodged?"

°°°°"Why," replied the Colonel, "the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me /gratis/ for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old /Egyptian/--"

°°°°"An Egyptian!"

°°°°"We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read."

°°°°"He might have lodged you better for your money," said Derville.

°°°°"Bah!" said the Colonel, "his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune . . . However, it does very well."

°°°°"Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!"

°°°°"Curse the money! To think I haven't got any!" he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

°°°°Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

°°°°"Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business," said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

°°°°"To me," said the soldier, "it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau."

°°°°"Things are not done so in the legal world," said Derville. "Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing that justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

°°°°"In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets."

°°°°"And my fortune?"

°°°°"Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?"

°°°°"Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?"

°°°°"My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs."

°°°°"And you call that justice!" said the Colonel, in dismay.

°°°°"Why, certainly--"

°°°°"A pretty kind of justice!"

°°°°"So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, that what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor."

°°°°"But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----"

°°°°"I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to."

°°°°"That would be to sell my wife!"

°°°°"With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in the position in which you are, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice."

°°°°"Let us go together."

°°°°"What, just as you are?" said the lawyer. "No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot."

°°°°"Can I possibly gain it?"

°°°°"On every count," replied Derville. "But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor."

°°°°"To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that," said he simply.

°°°°"Well, until then," Derville went on, "will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it."

°°°°Large tears gathered in the poor veteran's faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

°°°°"I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!" he cried. "I will call out: 'I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!'--The statue--he--he will know me."

°°°°"And you will find yourself in Charenton."

°°°°At this terrible name the soldier's transports collapsed.

°°°°"And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?"

°°°°"The war office!" said Derville. "Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire."

°°°°The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

°°°°His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements, which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

°°°°Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

°°°°"Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests."

°°°°"Do what you will," said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death."

°°°°"Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?"

°°°°"That is not my view of it," said the lawyer. "We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud's intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension."

°°°°"Well, proceed then," said Chabert. "I put myself entirely in your hands."

°°°°"I will send you a power of attorney to sign," said Derville. "Good- bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me."

°°°°Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer's hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him excepting with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

°°°°During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer's; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir," said he, taking Derville by the arm, "if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General's."

°°°°"And what then?" replied Derville. "What concern have you with him?-- But who are you?" said the cautious lawyer.

°°°°"I am Louis Vergniaud," he replied at once. "I have a few words to say to you."

°°°°"So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?"

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think? --Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it's neighbors' fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings."

°°°°"He?"

°°°°"Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, 'Really, General----' 'Bah!' says he, 'I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.'--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados-- Do you know him, sir?"

°°°°"But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you."

°°°°"He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it's just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----"

°°°°Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

°°°°"On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!" thought he.

°°°°"All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure."

°°°°"And will that be soon?"

°°°°"Why, yes."

°°°°"Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!" and the cowkeeper's tanned face seemed to expand.

°°°°"Now," said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, "let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but . . ."

°°°°And he set to work to study the Countess' position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves up when concocting their own plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

°°°°But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer's cleverness.

°°°°Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old /Parlement/ of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon's blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor's advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised the restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

°°°°The Emperor fell.

°°°°At the time of Comte Chabert's death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband's fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving of this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband's will; but Napoleon's hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count's marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

°°°°Then came the Restoration. The Count's political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the "Gulf of Revolution should be closed"--for this phrase of the King's, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer's preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

°°°°Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master's influence, and he made the Count's fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness of which most women have a share more or less, understood the man's motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well, that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

°°°°The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess' abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress' capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on the housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess' greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

°°°°At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert's widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

°°°°A speech he made, /a propos/ of Talleyrand's marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess' heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband's return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

°°°°"There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud's position," said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. "How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the /pairie/ by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the /Parlement/ is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King's great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess," thought he as he went up the steps.

°°°°Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

°°°°She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, while playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert's wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

°°°°"The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them."

°°°°A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

°°°°"Good-morning, Monsieur Derville," said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

°°°°"Madame," said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. "I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter."

°°°°"I am so /grieved/, M. le Comte is away--"

°°°°"I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count."

°°°°"Then I will send for Delbecq," said she.

°°°°"He would be of no use to you, clever as he is," replied Derville. "Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!"

°°°°"Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?" said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

°°°°"Madame," he said with cold and piercing solemnity, "you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point."

°°°°"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

°°°°"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

°°°°"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come."

°°°°"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

°°°°"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--"

°°°°"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

°°°°"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----"

°°°°The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's attorney, be so good as to--"

°°°°"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening."

°°°°"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

°°°°"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

°°°°"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

°°°°"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you."

°°°°"And who is he?"

°°°°"Comte Ferraud."

°°°°"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--"

°°°°"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--"

°°°°"He would defend me, monsieur."

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

°°°°"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

°°°°The Countess turned pale.

°°°°"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

°°°°"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?"

°°°°"Compromise!" said Derville.

°°°°"Does he still love me?" she said.

°°°°"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

°°°°The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

°°°°"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.

°°°°A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and seemed to have acquired youth and /impasto/, to borrow a picturesque word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture and a book.

°°°°When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville's office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off, when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a dress which, though simple, was cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was. She wore a pretty drawn bonnet lined with pink, which framed her face to perfection, softening its outlines and making it look younger.

°°°°If the clients were rejuvenescent, the office was unaltered, and presented the same picture as that described at the beginning of this story. Simonnin was eating his breakfast, his shoulder leaning against the window, which was then open, and he was staring up at the blue sky in the opening of the courtyard enclosed by four gloomy houses.

°°°°"Ah, ha!" cried the little clerk, "who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?"

°°°°"The chief is a great magician," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Then there is no trick to play on him this time?" asked Desroches.

°°°°"His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud," said Boucard.

°°°°"What next?" said Godeschal. "Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?"

°°°°"Here she is," answered Simonnin.

°°°°"So you are not deaf, you young rogue!" said Chabert, taking the gutter-jumper by the ear and twisting it, to the delight of the other clerks, who began to laugh, looking at the Colonel with the curious attention due to so singular a personage.

°°°°Comte Chabert was in Derville's private room at the moment when his wife came in by the door of the office.

°°°°"I say, Boucard, there is going to be a queer scene in the chief's room! There is a woman who can spend her days alternately, the odd with Comte Ferraud, and the even with Comte Chabert."

°°°°"And in leap year," said Godeschal, "they must settle the /count/ between them."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen, you can be heard!" said Boucard severely. "I never was in an office where there was so much jesting as there is here over the clients."

°°°°Derville had made the Colonel retire to the bedroom when the Countess was admitted.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert, I have placed you apart. If, however, you should wish it--"

°°°°"It is an attention for which I am obliged to you."

°°°°"I have drawn up the memorandum of an agreement of which you and M. Chabert can discuss the conditions, here, and now. I will go alternately to him and to you, and explain your views respectively."

°°°°"Let me see, monsieur," said the Countess impatiently.

°°°°Derville read aloud:

°°°°" 'Between the undersigned:

°°°°" 'M. Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, Marechal de Camp, and Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, living in Paris, Rue du Petit-Banquier, on the one part;

°°°°" 'And Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the aforesaid M. le Comte Chabert, /nee/--' "

°°°°"Pass over the preliminaries," said she. "Come to the conditions."

°°°°"Madame," said the lawyer, "the preamble briefly sets forth the position in which you stand to each other. Then, by the first clause, you acknowledge, in the presence of three witnesses, of whom two shall be notaries, and one the dairyman with whom your husband has been lodging, to all of whom your secret is known, and who will be absolutely silent--you acknowledge, I say, that the individual designated in the documents subjoined to the deed, and whose identity is to be further proved by an act of recognition prepared by your notary, Alexandre Crottat, is your first husband, Comte Chabert. By the second clause Comte Chabert, to secure your happiness, will undertake to assert his rights only under certain circumstances set forth in the deed.--And these," said Derville, in a parenthesis, "are none other than a failure to carry out the conditions of this secret agreement.--M. Chabert, on his part, agrees to accept judgment on a friendly suit, by which his certificate of death shall be annulled, and his marriage dissolved."

°°°°"That will not suit me in the least," said the Countess with surprise. "I will be a party to no suit; you know why."

°°°°"By the third clause," Derville went on, with imperturbable coolness, "you pledge yourself to secure to Hyacinthe Comte Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock held in his name, to revert to you at his death--"

°°°°"But it is much too dear!" exclaimed the Countess.

°°°°"Can you compromise the matter cheaper?"

°°°°"Possibly."

°°°°"But what do you want, madame?"

°°°°"I want--I will not have a lawsuit. I want--"

°°°°"You want him to remain dead?" said Derville, interrupting her hastily.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, "if twenty-four thousand francs a year are necessary, we will go to law--"

°°°°"Yes, we will go to law," said the Colonel in a deep voice, as he opened the door and stood before his wife, with one hand in his waistcoat and the other hanging by his side--an attitude to which the recollection of his adventure gave horrible significance.

°°°°"It is he," said the Countess to herself.

°°°°"Too dear!" the old soldier exclaimed. "I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you--you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved--"

°°°°"But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!" cried the Countess, in feigned amazement.

°°°°"Indeed!" said the old man, in a tone of intense irony. "Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais Royal----"

°°°°The Countess turned pale. Seeing her grow white under her rouge, the old soldier paused, touched by the acute suffering he was inflicting on the woman he had once so ardently loved; but she shot such a venomous glance at him that he abruptly went on:

°°°°"You were with La--"

°°°°"Allow me, Monsieur Derville," said the Countess to the lawyer. "You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things."

°°°°She rose and went out. Derville rushed after her; but the Countess had taken wings, and seemed to have flown from the place.

°°°°On returning to his private room, he found the Colonel in a towering rage, striding up and down.

°°°°"In those times a man took his wife where he chose," said he. "But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted to appearances. She has no heart."

°°°°"Well, Colonel, was I not right to beg you not to come?--I am now positive of your identity; when you came in, the Countess gave a little start, of which the meaning was unequivocal. But you have lost your chances. Your wife knows that you are unrecognizable."

°°°°"I will kill her!"

°°°°"Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch. Besides you might miss! That would be unpardonable. A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife.--Let me set things straight; you are only a big child. Go now. Take care of yourself; she is capable of setting some trap for you and shutting you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you against a surprise."

°°°°The unhappy Colonel obeyed his young benefactor, and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly went down the dark staircase, lost in gloomy thoughts, and crushed perhaps by the blow just dealt him--the most cruel he could feel, the thrust that could most deeply pierce his heart--when he heard the rustle of a woman's dress on the lowest landing, and his wife stood before him.

°°°°"Come, monsieur," said she, taking his arm with a gesture like those familiar to him of old. Her action and the accent of her voice, which had recovered its graciousness, were enough to allay the Colonel's wrath, and he allowed himself to be led to the carriage.

°°°°"Well, get in!" said she, when the footman had let down the step.

°°°°And as if by magic, he found himself sitting by his wife in the brougham.

°°°°"Where to?" asked the servant.

°°°°"To Groslay," said she.

°°°°The horses started at once, and carried them all across Paris.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, in a tone of voice which betrayed one of those emotions which are rare in our lives, and which agitate every part of our being. At such moments the heart, fibres, nerves, countenance, soul, and body, everything, every pore even, feels a thrill. Life no longer seems to be within us; it flows out, springs forth, is communicated as if by contagion, transmitted by a look, a tone of voice, a gesture, impressing our will on others. The old soldier started on hearing this single word, this first, terrible "monsieur!" But still it was at once a reproach and a pardon, a hope and a despair, a question and an answer. This word included them all; none but an actress could have thrown so much eloquence, so many feelings into a single word. Truth is less complete in its utterance; it does not put everything on the outside; it allows us to see what is within. The Colonel was filled with remorse for his suspicions, his demands, and his anger; he looked down not to betray his agitation.

°°°°"Monsieur," repeated she, after an imperceptible pause, "I knew you at once."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old soldier, "those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes."

°°°°Two large tears rolled hot on to his wife's hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

°°°°"Monsieur," she went on, "could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false as mine now is? If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in the privacy of my family. Ought not such a secret to remain buried in our hearts? You will forgive me, I hope, for my apparent indifference to the woes of a Chabert in whose existence I could not possibly believe. I received your letters," she hastily added, seeing in his face the objection it expressed, "but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing was unrecognizable; and after obtaining Napoleon's signature to my second marriage contract, I could not help believing that some clever swindler wanted to make a fool of me. Therefore, to avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud's peace of mind, and disturbing family ties, I was obliged to take precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right, I ask you?"

°°°°"Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot, the owl, the dolt, not to have calculated better what the consequences of such a position might be.--But where are we going?" he asked, seeing that they had reached the barrier of La Chapelle.

°°°°"To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There, monsieur, we will consider the steps to be taken. I know my duties. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? We need not inform the public of a situation, which for me has its ridiculous side, and let us preserve our dignity. You still love me," she said, with a sad, sweet gaze at the Colonel, "but have not I been authorized to form other ties? In so strange a position, a secret voice bids me trust to your kindness, which is so well known to me. Can I be wrong in taking you as the sole arbiter of my fate? Be at once judge and party to the suit. I trust in your noble character; you will be generous enough to forgive me for the consequences of faults committed in innocence. I may then confess to you: I love M. Ferraud. I believed that I had a right to love him. I do not blush to make this confession to you; even if it offends you, it does not disgrace us. I cannot conceal the facts. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother."

°°°°The Colonel with a wave of his hand bid his wife be silent, and for a mile and a half they sat without speaking a single word. Chabert could fancy he saw the two little ones before him.

°°°°"Rosine."

°°°°"Monsieur?"

°°°°"The dead are very wrong to come to life again."

°°°°"Oh, monsieur, no, no! Do not think me ungrateful. Only, you find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old man in a softened tone, "I no longer feel any resentment against you. We will forget anything," he added, with one of those smiles which always reflect a noble soul; "I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me."

°°°°The Countess gave him a flashing look full of such deep gratitude that poor Chabert would have been glad to sink again into his grave at Eylau. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion, of which the whole reward consists in the assurance that they have made the person they love happy.

°°°°"My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested," said the Countess.

°°°°The conversation turned to other subjects, for it was impossible to dwell very long on this one. Though the couple came back again and again to their singular position, either by some allusion or of serious purpose, they had a delightful drive, recalling the events of their former life together and the times of the Empire. The Countess knew how to lend peculiar charm to her reminiscences, and gave the conversation the tinge of melancholy that was needed to keep it serious. She revived his love without awakening his desires, and allowed her first husband to discern the mental wealth she had acquired while trying to accustom him to moderate his pleasure to that which a father may feel in the society of a favorite daughter.

°°°°The Colonel had known the Countess of the Empire; he found her a Countess of the Restoration.

°°°°At last, by a cross-road, they arrived at the entrance to a large park lying in the little valley which divides the heights of Margency from the pretty village of Groslay. The Countess had there a delightful house, where the Colonel on arriving found everything in readiness for his stay there, as well as for his wife's. Misfortune is a kind of talisman whose virtue consists in its power to confirm our original nature; in some men it increases their distrust and malignancy, just as it improves the goodness of those who have a kind heart.

°°°°Sorrow had made the Colonel even more helpful and good than he had always been, and he could understand some secrets of womanly distress which are unrevealed to most men. Nevertheless, in spite of his loyal trustfulness, he could not help saying to his wife:

°°°°"Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?"

°°°°"Yes," replied she, "if I found Colonel Chabert in Derville's client."

°°°°The appearance of truth she contrived to give to this answer dissipated the slight suspicions which the Colonel was ashamed to have felt. For three days the Countess was quite charming to her first husband. By tender attentions and unfailing sweetness she seemed anxious to wipe out the memory of the sufferings he had endured, and to earn forgiveness for the woes which, as she confessed, she had innocently caused him. She delighted in displaying for him the charms she knew he took pleasure in, while at the same time she assumed a kind of melancholy; for men are more especially accessible to certain ways, certain graces of the heart or of the mind which they cannot resist. She aimed at interesting him in her position, and appealing to his feelings so far as to take possession of his mind and control him despotically.

°°°°Ready for anything to attain her ends, she did not yet know what she was to do with this man; but at any rate she meant to annihilate him socially. On the evening of the third day she felt that in spite of her efforts she could not conceal her uneasiness as to the results of her manoeuvres. To give herself a minute's reprieve she went up to her room, sat down before her writing-table, and laid aside the mask of composure which she wore in Chabert's presence, like an actress who, returning to her dressing-room after a fatiguing fifth act, drops half dead, leaving with the audience an image of herself which she no longer resembles. She proceeded to finish a letter she had begun to Delbecq, whom she desired to go in her name and demand of Derville the deeds relating to Colonel Chabert, to copy them, and to come to her at once to Groslay. She had hardly finished when she heard the Colonel's step in the passage; uneasy at her absence, he had come to look for her.

°°°°"Alas!" she exclaimed, "I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable . . ."

°°°°"Why, what is the matter?" asked the good man.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing!" she replied.

°°°°She rose, left the Colonel, and went down to speak privately to her maid, whom she sent off to Paris, impressing on her that she was herself to deliver to Delbecq the letter just written, and to bring it back to the writer as soon as he had read it. Then the Countess went out to sit on a bench sufficiently in sight for the Colonel to join her as soon as he might choose. The Colonel, who was looking for her, hastened up and sat down by her.

°°°°"Rosine," said he, "what is the matter with you?"

°°°°She did not answer.

°°°°It was one of those glorious, calm evenings in the month of June, whose secret harmonies infuse such sweetness into the sunset. The air was clear, the stillness perfect, so that far away in the park they could hear the voices of some children, which added a kind of melody to the sublimity of the scene.

°°°°"You do not answer me?" the Colonel said to his wife.

°°°°"My husband----" said the Countess, who broke off, started a little, and with a blush stopped to ask him, "What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?"

°°°°"Call him your husband, my poor child," replied the Colonel, in a kind voice. "Is he not the father of your children?"

°°°°"Well, then," she said, "if he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out that I came here, alone, with a stranger, what am I to say to him? Listen, monsieur," she went on, assuming a dignified attitude, "decide my fate, I am resigned to anything--"

°°°°"My dear," said the Colonel, taking possession of his wife's hands, "I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness--"

°°°°"That is impossible!" she exclaimed, with a sudden spasmodic movement. "Remember that you would have to renounce your identity, and in an authenticated form."

°°°°"What?" said the Colonel. "Is not my word enough for you?"

°°°°The word "authenticated" fell on the old man's heart, and roused involuntary distrust. He looked at his wife in a way that made her color, she cast down her eyes, and he feared that he might find himself compelled to despise her. The Countess was afraid lest she had scared the shy modesty, the stern honesty, of a man whose generous temper and primitive virtues were known to her. Though these feelings had brought the clouds to her brow, they immediately recovered their harmony. This was the way of it. A child's cry was heard in the distance.

°°°°"Jules, leave your sister in peace," the Countess called out.

°°°°"What, are your children here?" said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but I told them not to trouble you."

°°°°The old soldier understood the delicacy, the womanly tact of so gracious a precaution, and took the Countess' hand to kiss it.

°°°°"But let them come," said he.

°°°°The little girl ran up to complain of her brother.

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"It was Jules--"

°°°°"It was her--"

°°°°Their little hands were held out to their mother, and the two childish voices mingled; it was an unexpected and charming picture.

°°°°"Poor little things!" cried the Countess, no longer restraining her tears, "I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother's heart cannot be divided; I want them, I want them."

°°°°"Are you making mamma cry?" said Jules, looking fiercely at the Colonel.

°°°°"Silence, Jules!" said the mother in a decided tone.

°°°°The two children stood speechless, examining their mother and the stranger with a curiosity which it is impossible to express in words.

°°°°"Oh yes!" she cried. "If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything . . ."

°°°°This was the decisive speech which gained all that she had hoped from it.

°°°°"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, as if he were ending a sentence already begun in his mind, "I must return underground again. I had told myself so already."

°°°°"Can I accept such a sacrifice?" replied his wife. "If some men have died to save a mistress' honor, they gave their life but once. But in this case you would be giving your life every day. No, no. It is impossible. If it were only your life, it would be nothing; but to sign a declaration that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to sacrifice your honor, and live a lie every hour of the day! Human devotion cannot go so far. Only think!--No. But for my poor children I would have fled with you by this time to the other end of the world."

°°°°"But," said Chabert, "cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn out as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but a little tobacco and the /Constitutionnel/."

°°°°The Countess melted into tears. There was a contest of generosity between the Comtesse Ferraud and Colonel Chabert, and the soldier came out victorious. One evening, seeing this mother with her children, the soldier was bewitched by the touching grace of a family picture in the country, in the shade and the silence; he made a resolution to remain dead, and, frightened no longer at the authentication of a deed, he asked what he could do to secure beyond all risk the happiness of this family.

°°°°"Do exactly as you like," said the Countess. "I declare to you that I will have nothing to do with this affair. I ought not."

°°°°Delbecq had arrived some days before, and in obedience to the Countess' verbal instructions, the intendant had succeeded in gaining the old soldier's confidence. So on the following morning Colonel Chabert went with the erewhile attorney to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had caused the notary to draw up an affidavit in such terms that, after hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

°°°°"Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!" he exclaimed.

°°°°"Indeed, monsieur," said Delbecq, "I should advise you not to sign in haste. In your place I would get at least thirty thousand francs a year out of the bargain. Madame would pay them."

°°°°After annihilating this scoundrel /emeritus/ by the lightning look of an honest man insulted, the Colonel rushed off, carried away by a thousand contrary emotions. He was suspicious, indignant, and calm again by turns.

°°°°Finally he made his way back into the park of Groslay by a gap in a fence, and slowly walked on to sit down and rest, and meditate at his ease, in a little room under a gazebo, from which the road to Saint- Leu could be seen. The path being strewn with the yellowish sand which is used instead of river-gravel, the Countess, who was sitting in the upper room of this little summer-house, did not hear the Colonel's approach, for she was too much preoccupied with the success of her business to pay the smallest attention to the slight noise made by her husband. Nor did the old man notice that his wife was in the room over him.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur Delbecq, has he signed?" the Countess asked her secretary, whom she saw alone on the road beyond the hedge of a haha.

°°°°"No, madame. I do not even know what has become of our man. The old horse reared."

°°°°"Then we shall be obliged to put him into Charenton," said she, "since we have got him."

°°°°The Colonel, who recovered the elasticity of youth to leap the haha, in the twinkling of an eye was standing in front of Delbecq, on whom he bestowed the two finest slaps that ever a scoundrel's cheeks received.

°°°°"And you may add that old horses can kick!" said he.

°°°°His rage spent, the Colonel no longer felt vigorous enough to leap the ditch. He had seen the truth in all its nakedness. The Countess' speech and Delbecq's reply had revealed the conspiracy of which he was to be the victim. The care taken of him was but a bait to entrap him in a snare. That speech was like a drop of subtle poison, bringing on in the old soldier a return of all his sufferings, physical and moral. He came back to the summer-house through the park gate, walking slowly like a broken man.

°°°°Then for him there was to be neither peace nor truce. From this moment he must begin the odious warfare with this woman of which Derville had spoken, enter on a life of litigation, feed on gall, drink every morning of the cup of bitterness. And then--fearful thought!--where was he to find the money needful to pay the cost of the first proceedings? He felt such disgust of life, that if there had been any water at hand he would have thrown himself into it; that if he had had a pistol, he would have blown out his brains. Then he relapsed into the indecision of mind which, since his conversation with Derville at the dairyman's had changed his character.

°°°°At last, having reached the kiosque, he went up to the gazebo, where little rose-windows afforded a view over each lovely landscape of the valley, and where he found his wife seated on a chair. The Countess was gazing at the distance, and preserved a calm countenance, showing that impenetrable face which women can assume when resolved to do their worst. She wiped her eyes as if she had been weeping, and played absently with the pink ribbons of her sash. Nevertheless, in spite of her apparent assurance, she could not help shuddering slightly when she saw before her her venerable benefactor, standing with folded arms, his face pale, his brow stern.

°°°°"Madame," he said, after gazing at her fixedly for a moment and compelling her to blush, "Madame, I do not curse you--I scorn you. I can now thank the chance that has divided us. I do not feel even a desire for revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on the strength of my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps have made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of the sunshine.--Farewell!"

°°°°The Countess threw herself at his feet; she would have detained him by taking his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust, saying:

°°°°"Do not touch me!"

°°°°The Countess' expression when she heard her husband's retreating steps is quite indescribable. Then, with the deep perspicacity given only by utter villainy, or by fierce worldly selfishness, she knew that she might live in peace on the word and the contempt of this loyal veteran.

°°°°Chabert, in fact, disappeared. The dairyman failed in business, and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel, perhaps, took up some similar industry for a time. Perhaps, like a stone flung into a chasm, he went falling from ledge to ledge, to be lost in the mire of rags that seethes through the streets of Paris.

°°°°Six months after this event, Derville, hearing no more of Colonel Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed that they had no doubt come to a compromise, which the Countess, out of revenge, had had arranged by some other lawyer. So one morning he added up the sums he had advanced to the said Chabert with the costs, and begged the Comtesse Ferraud to claim from M. le Comte Chabert the amount of the bill, assuming that she would know where to find her first husband.

°°°°The very next day Comte Ferraud's man of business, lately appointed President of the County Court in a town of some importance, wrote this distressing note to Derville:

°°°°"MONSIEUR,--

°°°°"Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your   client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the   individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he   came forward under false pretences. "Yours, etc.,                DELBECQ."

°°°°"One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half," cried Derville. "They don't deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand- franc notes!"

°°°°Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader to whom he wished to speak, and who was employed in the Police Court. As chance would have it, Derville went into Court Number 6 at the moment when the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months' imprisonment as a vagabond, and subsequently to be taken to the Mendicity House of Detention, a sentence which, by magistrates' law, is equivalent to perpetual imprisonment. On hearing the name of Hyacinthe, Derville looked at the deliquent, sitting between two /gendarmes/ on the bench for the accused, and recognized in the condemned man his false Colonel Chabert.

°°°°The old soldier was placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In spite of his rags, in spite of the misery stamped on his countenance, it gave evidence of noble pride. His eye had a stoical expression which no magistrate ought to have misunderstood; but as soon as a man has fallen into the hands of justice, he is no more than a moral entity, a matter of law or of fact, just as to statists he has become a zero.

°°°°When the veteran was taken back to the lock-up, to be removed later with the batch of vagabonds at that moment at the bar, Derville availed himself of the privilege accorded to lawyers of going wherever they please in the Courts, and followed him to the lock-up, where he stood scrutinizing him for some minutes, as well as the curious crew of beggars among whom he found himself. The passage to the lock-up at that moment afforded one of those spectacles which, unfortunately, neither legislators, nor philanthropists, nor painters, nor writers come to study. Like all the laboratories of the law, this ante-room is a dark and malodorous place; along the walls runs a wooden seat, blackened by the constant presence there of the wretches who come to this meeting-place of every form of social squalor, where not one of them is missing.

°°°°A poet might say that the day was ashamed to light up this dreadful sewer through which so much misery flows! There is not a spot on that plank where some crime has not sat, in embryo or matured; not a corner where a man has never stood who, driven to despair by the blight which justice has set upon him after his first fault, has not there begun a career, at the end of which looms the guillotine or the pistol-snap of the suicide. All who fall on the pavement of Paris rebound against these yellow-gray walls, on which a philanthropist who was not a speculator might read a justification of the numerous suicides complained of by hypocritical writers who are incapable of taking a step to prevent them--for that justification is written in that ante- room, like a preface to the dramas of the Morgue, or to those enacted on the Place de la Greve.

°°°°At this moment Colonel Chabert was sitting among these men--men with coarse faces, clothed in the horrible livery of misery, and silent at intervals, or talking in a low tone, for three gendarmes on duty paced to and fro, their sabres clattering on the floor.

°°°°"Do you recognize me?" said Derville to the old man, standing in front of him.

°°°°"Yes, sir," said Chabert, rising.

°°°°"If you are an honest man," Derville went on in an undertone, "how could you remain in my debt?"

°°°°The old soldier blushed as a young girl might when accused by her mother of a clandestine love affair.

°°°°"What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?" cried he in a loud voice.

°°°°"Paid me?" said Derville. "She wrote to me that you were a swindler."

°°°°The Colonel cast up his eyes in a sublime impulse of horror and imprecation, as if to call heaven to witness to this fresh subterfuge.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, in a voice that was calm by sheer huskiness, "get the gendarmes to allow me to go into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored."

°°°°At a word from Derville to the sergeant he was allowed to take his client into the room, where Hyacinthe wrote a few lines, and addressed them to the Comtesse Ferraud.

°°°°"Send her that," said the soldier, "and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is not the less there," and he laid his hand on his heart. "Yes, it is there, deep and sincere. But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all."

°°°°"What!" said Derville. "Did you not stipulate for an allowance?"

°°°°"Do not speak of it!" cried the old man. "You cannot conceive how deep my contempt is for the outside life to which most men cling. I was suddenly attacked by a sickness--disgust of humanity. When I think that Napoleon is at Saint-Helena, everything on earth is a matter of indifference to me. I can no longer be a soldier; that is my only real grief. After all," he added with a gesture of childish simplicity, "it is better to enjoy luxury of feeling than of dress. For my part, I fear nobody's contempt."

°°°°And the Colonel sat down on his bench again.

°°°°Derville went away. On returning to his office, he sent Godeschal, at that time his second clerk, to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert's lawyer.

°°°°In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now himself an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, to whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal's staff among beggars by living on at Bicetre as poor women live on at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures who are lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners, which consists in drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords to its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

°°°°"I say, Derville," said Godeschal to his traveling companion, "look at that old fellow. Isn't he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy."

°°°°Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

°°°°"That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?"

°°°°"Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious," said Godeschal.

°°°°"That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger's glare she shot at him at that moment."

°°°°This opening having excited Godeschal's curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

°°°°Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

°°°°"Good-morning, Colonel Chabert," said Derville.

°°°°"Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe," replied the veteran. "I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7," he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--"Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?" he asked after a moment's silence. "He is not married! He is very lucky!"

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Godeschal. "Would you like something to buy snuff?"

°°°°With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

°°°°"Brave troopers!"

°°°°He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

°°°°"Fire! both arms! /Vive Napoleon/!" And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

°°°°"The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish," said Derville.

°°°°"Childish! he?" said another old pauper, who was looking on. "Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, 'Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.'--'I was too young to be there,' said Hyacinthe. 'But I was at Jena.' And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions."

°°°°"What a destiny!" exclaimed Derville. "Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow," Derville went on after a pause, "there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

°°°°"How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris."

°°°°"I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches' office," replied Godeschal.

°°°°PARIS, February-March 1832.

°°°°End



°°°°Father Goriot

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage

°°°°To the great and illustrious Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a token of admiration for his works and genius. DE BALZAC.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans) is an elderly person, who for the past forty years has kept a lodging-house in the Rue Nueve- Sainte-Genevieve, in the district that lies between the Latin Quarter and the Faubourg Saint-Marcel. Her house (known in the neighborhood as the Maison Vauquer) receives men and women, old and young, and no word has ever been breathed against her respectable establishment; but, at the same time, it must be said that as a matter of fact no young woman has been under her roof for thirty years, and that if a young man stays there for any length of time it is a sure sign that his allowance must be of the slenderest. In 1819, however, the time when this drama opens, there was an almost penniless young girl among Mme. Vauquer's boarders.

°°°°That word drama has been somewhat discredited of late; it has been overworked and twisted to strange uses in these days of dolorous literature; but it must do service again here, not because this story is dramatic in the restricted sense of the word, but because some tears may perhaps be shed intra et extra muros before it is over.

°°°°Will any one without the walls of Paris understand it? It is open to doubt. The only audience who could appreciate the results of close observation, the careful reproduction of minute detail and local color, are dwellers between the heights of Montrouge and Montmartre, in a vale of crumbling stucco watered by streams of black mud, a vale of sorrows which are real and joys too often hollow; but this audience is so accustomed to terrible sensations, that only some unimaginable and well-neigh impossible woe could produce any lasting impression there. Now and again there are tragedies so awful and so grand by reason of the complication of virtues and vices that bring them about, that egotism and selfishness are forced to pause and are moved to pity; but the impression that they receive is like a luscious fruit, soon consumed. Civilization, like the car of Juggernaut, is scarcely stayed perceptibly in its progress by a heart less easy to break than the others that lie in its course; this also is broken, and Civilization continues on her course triumphant. And you, too, will do the like; you who with this book in your white hand will sink back among the cushions of your armchair, and say to yourself, "Perhaps this may amuse me." You will read the story of Father Goriot's secret woes, and, dining thereafter with an unspoiled appetite, will lay the blame of your insensibility upon the writer, and accuse him of exaggeration, of writing romances. Ah! once for all, this drama is neither a fiction nor a romance! ALL IS TRUE,--so true, that every one can discern the elements of the tragedy in his own house, perhaps in his own heart.

°°°°The lodging-house is Mme. Vauquer's own property. It is still standing in the lower end of the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, just where the road slopes so sharply down to the Rue de l'Arbalete, that wheeled traffic seldom passes that way, because it is so stony and steep. This position is sufficient to account for the silence prevalent in the streets shut in between the dome of the Pantheon and the dome of the Val-de-Grace, two conspicuous public buildings which give a yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies beneath the shadow of their leaden- hued cupolas.

°°°°In that district the pavements are clean and dry, there is neither mud nor water in the gutters, grass grows in the chinks of the walls. The most heedless passer-by feels the depressing influences of a place where the sound of wheels creates a sensation; there is a grim look about the houses, a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls. A Parisian straying into a suburb apparently composed of lodging-houses and public institutions would see poverty and dullness, old age lying down to die, and joyous youth condemned to drudgery. It is the ugliest quarter of Paris, and, it may be added, the least known. But, before all things, the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve is like a bronze frame for a picture for which the mind cannot be too well prepared by the contemplation of sad hues and sober images. Even so, step by step the daylight decreases, and the cicerone's droning voice grows hollower as the traveler descends into the Catacombs. The comparison holds good! Who shall say which is more ghastly, the sight of the bleached skulls or of dried-up human hearts?

°°°°The front of the lodging-house is at right angles to the road, and looks out upon a little garden, so that you see the side of the house in section, as it were, from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. Beneath the wall of the house front there lies a channel, a fathom wide, paved with cobble-stones, and beside it runs a graveled walk bordered by geraniums and oleanders and pomegranates set in great blue and white glazed earthenware pots. Access into the graveled walk is afforded by a door, above which the words MAISON VAUQUER may be read, and beneath, in rather smaller letters, "Lodgings for both sexes, etc."

°°°°During the day a glimpse into the garden is easily obtained through a wicket to which a bell is attached. On the opposite wall, at the further end of the graveled walk, a green marble arch was painted once upon a time by a local artist, and in this semblance of a shrine a statue representing Cupid is installed; a Parisian Cupid, so blistered and disfigured that he looks like a candidate for one of the adjacent hospitals, and might suggest an allegory to lovers of symbolism. The half-obliterated inscription on the pedestal beneath determines the date of this work of art, for it bears witness to the widespread enthusiasm felt for Voltaire on his return to Paris in 1777:

°°°°"Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;   He is, or was, or ought to be."

°°°°At night the wicket gate is replaced by a solid door. The little garden is no wider than the front of the house; it is shut in between the wall of the street and the partition wall of the neighboring house. A mantle of ivy conceals the bricks and attracts the eyes of passers-by to an effect which is picturesque in Paris, for each of the walls is covered with trellised vines that yield a scanty dusty crop of fruit, and furnish besides a subject of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her lodgers; every year the widow trembles for her vintage.

°°°°A straight path beneath the walls on either side of the garden leads to a clump of lime-trees at the further end of it; LINE- trees, as Mme. Vauquer persists in calling them, in spite of the fact that she was a de Conflans, and regardless of repeated corrections from her lodgers.

°°°°The central space between the walls is filled with artichokes and rows of pyramid fruit-trees, and surrounded by a border of lettuce, pot-herbs, and parsley. Under the lime-trees there are a few green-painted garden seats and a wooden table, and hither, during the dog-days, such of the lodgers as are rich enough to indulge in a cup of coffee come to take their pleasure, though it is hot enough to roast eggs even in the shade.

°°°°The house itself is three stories high, without counting the attics under the roof. It is built of rough stone, and covered with the yellowish stucco that gives a mean appearance to almost every house in Paris. There are five windows in each story in the front of the house; all the blinds visible through the small square panes are drawn up awry, so that the lines are all at cross purposes. At the side of the house there are but two windows on each floor, and the lowest of all are adorned with a heavy iron grating.

°°°°Behind the house a yard extends for some twenty feet, a space inhabited by a happy family of pigs, poultry, and rabbits; the wood-shed is situated on the further side, and on the wall between the wood-shed and the kitchen window hangs the meat-safe, just above the place where the sink discharges its greasy streams. The cook sweeps all the refuse out through a little door into the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, and frequently cleanses the yard with copious supplies of water, under pain of pestilence.

°°°°The house might have been built on purpose for its present uses. Access is given by a French window to the first room on the ground floor, a sitting-room which looks out upon the street through the two barred windows already mentioned. Another door opens out of it into the dining-room, which is separated from the kitchen by the well of the staircase, the steps being constructed partly of wood, partly of tiles, which are colored and beeswaxed. Nothing can be more depressing than the sight of that sitting- room. The furniture is covered with horse hair woven in alternate dull and glossy stripes. There is a round table in the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from Telemaque are depicted, the various classical personages being colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

°°°°The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the language, and which should be called the odeur de pension. The damp atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy, musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet, in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining dining- room.

°°°°The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which the lodgers' table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine, are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long table is so greasy that a waggish externe will write his name on the surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky, worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one- eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire, parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet, its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

°°°°This apartment is in all its glory at seven o'clock in the morning, when Mme. Vauquer's cat appears, announcing the near approach of his mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated countenance, and a nose like a parrot's beak set in the middle of it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn; there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and interpretation of her lodging- house, as surely as her lodging-house implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital. The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room, and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its mistress.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who "have seen a deal of trouble." She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still, "she is a good woman at bottom," said the lodgers who believed that the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

°°°°What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head. How had she lost her money? "Through trouble," was her answer. He had treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody, because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every possible misfortune.

°°°°Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress' shuffling footsteps, hastened to serve the lodgers' breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these externes usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty francs a month.

°°°°At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme. Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary- general in the service of the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred francs a year.

°°°°The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on the third floor were also let-- one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle. Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli, Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as "Father Goriot." The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of passage, to impecunious students, who like "Father Goriot" and Mlle. Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of better.

°°°°At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him. Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that their parents' hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as by those who had brought it to pass.

°°°°Above the third story there was a garret where the linen was hung to dry, and a couple of attics. Christophe, the man-of-all-work, slept in one, and Sylvie, the stout cook, in the other. Beside the seven inmates thus enumerated, taking one year with another, some eight law or medical students dined in the house, as well as two or three regular comers who lived in the neighborhood. There were usually eighteen people at dinner, and there was room, if need be, for twenty at Mme. Vauquer's table; at breakfast, however, only the seven lodgers appeared. It was almost like a family party. Every one came down in dressing-gown and slippers, and the conversation usually turned on anything that had happened the evening before; comments on the dress or appearance of the dinner contingent were exchanged in friendly confidence.

°°°°These seven lodgers were Mme. Vauquer's spoiled children. Among them she distributed, with astronomical precision, the exact proportion of respect and attention due to the varying amounts they paid for their board. One single consideration influenced all these human beings thrown together by chance. The two second- floor lodgers only paid seventy-two francs a month. Such prices as these are confined to the Faubourg Saint-Marcel and the district between La Bourbe and the Salpetriere; and, as might be expected, poverty, more or less apparent, weighed upon them all, Mme. Couture being the sole exception to the rule.

°°°°The dreary surroundings were reflected in the costumes of the inmates of the house; all were alike threadbare. The color of the men's coats were problematical; such shoes, in more fashionable quarters, are only to be seen lying in the gutter; the cuffs and collars were worn and frayed at the edges; every limp article of clothing looked like the ghost of its former self. The women's dresses were faded, old-fashioned, dyed and re-dyed; they wore gloves that were glazed with hard wear, much-mended lace, dingy ruffles, crumpled muslin fichus. So much for their clothing; but, for the most part, their frames were solid enough; their constitutions had weathered the storms of life; their cold, hard faces were worn like coins that have been withdrawn from circulation, but there were greedy teeth behind the withered lips. Dramas brought to a close or still in progress are foreshadowed by the sight of such actors as these, not the dramas that are played before the footlights and against a background of painted canvas, but dumb dramas of life, frost-bound dramas that sere hearts like fire, dramas that do not end with the actors' lives.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau, that elderly young lady, screened her weak eyes from the daylight by a soiled green silk shade with a rim of brass, an object fit to scare away the Angel of Pity himself. Her shawl, with its scanty, draggled fringe, might have covered a skeleton, so meagre and angular was the form beneath it. Yet she must have been pretty and shapely once. What corrosive had destroyed the feminine outlines? Was it trouble, or vice, or greed? Had she loved too well? Had she been a second-hand clothes dealer, a frequenter of the backstairs of great houses, or had she been merely a courtesan? Was she expiating the flaunting triumphs of a youth overcrowded with pleasures by an old age in which she was shunned by every passer-by? Her vacant gaze sent a chill through you; her shriveled face seemed like a menace. Her voice was like the shrill, thin note of the grasshopper sounding from the thicket when winter is at hand. She said that she had nursed an old gentleman, ill of catarrh of the bladder, and left to die by his children, who thought that he had nothing left. His bequest to her, a life annuity of a thousand francs, was periodically disputed by his heirs, who mingled slander with their persecutions. In spite of the ravages of conflicting passions, her face retained some traces of its former fairness and fineness of tissue, some vestiges of the physical charms of her youth still survived.

°°°°M. Poiret was a sort of automaton. He might be seen any day sailing like a gray shadow along the walks of the Jardin des Plantes, on his head a shabby cap, a cane with an old yellow ivory handle in the tips of his thin fingers; the outspread skirts of his threadbare overcoat failed to conceal his meagre figure; his breeches hung loosely on his shrunken limbs; the thin, blue-stockinged legs trembled like those of a drunken man; there was a notable breach of continuity between the dingy white waistcoat and crumpled shirt frills and the cravat twisted about a throat like a turkey gobbler's; altogether, his appearance set people wondering whether this outlandish ghost belonged to the audacious race of the sons of Japhet who flutter about on the Boulevard Italien. What devouring kind of toil could have so shriveled him? What devouring passions had darkened that bulbous countenance, which would have seemed outrageous as a caricature? What had he been? Well, perhaps he had been part of the machinery of justice, a clerk in the office to which the executioner sends in his accounts,--so much for providing black veils for parricides, so much for sawdust, so much for pulleys and cord for the knife. Or he might have been a receiver at the door of a public slaughter-house, or a sub-inspector of nuisances. Indeed, the man appeared to have been one of the beasts of burden in our great social mill; one of those Parisian Ratons whom their Bertrands do not even know by sight; a pivot in the obscure machinery that disposes of misery and things unclean; one of those men, in short, at sight of whom we are prompted to remark that, "After all, we cannot do without them."

°°°°Stately Paris ignores the existence of these faces bleached by moral or physical suffering; but, then, Paris is in truth an ocean that no line can plumb. You may survey its surface and describe it; but no matter how numerous and painstaking the toilers in this sea, there will always be lonely and unexplored regions in its depths, caverns unknown, flowers and pearls and monsters of the deep overlooked or forgotten by the divers of literature. The Maison Vauquer is one of these curious monstrosities.

°°°°Two, however, of Mme. Vauquer's boarders formed a striking contrast to the rest. There was a sickly pallor, such as is often seen in anaemic girls, in Mlle. Victorine Taillefer's face; and her unvarying expression of sadness, like her embarrassed manner and pinched look, was in keeping with the general wretchedness of the establishment in the Rue Nueve-Saint-Genevieve, which forms a background to this picture; but her face was young, there was youthfulness in her voice and elasticity in her movements. This young misfortune was not unlike a shrub, newly planted in an uncongenial soil, where its leaves have already begun to wither. The outlines of her figure, revealed by her dress of the simplest and cheapest materials, were also youthful. There was the same kind of charm about her too slender form, her faintly colored face and light-brown hair, that modern poets find in mediaeval statuettes; and a sweet expression, a look of Christian resignation in the dark gray eyes. She was pretty by force of contrast; if she had been happy, she would have been charming. Happiness is the poetry of woman, as the toilette is her tinsel. If the delightful excitement of a ball had made the pale face glow with color; if the delights of a luxurious life had brought the color to the wan cheeks that were slightly hollowed already; if love had put light into the sad eyes, then Victorine might have ranked among the fairest; but she lacked the two things which create woman a second time--pretty dresses and love- letters.

°°°°A book might have been made of her story. Her father was persuaded that he had sufficient reason for declining to acknowledge her, and allowed her a bare six hundred francs a year; he had further taken measures to disinherit his daughter, and had converted all his real estate into personalty, that he might leave it undivided to his son. Victorine's mother had died broken-hearted in Mme. Couture's house; and the latter, who was a near relation, had taken charge of the little orphan. Unluckily, the widow of the commissary-general to the armies of the Republic had nothing in the world but her jointure and her widow's pension, and some day she might be obliged to leave the helpless, inexperienced girl to the mercy of the world. The good soul, therefore, took Victorine to mass every Sunday, and to confession once a fortnight, thinking that, in any case, she would bring up her ward to be devout. She was right; religion offered a solution of the problem of the young girl's future. The poor child loved the father who refused to acknowledge her. Once every year she tried to see him to deliver her mother's message of forgiveness, but every year hitherto she had knocked at that door in vain; her father was inexorable. Her brother, her only means of communication, had not come to see her for four years, and had sent her no assistance; yet she prayed to God to unseal her father's eyes and to soften her brother's heart, and no accusations mingled with her prayers. Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exhausted the vocabulary of abuse, and failed to find words that did justice to the banker's iniquitous conduct; but while they heaped execrations on the millionaire, Victorine's words were as gentle as the moan of the wounded dove, and affection found expression even in the cry drawn from her by pain.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac was a thoroughly southern type; he had a fair complexion, blue eyes, black hair. In his figure, manner, and his whole bearing it was easy to see that he had either come of a noble family, or that, from his earliest childhood, he had been gently bred. If he was careful of his wardrobe, only taking last year's clothes into daily wear, still upon occasion he could issue forth as a young man of fashion. Ordinarily he wore a shabby coat and waistcoat, the limp black cravat, untidily knotted, that students affect, trousers that matched the rest of his costume, and boots that had been resoled.

°°°°Vautrin (the man of forty with the dyed whiskers) marked a transition stage between these two young people and the others. He was the kind of man that calls forth the remark: "He looks a jovial sort!" He had broad shoulders, a well-developed chest, muscular arms, and strong square-fisted hands; the joints of his fingers were covered with tufts of fiery red hair. His face was furrowed by premature wrinkles; there was a certain hardness about it in spite of his bland and insinuating manner. His bass voice was by no means unpleasant, and was in keeping with his boisterous laughter. He was always obliging, always in good spirits; if anything went wrong with one of the locks, he would soon unscrew it, take it to pieces, file it, oil and clean and set it in order, and put it back in its place again; "I am an old hand at it," he used to say. Not only so, he knew all about ships, the sea, France, foreign countries, men, business, law, great houses and prisons,--there was nothing that he did not know. If any one complained rather more than usual, he would offer his services at once. He had several times lent money to Mme. Vauquer, or to the boarders; but, somehow, those whom he obliged felt that they would sooner face death than fail to repay him; a certain resolute look, sometimes seen on his face, inspired fear of him, for all his appearance of easy good-nature. In the way he spat there was an imperturbable coolness which seemed to indicate that this was a man who would not stick at a crime to extricate himself from a false position. His eyes, like those of a pitiless judge, seemed to go to the very bottom of all questions, to read all natures, all feelings and thoughts. His habit of life was very regular; he usually went out after breakfast, returning in time for dinner, and disappeared for the rest of the evening, letting himself in about midnight with a latch key, a privilege that Mme. Vauquer accorded to no other boarder. But then he was on very good terms with the widow; he used to call her "mamma," and put his arm round her waist, a piece of flattery perhaps not appreciated to the full! The worthy woman might imagine this to be an easy feat; but, as a matter of fact, no arm but Vautrin's was long enough to encircle her.

°°°°It was a characteristic trait of his generously to pay fifteen francs a month for the cup of coffee with a dash of brandy in it, which he took after dinner. Less superficial observers than young men engulfed by the whirlpool of Parisian life, or old men, who took no interest in anything that did not directly concern them, would not have stopped short at the vaguely unsatisfactory impression that Vautrin made upon them. He knew or guessed the concerns of every one about him; but none of them had been able to penetrate his thoughts, or to discover his occupation. He had deliberately made his apparent good-nature, his unfailing readiness to oblige, and his high spirits into a barrier between himself and the rest of them, but not seldom he gave glimpses of appalling depths of character. He seemed to delight in scourging the upper classes of society with the lash of his tongue, to take pleasure in convicting it of inconsistency, in mocking at law and order with some grim jest worthy of Juvenal, as if some grudge against the social system rankled in him, as if there were some mystery carefully hidden away in his life.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer felt attracted, perhaps unconsciously, by the strength of the one man, and the good looks of the other; her stolen glances and secret thoughts were divided between them; but neither of them seemed to take any notice of her, although some day a chance might alter her position, and she would be a wealthy heiress. For that matter, there was not a soul in the house who took any trouble to investigate the various chronicles of misfortunes, real or imaginary, related by the rest. Each one regarded the others with indifference, tempered by suspicion; it was a natural result of their relative positions. Practical assistance not one could give, this they all knew, and they had long since exhausted their stock of condolence over previous discussions of their grievances. They were in something the same position as an elderly couple who have nothing left to say to each other. The routine of existence kept them in contact, but they were parts of a mechanism which wanted oil. There was not one of them but would have passed a blind man begging in the street, not one that felt moved to pity by a tale of misfortune, not one who did not see in death the solution of the all- absorbing problem of misery which left them cold to the most terrible anguish in others.

°°°°The happiest of these hapless beings was certainly Mme. Vauquer, who reigned supreme over this hospital supported by voluntary contributions. For her, the little garden, which silence, and cold, and rain, and drought combined to make as dreary as an Asian steppe, was a pleasant shaded nook; the gaunt yellow house, the musty odors of a back shop had charms for her, and for her alone. Those cells belonged to her. She fed those convicts condemned to penal servitude for life, and her authority was recognized among them. Where else in Paris would they have found wholesome food in sufficient quantity at the prices she charged them, and rooms which they were at liberty to make, if not exactly elegant or comfortable, at any rate clean and healthy? If she had committed some flagrant act of injustice, the victim would have borne it in silence.

°°°°Such a gathering contained, as might have been expected, the elements out of which a complete society might be constructed. And, as in a school, as in the world itself, there was among the eighteen men and women who met round the dinner table a poor creature, despised by all the others, condemned to be the butt of all their jokes. At the beginning of Eugene de Rastignac's second twelvemonth, this figure suddenly started out into bold relief against the background of human forms and faces among which the law student was yet to live for another two years to come. This laughing-stock was the retired vermicelli-merchant, Father Goriot, upon whose face a painter, like the historian, would have concentrated all the light in his picture.

°°°°How had it come about that the boarders regarded him with a half- malignant contempt? Why did they subject the oldest among their number to a kind of persecution, in which there was mingled some pity, but no respect for his misfortunes? Had he brought it on himself by some eccentricity or absurdity, which is less easily forgiven or forgotten than more serious defects? The question strikes at the root of many a social injustice. Perhaps it is only human nature to inflict suffering on anything that will endure suffering, whether by reason of its genuine humility, or indifference, or sheer helplessness. Do we not, one and all, like to feel our strength even at the expense of some one or of something? The poorest sample of humanity, the street arab, will pull the bell handle at every street door in bitter weather, and scramble up to write his name on the unsullied marble of a monument.

°°°°In the year 1813, at the age of sixty-nine or thereabouts, "Father Goriot" had sold his business and retired--to Mme. Vauquer's boarding house. When he first came there he had taken the rooms now occupied by Mme. Couture; he had paid twelve hundred francs a year like a man to whom five louis more or less was a mere trifle. For him Mme. Vauquer had made various improvements in the three rooms destined for his use, in consideration of a certain sum paid in advance, so it was said, for the miserable furniture, that is to say, for some yellow cotton curtains, a few chairs of stained wood covered with Utrecht velvet, several wretched colored prints in frames, and wall papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained. Possibly it was the careless generosity with which Father Goriot allowed himself to be overreached at this period of his life (they called him Monsieur Goriot very respectfully then) that gave Mme. Vauquer the meanest opinion of his business abilities; she looked on him as an imbecile where money was concerned.

°°°°Goriot had brought with him a considerable wardrobe, the gorgeous outfit of a retired tradesman who denies himself nothing. Mme. Vauquer's astonished eyes beheld no less than eighteen cambric- fronted shirts, the splendor of their fineness being enhanced by a pair of pins each bearing a large diamond, and connected by a short chain, an ornament which adorned the vermicelli-maker's shirt front. He usually wore a coat of corn-flower blue; his rotund and portly person was still further set off by a clean white waistcoat, and a gold chain and seals which dangled over that broad expanse. When his hostess accused him of being "a bit of a beau," he smiled with the vanity of a citizen whose foible is gratified. His cupboards (ormoires, as he called them in the popular dialect) were filled with a quantity of plate that he brought with him. The widow's eyes gleamed as she obligingly helped him to unpack the soup ladles, table-spoons, forks, cruet- stands, tureens, dishes, and breakfast services--all of silver, which were duly arranged upon shelves, besides a few more or less handsome pieces of plate, all weighing no inconsiderable number of ounces; he could not bring himself to part with these gifts that reminded him of past domestic festivals.

°°°°"This was my wife's present to me on the first anniversary of our wedding day," he said to Mme. Vauquer, as he put away a little silver posset dish, with two turtle-doves billing on the cover. "Poor dear! she spent on it all the money she had saved before we were married. Do you know, I would sooner scratch the earth with my nails for a living, madame, than part with that. But I shall be able to take my coffee out of it every morning for the rest of my days, thank the Lord! I am not to be pitied. There's not much fear of my starving for some time to come."

°°°°Finally, Mme. Vauquer's magpie's eye had discovered and read certain entries in the list of shareholders in the funds, and, after a rough calculation, was disposed to credit Goriot (worthy man) with something like ten thousand francs a year. From that day forward Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans), who, as a matter of fact, had seen forty-eight summers, though she would only own to thirty-nine of them--Mme. Vauquer had her own ideas. Though Goriot's eyes seemed to have shrunk in their sockets, though they were weak and watery, owing to some glandular affection which compelled him to wipe them continually, she considered him to be a very gentlemanly and pleasant-looking man. Moreover, the widow saw favorable indications of character in the well-developed calves of his legs and in his square-shaped nose, indications still further borne out by the worthy man's full-moon countenance and look of stupid good-nature. This, in all probability, was a strongly-build animal, whose brains mostly consisted in a capacity for affection. His hair, worn in ailes de pigeon, and duly powdered every morning by the barber from the Ecole Polytechnique, described five points on his low forehead, and made an elegant setting to his face. Though his manners were somewhat boorish, he was always as neat as a new pin and he took his snuff in a lordly way, like a man who knows that his snuff- box is always likely to be filled with maccaboy, so that when Mme. Vauquer lay down to rest on the day of M. Goriot's installation, her heart, like a larded partridge, sweltered before the fire of a burning desire to shake off the shroud of Vauquer and rise again as Goriot. She would marry again, sell her boarding-house, give her hand to this fine flower of citizenship, become a lady of consequence in the quarter, and ask for subscriptions for charitable purposes; she would make little Sunday excursions to Choisy, Soissy, Gentilly; she would have a box at the theatre when she liked, instead of waiting for the author's tickets that one of her boarders sometimes gave her, in July; the whole Eldorado of a little Parisian household rose up before Mme. Vauquer in her dreams. Nobody knew that she herself possessed forty thousand francs, accumulated sou by sou, that was her secret; surely as far as money was concerned she was a very tolerable match. "And in other respects, I am quite his equal," she said to herself, turning as if to assure herself of the charms of a form that the portly Sylvie found moulded in down feathers every morning.

°°°°For three months from that day Mme. Veuve Vauquer availed herself of the services of M. Goriot's coiffeur, and went to some expense over her toilette, expense justifiable on the ground that she owed it to herself and her establishment to pay some attention to appearances when such highly-respectable persons honored her house with their presence. She expended no small amount of ingenuity in a sort of weeding process of her lodgers, announcing her intention of receiving henceforward none but people who were in every way select. If a stranger presented himself, she let him know that M. Goriot, one of the best known and most highly- respected merchants in Paris, had singled out her boarding-house for a residence. She drew up a prospectus headed MAISON VAUQUER, in which it was asserted that hers was "one of the oldest and most highly recommended boarding-houses in the Latin Quarter." "From the windows of the house," thus ran the prospectus, "there is a charming view of the Vallee des Gobelins (so there is--from the third floor), and a BEAUTIFUL garden, EXTENDING down to AN AVENUE OF LINDENS at the further end." Mention was made of the bracing air of the place and its quiet situation.

°°°°It was this prospectus that attracted Mme. la Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil, a widow of six and thirty, who was awaiting the final settlement of her husband's affairs, and of another matter regarding a pension due to her as the wife of a general who had died "on the field of battle." On this Mme. Vauquer saw to her table, lighted a fire daily in the sitting-room for nearly six months, and kept the promise of her prospectus, even going to some expense to do so. And the Countess, on her side, addressed Mme. Vauquer as "my dear," and promised her two more boarders, the Baronne de Vaumerland and the widow of a colonel, the late Comte de Picquoisie, who were about to leave a boarding-house in the Marais, where the terms were higher than at the Maison Vauquer. Both these ladies, moreover, would be very well to do when the people at the War Office had come to an end of their formalities. "But Government departments are always so dilatory," the lady added.

°°°°After dinner the two widows went together up to Mme. Vauquer's room, and had a snug little chat over some cordial and various delicacies reserved for the mistress of the house. Mme. Vauquer's ideas as to Goriot were cordially approved by Mme. de l'Ambermesnil; it was a capital notion, which for that matter she had guessed from the very first; in her opinion the vermicelli maker was an excellent man.

°°°°"Ah! my dear lady, such a well-preserved man of his age, as sound as my eyesight--a man who might make a woman happy!" said the widow.

°°°°The good-natured Countess turned to the subject of Mme. Vauquer's dress, which was not in harmony with her projects. "You must put yourself on a war footing," said she.

°°°°After much serious consideration the two widows went shopping together--they purchased a hat adorned with ostrich feathers and a cap at the Palais Royal, and the Countess took her friend to the Magasin de la Petite Jeannette, where they chose a dress and a scarf. Thus equipped for the campaign, the widow looked exactly like the prize animal hung out for a sign above an a la mode beef shop; but she herself was so much pleased with the improvement, as she considered it, in her appearance, that she felt that she lay under some obligation to the Countess; and, though by no means open-handed, she begged that lady to accept a hat that cost twenty francs. The fact was that she needed the Countess' services on the delicate mission of sounding Goriot; the countess must sing her praises in his ears. Mme. de l'Ambermesnil lent herself very good-naturedly to this manoeuvre, began her operations, and succeeded in obtaining a private interview; but the overtures that she made, with a view to securing him for herself, were received with embarrassment, not to say a repulse. She left him, revolted by his coarseness.

°°°°"My angel," said she to her dear friend, "you will make nothing of that man yonder. He is absurdly suspicious, and he is a mean curmudgeon, an idiot, a fool; you would never be happy with him."

°°°°After what had passed between M. Goriot and Mme. de l'Ambermesnil, the Countess would no longer live under the same roof. She left the next day, forgot to pay for six months' board, and left behind her wardrobe, cast-off clothing to the value of five francs. Eagerly and persistently as Mme. Vauquer sought her quondam lodger, the Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil was never heard of again in Paris. The widow often talked of this deplorable business, and regretted her own too confiding disposition. As a matter of fact, she was as suspicious as a cat; but she was like many other people, who cannot trust their own kin and put themselves at the mercy of the next chance comer--an odd but common phenomenon, whose causes may readily be traced to the depths of the human heart.

°°°°Perhaps there are people who know that they have nothing more to look for from those with whom they live; they have shown the emptiness of their hearts to their housemates, and in their secret selves they are conscious that they are severely judged, and that they deserve to be judged severely; but still they feel an unconquerable craving for praises that they do not hear, or they are consumed by a desire to appear to possess, in the eyes of a new audience, the qualities which they have not, hoping to win the admiration or affection of strangers at the risk of forfeiting it again some day. Or, once more, there are other mercenary natures who never do a kindness to a friend or a relation simply because these have a claim upon them, while a service done to a stranger brings its reward to self-love. Such natures feel but little affection for those who are nearest to them; they keep their kindness for remoter circles of acquaintance, and show most to those who dwell on its utmost limits. Mme. Vauquer belonged to both these essentially mean, false, and execrable classes.

°°°°"If I had been there at the time," Vautrin would say at the end of the story, I would have shown her up, and that misfortune would not have befallen you. I know that kind of phiz!"

°°°°Like all narrow natures, Mme. Vauquer was wont to confine her attention to events, and did not go very deeply into the causes that brought them about; she likewise preferred to throw the blame of her own mistakes on other people, so she chose to consider that the honest vermicelli maker was responsible for her misfortune. It had opened her eyes, so she said, with regard to him. As soon as she saw that her blandishments were in vain, and that her outlay on her toilette was money thrown away, she was not slow to discover the reason of his indifference. It became plain to her at once that there was SOME OTHER ATTRACTION, to use her own expression. In short, it was evident that the hope she had so fondly cherished was a baseless delusion, and that she would "never make anything out of that man yonder," in the Countess' forcible phrase. The Countess seemed to have been a judge of character. Mme. Vauquer's aversion was naturally more energetic than her friendship, for her hatred was not in proportion to her love, but to her disappointed expectations. The human heart may find here and there a resting-place short of the highest height of affection, but we seldom stop in the steep, downward slope of hatred. Still, M. Goriot was a lodger, and the widow's wounded self-love could not vent itself in an explosion of wrath; like a monk harassed by the prior of his convent, she was forced to stifle her sighs of disappointment, and to gulp down her craving for revenge. Little minds find gratification for their feelings, benevolent or otherwise, by a constant exercise of petty ingenuity. The widow employed her woman's malice to devise a system of covert persecution. She began by a course of retrenchment--various luxuries which had found their way to the table appeared there no more.

°°°°"No more gherkins, no more anchovies; they have made a fool of me!" she said to Sylvie one morning, and they returned to the old bill of fare.

°°°°The thrifty frugality necessary to those who mean to make their way in the world had become an inveterate habit of life with M. Goriot. Soup, boiled beef, and a dish of vegetables had been, and always would be, the dinner he liked best, so Mme. Vauquer found it very difficult to annoy a boarder whose tastes were so simple. He was proof against her malice, and in desperation she spoke to him and of him slightingly before the other lodgers, who began to amuse themselves at his expense, and so gratified her desire for revenge.

°°°°Towards the end of the first year the widow's suspicions had reached such a pitch that she began to wonder how it was that a retired merchant with a secure income of seven or eight thousand livres, the owner of such magnificent plate and jewelry handsome enough for a kept mistress, should be living in her house. Why should he devote so small a proportion of his money to his expenses? Until the first year was nearly at an end, Goriot had dined out once or twice every week, but these occasions came less frequently, and at last he was scarcely absent from the dinner- table twice a month. It was hardly expected that Mme. Vauquer should regard the increased regularity of her boarder's habits with complacency, when those little excursions of his had been so much to her interest. She attributed the change not so much to a gradual diminution of fortune as to a spiteful wish to annoy his hostess. It is one of the most detestable habits of a Liliputian mind to credit other people with its own malignant pettiness.

°°°°Unluckily, towards the end of the second year, M. Goriot's conduct gave some color to the idle talk about him. He asked Mme. Vauquer to give him a room on the second floor, and to make a corresponding reduction in her charges. Apparently, such strict economy was called for, that he did without a fire all through the winter. Mme. Vauquer asked to be paid in advance, an arrangement to which M. Goriot consented, and thenceforward she spoke of him as "Father Goriot."

°°°°What had brought about this decline and fall? Conjecture was keen, but investigation was difficult. Father Goriot was not communicative; in the sham countess' phrase he was "a curmudgeon." Empty-headed people who babble about their own affairs because they have nothing else to occupy them, naturally conclude that if people say nothing of their doings it is because their doings will not bear being talked about; so the highly respectable merchant became a scoundrel, and the late beau was an old rogue. Opinion fluctuated. Sometimes, according to Vautrin, who came about this time to live in the Maison Vauquer, Father Goriot was a man who went on 'Change and DABBLED (to use the sufficiently expressive language of the Stock Exchange) in stocks and shares after he had ruined himself by heavy speculation. Sometimes it was held that he was one of those petty gamblers who nightly play for small stakes until they win a few francs. A theory that he was a detective in the employ of the Home Office found favor at one time, but Vautrin urged that "Goriot was not sharp enough for one of that sort." There were yet other solutions; Father Goriot was a skinflint, a shark of a money- lender, a man who lived by selling lottery tickets. He was by turns all the most mysterious brood of vice and shame and misery; yet, however vile his life might be, the feeling of repulsion which he aroused in others was not so strong that he must be banished from their society--he paid his way. Besides, Goriot had his uses, every one vented his spleen or sharpened his wit on him; he was pelted with jokes and belabored with hard words. The general consensus of opinion was in favor of a theory which seemed the most likely; this was Mme. Vauquer's view. According to her, the man so well preserved at his time of life, as sound as her eyesight, with whom a woman might be very happy, was a libertine who had strange tastes. These are the facts upon which Mme. Vauquer's slanders were based.

°°°°Early one morning, some few months after the departure of the unlucky Countess who had managed to live for six months at the widow's expense, Mme. Vauquer (not yet dressed) heard the rustle of a silk dress and a young woman's light footstep on the stair; some one was going to Goriot's room. He seemed to expect the visit, for his door stood ajar. The portly Sylvie presently came up to tell her mistress that a girl too pretty to be honest, "dressed like a goddess," and not a speck of mud on her laced cashmere boots, had glided in from the street like a snake, had found the kitchen, and asked for M. Goriot's room. Mme. Vauquer and the cook, listening, overheard several words affectionately spoken during the visit, which lasted for some time. When M. Goriot went downstairs with the lady, the stout Sylvie forthwith took her basket and followed the lover-like couple, under pretext of going to do her marketing.

°°°°"M. Goriot must be awfully rich, all the same, madame," she reported on her return, "to keep her in such style. Just imagine it! There was a splendid carriage waiting at the corner of the Place de l'Estrapade, and SHE got into it."

°°°°While they were at dinner that evening, Mme. Vauquer went to the window and drew the curtain, as the sun was shining into Goriot's eyes.

°°°°"You are beloved of fair ladies, M. Goriot--the sun seeks you out," she said, alluding to his visitor. "Peste! you have good taste; she was very pretty."

°°°°"That was my daughter," he said, with a kind of pride in his voice, and the rest chose to consider this as the fatuity of an old man who wishes to save appearances.

°°°°A month after this visit M. Goriot received another. The same daughter who had come to see him that morning came again after dinner, this time in evening dress. The boarders, in deep discussion in the dining-room, caught a glimpse of a lovely, fair-haired woman, slender, graceful, and much too distinguished- looking to be a daughter of Father Goriot's.

°°°°"Two of them!" cried the portly Sylvie, who did not recognize the lady of the first visit.

°°°°A few days later, and another young lady--a tall, well-moulded brunette, with dark hair and bright eyes--came to ask for M. Goriot.

°°°°"Three of them!" said Sylvie.

°°°°Then the second daughter, who had first come in the morning to see her father, came shortly afterwards in the evening. She wore a ball dress, and came in a carriage.

°°°°"Four of them!" commented Mme. Vauquer and her plump handmaid. Sylvie saw not a trace of resemblance between this great lady and the girl in her simple morning dress who had entered her kitchen on the occasion of her first visit.

°°°°At that time Goriot was paying twelve hundred francs a year to his landlady, and Mme. Vauquer saw nothing out of the common in the fact that a rich man had four or five mistresses; nay, she thought it very knowing of him to pass them off as his daughters. She was not at all inclined to draw a hard-and-fast line, or to take umbrage at his sending for them to the Maison Vauquer; yet, inasmuch as these visits explained her boarder's indifference to her, she went so far (at the end of the second year) as to speak of him as an "ugly old wretch." When at length her boarder declined to nine hundred francs a year, she asked him very insolently what he took her house to be, after meeting one of these ladies on he stairs. Father Goriot answered that the lady was his eldest daughter.

°°°°"So you have two or three dozen daughters, have you?" said Mme. Vauquer sharply.

°°°°"I have only two," her boarder answered meekly, like a ruined man who is broken in to all the cruel usage of misfortune.

°°°°Towards the end of the third year Father Goriot reduced his expenses still further; he went up to the third story, and now paid forty-five francs a month. He did without snuff, told his hairdresser that he no longer required his services, and gave up wearing powder. When Goriot appeared for the first time in this condition, an exclamation of astonishment broke from his hostess at the color of his hair--a dingy olive gray. He had grown sadder day by day under the influence of some hidden trouble; among all the faces round the table, his was the most woe-begone. There was no longer any doubt. Goriot was an elderly libertine, whose eyes had only been preserved by the skill of the physician from the malign influence of the remedies necessitated by the state of his health. The disgusting color of his hair was a result of his excesses and of the drugs which he had taken that he might continue his career. The poor old man's mental and physical condition afforded some grounds for the absurd rubbish talked about him. When his outfit was worn out, he replaced the fine linen by calico at fourteen sous the ell. His diamonds, his gold snuff-box, watch-chain and trinkets, disappeared one by one. He had left off wearing the corn-flower blue coat, and was sumptuously arrayed, summer as well as winter, in a coarse chestnut-brown coat, a plush waistcoat, and doeskin breeches. He grew thinner and thinner; his legs were shrunken, his cheeks, once so puffed out by contented bourgeois prosperity, were covered with wrinkles, and the outlines of the jawbones were distinctly visible; there were deep furrows in his forehead. In the fourth year of his residence in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve he was no longer like his former self. The hale vermicelli manufacturer, sixty-two years of age, who had looked scarce forty, the stout, comfortable, prosperous tradesman, with an almost bucolic air, and such a brisk demeanor that it did you good to look at him; the man with something boyish in his smile, had suddenly sunk into his dotage, and had become a feeble, vacillating septuagenarian.

°°°°The keen, bright blue eyes had grown dull, and faded to a steel- gray color; the red inflamed rims looked as though they had shed tears of blood. He excited feelings of repulsion in some, and of pity in others. The young medical students who came to the house noticed the drooping of his lower lip and the conformation of the facial angle; and, after teasing him for some time to no purpose, they declared that cretinism was setting in.

°°°°One evening after dinner Mme. Vauquer said half banteringly to him, "So those daughters of yours don't come to see you any more, eh?" meaning to imply her doubts as to his paternity; but Father Goriot shrank as if his hostess had touched him with a sword- point.

°°°°"They come sometimes," he said in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Aha! you still see them sometimes?" cried the students. "Bravo, Father Goriot!"

°°°°The old man scarcely seemed to hear the witticisms at his expense that followed on the words; he had relapsed into the dreamy state of mind that these superficial observers took for senile torpor, due to his lack of intelligence. If they had only known, they might have been deeply interested by the problem of his condition; but few problems were more obscure. It was easy, of course, to find out whether Goriot had really been a vermicelli manufacturer; the amount of his fortune was readily discoverable; but the old people, who were most inquisitive as to his concerns, never went beyond the limits of the Quarter, and lived in the lodging-house much as oysters cling to a rock. As for the rest, the current of life in Paris daily awaited them, and swept them away with it; so soon as they left the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, they forgot the existence of the old man, their butt at dinner. For those narrow souls, or for careless youth, the misery in Father Goriot's withered face and its dull apathy were quite incompatible with wealth or any sort of intelligence. As for the creatures whom he called his daughters, all Mme. Vauquer's boarders were of her opinion. With the faculty for severe logic sedulously cultivated by elderly women during long evenings of gossip till they can always find an hypothesis to fit all circumstances, she was wont to reason thus:

°°°°"If Father Goriot had daughters of his own as rich as those ladies who came here seemed to be, he would not be lodging in my house, on the third floor, at forty-five francs a month; and he would not go about dressed like a poor man."

°°°°No objection could be raised to these inferences. So by the end of the month of November 1819, at the time when the curtain rises on this drama, every one in the house had come to have a very decided opinion as to the poor old man. He had never had either wife or daughter; excesses had reduced him to this sluggish condition; he was a sort of human mollusk who should be classed among the capulidoe, so one of the dinner contingent, an employe at the Museum, who had a pretty wit of his own. Poiret was an eagle, a gentleman, compared with Goriot. Poiret would join the talk, argue, answer when he was spoken to; as a matter of fact, his talk, arguments, and responses contributed nothing to the conversation, for Poiret had a habit of repeating what the others said in different words; still, he did join in the talk; he was alive, and seemed capable of feeling; while Father Goriot (to quote the Museum official again) was invariably at zero--Reaumur.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac had just returned to Paris in a state of mind not unknown to young men who are conscious of unusual powers, and to those whose faculties are so stimulated by a difficult position, that for the time being they rise above the ordinary level.

°°°°Rastignac's first year of study for the preliminary examinations in law had left him free to see the sights of Paris and to enjoy some of its amusements. A student has not much time on his hands if he sets himself to learn the repertory of every theatre, and to study the ins and outs of the labyrinth of Paris. To know its customs; to learn the language, and become familiar with the amusements of the capital, he must explore its recesses, good and bad, follow the studies that please him best, and form some idea of the treasures contained in galleries and museums.

°°°°At this stage of his career a student grows eager and excited about all sorts of follies that seem to him to be of immense importance. He has his hero, his great man, a professor at the College de France, paid to talk down to the level of his audience. He adjusts his cravat, and strikes various attitudes for the benefit of the women in the first galleries at the Opera- Comique. As he passes through all these successive initiations, and breaks out of his sheath, the horizons of life widen around him, and at length he grasps the plan of society with the different human strata of which it is composed.

°°°°If he begins by admiring the procession of carriages on sunny afternoons in the Champs-Elysees, he soon reaches the further stage of envying their owners. Unconsciously, Eugene had served his apprenticeship before he went back to Angouleme for the long vacation after taking his degrees as bachelor of arts and bachelor of law. The illusions of childhood had vanished, so also had the ideas he brought with him from the provinces; he had returned thither with an intelligence developed, with loftier ambitions, and saw things as they were at home in the old manor house. His father and mother, his two brothers and two sisters, with an aged aunt, whose whole fortune consisted in annuities, lived on the little estate of Rastignac. The whole property brought in about three thousand francs; and though the amount varied with the season (as must always be the case in a vine- growing district), they were obliged to spare an unvarying twelve hundred francs out of their income for him. He saw how constantly the poverty, which they had generously hidden from him, weighed upon them; he could not help comparing the sisters, who had seemed so beautiful to his boyish eyes, with women in Paris, who had realized the beauty of his dreams. The uncertain future of the whole family depended upon him. It did not escape his eyes that not a crumb was wasted in the house, nor that the wine they drank was made from the second pressing; a multitude of small things, which it is useless to speak of in detail here, made him burn to distinguish himself, and his ambition to succeed increased tenfold.

°°°°He meant, like all great souls, that his success should be owing entirely to his merits; but his was pre-eminently a southern temperament, the execution of his plans was sure to be marred by the vertigo that seizes on youth when youth sees itself alone in a wide sea, uncertain how to spend its energies, whither to steer its course, how to adapt its sails to the winds. At first he determined to fling himself heart and soul into his work, but he was diverted from this purpose by the need of society and connections; then he saw how great an influence women exert in social life, and suddenly made up his mind to go out into this world to seek a protectress there. Surely a clever and high- spirited young man, whose wit and courage were set off to advantage by a graceful figure and the vigorous kind of beauty that readily strikes a woman's imagination, need not despair of finding a protectress. These ideas occurred to him in his country walks with his sisters, whom he had once joined so gaily. The girls thought him very much changed.

°°°°His aunt, Mme. de Marcillac, had been presented at court, and had moved among the brightest heights of that lofty region. Suddenly the young man's ambition discerned in those recollections of hers, which had been like nursery fairy tales to her nephews and nieces, the elements of a social success at least as important as the success which he had achieved at the Ecole de Droit. He began to ask his aunt about those relations; some of the old ties might still hold good. After much shaking of the branches of the family tree, the old lady came to the conclusion that of all persons who could be useful to her nephew among the selfish genus of rich relations, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was the least likely to refuse. To this lady, therefore, she wrote in the old-fashioned style, recommending Eugene to her; pointing out to her nephew that if he succeeded in pleasing Mme. de Beauseant, the Vicomtesse would introduce him to other relations. A few days after his return to Paris, therefore, Rastignac sent his aunt's letter to Mme. de Beauseant. The Vicomtesse replied by an invitation to a ball for the following evening. This was the position of affairs at the Maison Vauquer at the end of November 1819.

°°°°A few days later, after Mme. de Beauseant's ball, Eugene came in at two o'clock in the morning. The persevering student meant to make up for the lost time by working until daylight. It was the first time that he had attempted to spend the night in this way in that silent quarter. The spell of a factitious energy was upon him; he had beheld the pomp and splendor of the world. He had not dined at the Maison Vauquer; the boarders probably would think that he would walk home at daybreak from the dance, as he had done sometimes on former occasions, after a fete at the Prado, or a ball at the Odeon, splashing his silk stockings thereby, and ruining his pumps.

°°°°It so happened that Christophe took a look into the street before drawing the bolts of the door; and Rastignac, coming in at that moment, could go up to his room without making any noise, followed by Christophe, who made a great deal. Eugene exchanged his dress suit for a shabby overcoat and slippers, kindled a fire with some blocks of patent fuel, and prepared for his night's work in such a sort that the faint sounds he made were drowned by Christophe's heavy tramp on the stairs.

°°°°Eugene sat absorbed in thought for a few moments before plunging into his law books. He had just become aware of the fact that the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was one of the queens of fashion, that her house was thought to be the pleasantest in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. And not only so, she was, by right of her fortune, and the name she bore, one of the most conspicuous figures in that aristocratic world. Thanks to the aunt, thanks to Mme. de Marcillac's letter of introduction, the poor student had been kindly received in that house before he knew the extent of the favor thus shown to him. It was almost like a patent of nobility to be admitted to those gilded salons; he had appeared in the most exclusive circle in Paris, and now all doors were open for him. Eugene had been dazzled at first by the brilliant assembly, and had scarcely exchanged a few words with the Vicomtesse; he had been content to single out a goddess among this throng of Parisian divinities, one of those women who are sure to attract a young man's fancy.

°°°°The Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud was tall and gracefully made; she had one of the prettiest figures in Paris. Imagine a pair of great dark eyes, a magnificently moulded hand, a shapely foot. There was a fiery energy in her movements; the Marquis de Ronquerolles had called her "a thoroughbred," "a pure pedigree," these figures of speech have replaced the "heavenly angel" and Ossianic nomenclature; the old mythology of love is extinct, doomed to perish by modern dandyism. But for Rastignac, Mme. Anastasie de Restaud was the woman for whom he had sighed. He had contrived to write his name twice upon the list of partners upon her fan, and had snatched a few words with her during the first quadrille.

°°°°"Where shall I meet you again, Madame?" he asked abruptly, and the tones of his voice were full of the vehement energy that women like so well.

°°°°"Oh, everywhere!" said she, "in the Bois, at the Bouffons, in my own house."

°°°°With the impetuosity of his adventurous southern temper, he did all he could to cultivate an acquaintance with this lovely countess, making the best of his opportunities in the quadrille and during a waltz that she gave him. When he told her that he was a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's, the Countess, whom he took for a great lady, asked him to call at her house, and after her parting smile, Rastignac felt convinced that he must make this visit. He was so lucky as to light upon some one who did not laugh at his ignorance, a fatal defect among the gilded and insolent youth of that period; the coterie of Maulincourts, Maximes de Trailles, de Marsays, Ronquerolles, Ajuda-Pintos, and Vandenesses who shone there in all the glory of coxcombry among the best-dressed women of fashion in Paris--Lady Brandon, the Duchesse de Langeais, the Comtesse de Kergarouet, Mme. de Serizy, the Duchesse de Carigliano, the Comtesse Ferraud, Mme. de Lanty, the Marquise d'Aiglemont, Mme. Firmiani, the Marquise de Listomere and the Marquise d'Espard, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and the Grandlieus. Luckily, therefore, for him, the novice happened upon the Marquis de Montriveau, the lover of the Duchesse de Langeais, a general as simple as a child; from him Rastignac learned that the Comtesse lived in the Rue du Helder.

°°°°Ah, what it is to be young, eager to see the world, greedily on the watch for any chance that brings you nearer the woman of your dreams, and behold two houses open their doors to you! To set foot in the Vicomtesse de Beauseant's house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; to fall on your knees before a Comtesse de Restaud in the Chaussee d'Antin; to look at one glance across a vista of Paris drawing-rooms, conscious that, possessing sufficient good looks, you may hope to find aid and protection there in a feminine heart! To feel ambitious enough to spurn the tight-rope on which you must walk with the steady head of an acrobat for whom a fall is impossible, and to find in a charming woman the best of all balancing poles.

°°°°He sat there with his thoughts for a while, Law on the one hand, and Poverty on the other, beholding a radiant vision of a woman rise above the dull, smouldering fire. Who would not have paused and questioned the future as Eugene was doing? who would not have pictured it full of success? His wondering thoughts took wings; he was transported out of the present into that blissful future; he was sitting by Mme. de Restaud's side, when a sort of sigh, like the grunt of an overburdened St. Joseph, broke the silence of the night. It vibrated through the student, who took the sound for a death groan. He opened his door noiselessly, went out upon the landing, and saw a thin streak of light under Father Goriot's door. Eugene feared that his neighbor had been taken ill; he went over and looked through the keyhole; the old man was busily engaged in an occupation so singular and so suspicious that Rastignac thought he was only doing a piece of necessary service to society to watch the self-styled vermicelli maker's nocturnal industries.

°°°°The table was upturned, and Goriot had doubtless in some way secured a silver plate and cup to the bar before knotting a thick rope round them; he was pulling at this rope with such enormous force that they were being crushed and twisted out of shape; to all appearance he meant to convert the richly wrought metal into ingots.

°°°°"Peste! what a man!" said Rastignac, as he watched Goriot's muscular arms; there was not a sound in the room while the old man, with the aid of the rope, was kneading the silver like dough. "Was he then, indeed, a thief, or a receiver of stolen goods, who affected imbecility and decrepitude, and lived like a beggar that he might carry on his pursuits the more securely?" Eugene stood for a moment revolving these questions, then he looked again through the keyhole.

°°°°Father Goriot had unwound his coil of rope; he had covered the table with a blanket, and was now employed in rolling the flattened mass of silver into a bar, an operation which he performed with marvelous dexterity.

°°°°"Why, he must be as strong as Augustus, King of Poland!" said Eugene to himself when the bar was nearly finished.

°°°°Father Goriot looked sadly at his handiwork, tears fell from his eyes, he blew out the dip which had served him for a light while he manipulated the silver, and Eugene heard him sigh as he lay down again.

°°°°"He is mad," thought the student.

°°°°"Poor child!" Father Goriot said aloud. Rastignac, hearing those words, concluded to keep silence; he would not hastily condemn his neighbor. He was just in the doorway of his room when a strange sound from the staircase below reached his ears; it might have been made by two men coming up in list slippers. Eugene listened; two men there certainly were, he could hear their breathing. Yet there had been no sound of opening the street door, no footsteps in the passage. Suddenly, too, he saw a faint gleam of light on the second story; it came from M. Vautrin's room.

°°°°"There are a good many mysteries here for a lodging-house!" he said to himself.

°°°°He went part of the way downstairs and listened again. The rattle of gold reached his ears. In another moment the light was put out, and again he distinctly heard the breathing of two men, but no sound of a door being opened or shut. The two men went downstairs, the faint sounds growing fainter as they went.

°°°°"Who is there?" cried Mme. Vauquer out of her bedroom window.

°°°°"I, Mme. Vauquer," answered Vautrin's deep bass voice. "I am coming in."

°°°°"That is odd! Christophe drew the bolts," said Eugene, going back to his room. "You have to sit up at night, it seems, if you really mean to know all that is going on about you in Paris."

°°°°These incidents turned his thought from his ambitious dreams; he betook himself to his work, but his thought wandered back to Father Goriot's suspicious occupation; Mme. de Restaud's face swam again and again before his eyes like a vision of a brilliant future; and at last he lay down and slept with clenched fists. When a young man makes up his mind that he will work all night, the chances are that seven times out of ten he will sleep till morning. Such vigils do not begin before we are turned twenty.

°°°°The next morning Paris was wrapped in one of the dense fogs that throw the most punctual people out in their calculations as to the time; even the most business-like folk fail to keep their appointments in such weather, and ordinary mortals wake up at noon and fancy it is eight o'clock. On this morning it was half- past nine, and Mme. Vauquer still lay abed. Christophe was late, Sylvie was late, but the two sat comfortably taking their coffee as usual. It was Sylvie's custom to take the cream off the milk destined for the boarders' breakfast for her own, and to boil the remainder for some time, so that madame should not discover this illegal exaction.

°°°°"Sylvie," said Christophe, as he dipped a piece of toast into the coffee, "M. Vautrin, who is not such a bad sort, all the same, had two people come to see him again last night. If madame says anything, mind you say nothing about it."

°°°°"Has he given you something?"

°°°°"He gave me a five-franc piece this month, which is as good as saying, 'Hold your tongue.' "

°°°°"Except him and Mme. Couture, who doesn't look twice at every penny, there's no one in the house that doesn't try to get back with the left hand all that they give with the right at New Year," said Sylvie.

°°°°"And, after all," said Christophe, "what do they give you? A miserable five-franc piece. There is Father Goriot, who has cleaned his shoes himself these two years past. There is that old beggar Poiret, who goes without blacking altogether; he would sooner drink it than put it on his boots. Then there is that whipper-snapper of a student, who gives me a couple of francs, Two francs will not pay for my brushes, and he sells his old clothes, and gets more for them than they are worth. Oh! they're a shabby lot!"

°°°°"Pooh!" said Sylvie, sipping her coffee, "our places are the best in the Quarter, that I know. But about that great big chap Vautrin, Christophe; has any one told you anything about him?"

°°°°"Yes. I met a gentleman in the street a few days ago; he said to me, 'There's a gentleman in your place, isn't there? a tall man that dyes his whiskers?' I told him, 'No, sir; they aren't dyed. A gay fellow like him hasn't the time to do it.' And when I told M. Vautrin about it afterwards, he said, 'Quite right, my boy. That is the way to answer them. There is nothing more unpleasant than to have your little weaknesses known; it might spoil many a match.' "

°°°°"Well, and for my part," said Sylvie, "a man tried to humbug me at the market wanting to know if I had seen him put on his shirt. Such bosh! There," she cried, interrupting herself, "that's a quarter to ten striking at the Val-de-Grace, and not a soul stirring!"

°°°°"Pooh! they are all gone out. Mme. Couture and the girl went out at eight o'clock to take the wafer at Saint-Etienne. Father Goriot started off somewhere with a parcel, and the student won't be back from his lecture till ten o'clock. I saw them go while I was sweeping the stairs; Father Goriot knocked up against me, and his parcel was as hard as iron. What is the old fellow up to, I wonder? He is as good as a plaything for the rest of them; they can never let him alone; but he is a good man, all the same, and worth more than all of them put together. He doesn't give you much himself, but he sometimes sends you with a message to ladies who fork out famous tips; they are dressed grandly, too."

°°°°"His daughters, as he calls them, eh? There are a dozen of them."

°°°°"I have never been to more than two--the two who came here."

°°°°"There is madame moving overhead; I shall have to go, or she will raise a fine racket. Just keep an eye on the milk, Christophe; don't let the cat get at it."

°°°°Sylvie went up to her mistress' room.

°°°°"Sylvie! How is this? It's nearly ten o'clock, and you let me sleep like a dormouse! Such a thing has never happened before."

°°°°"It's the fog; it is that thick, you could cut it with a knife."

°°°°"But how about breakfast?"

°°°°"Bah! the boarders are possessed, I'm sure. They all cleared out before there was a wink of daylight."

°°°°"Do speak properly, Sylvie," Mme. Vauquer retorted; "say a blink of daylight."

°°°°"Ah, well, madame, whichever you please. Anyhow, you can have breakfast at ten o'clock. La Michonnette and Poiret have neither of them stirred. There are only those two upstairs, and they are sleeping like the logs they are."

°°°°"But, Sylvie, you put their names together as if----"

°°°°"As if what?" said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. "The two of them make a pair."

°°°°"It is a strange thing, isn't it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last night after Christophe had bolted the door?"

°°°°"Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?"

°°°°"Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears on the table, those at five a penny."

°°°°A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all haste.

°°°°"Mistigris!" she cried.

°°°°The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

°°°°"Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!" she said. "Sylvie! Sylvie!"

°°°°"Yes, madame; what is it?"

°°°°"Just see what the cat has done!"

°°°°"It is all that stupid Christophe's fault. I told him to stop and lay the table. What has become of him? Don't you worry, madame; Father Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won't know the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats."

°°°°"I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?" said Mme. Vauquer, setting the plates round the table.

°°°°"Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"I have overslept myself," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same."

°°°°The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the sitting-room, singing loudly:

°°°°" 'Tis the same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance . .

°°°°"Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!" he cried at the sight of his hostess, and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

°°°°"There! have done----"

°°°°" 'Impertinence!' Say it!" he answered. "Come, say it! Now, isn't that what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah! I am a nice man, am I not?

°°°°"For the locks of brown and the golden hair   A sighing lover . . .

°°°°"Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

°°°°. . . . led by chance."

°°°°"What?" asked the widow.

°°°°"Father Goriot in the goldsmith's shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there, and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that's not used to the trade."

°°°°"Really? You don't say so?"

°°°°"Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair. He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went into a money-lender's house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father's bones, a Turk, a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob HIM, for he puts all his coin into the Bank."

°°°°"Then what was Father Goriot doing there?"

°°°°"Doing?" said Vautrin. "Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----"

°°°°"There he is!" cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Christophe," cried Father Goriot's voice, "come upstairs with me."

°°°°Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

°°°°"Where are you going?" Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

°°°°"Out on an errand for M. Goriot."

°°°°"What may that be?" said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe's hand. "Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud," he read. "Where are you going with it?" he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

°°°°"To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands myself."

°°°°"What is there inside it?" said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the light. "A banknote? No." He peered into the envelope. "A receipted account!" he cried. "My word! 'tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you, old chap," he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe's head, and spinning the man round like a thimble; "you will have a famous tip."

°°°°By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme. Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

°°°°"The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance."

°°°°When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

°°°°"Where have you been this morning, fair lady?" said Mme. Vauquer, turning to Mme. Couture.

°°°°"We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She is trembling like a leaf," Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

°°°°"Warm yourself, Victorine," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften your father's heart," said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the orphan girl; "but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl needs a dowry nowadays."

°°°°"Poor child!" said Mme. Vauquer. "Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself."

°°°°Victorine's eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

°°°°"If we could only see him!" said the Commissary-General's widow; "if I could speak to him myself and give him his wife's last letter! I have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my handwriting----"

°°°°" 'Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!' " exclaimed Vautrin, breaking in upon her. "So that is how you are, is it? In a few days' time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall see."

°°°°"Oh! sir," said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin, who showed no sign of being touched by it, "if you know of any way of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his affection and my mother's honor are more to me than all the money in the world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----"

°°°°"The same old story everywhere," sang Vautrin, with a satirical intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven people thus assembled bade each other good- morning, and took their places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student's footstep was heard outside.

°°°°"Ah! here you are, M. Eugene," said Sylvie; "every one is breakfasting at home to-day."

°°°°The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside Goriot.

°°°°"I have just met with a queer adventure," he said, as he helped himself abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer's eyes gauged as usual.

°°°°"An adventure?" queried Poiret.

°°°°"Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?" Vautrin asked of Poiret. "M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing."

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

°°°°"Tell us about your adventure!" demanded M. Vautrin.

°°°°"Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a king---"

°°°°"Fisher," put in Vautrin, interrupting.

°°°°"What do you mean, sir?" said Eugene sharply.

°°°°"I said 'fisher,' because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than kings."

°°°°"Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a king," said Poiret the ditto-ist, "because----"

°°°°"In fact"--the law-student cut him short--"I danced with one of the handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this divine countess about nine o'clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how my heart beat! I began to think----"

°°°°"That she was coming here," said Vautrin, with a keen look at the student. "I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman's heart, you will find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder."

°°°°The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

°°°°"Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!" cried Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

°°°°"It is just as I guessed," said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme. Vauquer's ear.

°°°°Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own thoughts than he did at that moment.

°°°°"Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! there you are!" answered Vautrin. "Old Father Goriot there knew it quite well! and why should I not know it too?"

°°°°"M. Goriot?" the student cried.

°°°°"What is it?" asked the old man. "So she was very beautiful, was she, yesterday night?"

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"Look at the old wretch," said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; "how his eyes light up!"

°°°°"Then does he really keep her?" said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to the student.

°°°°"Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty," Eugene answered. Father Goriot watched him with eager eyes. "If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there, my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list, and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a galloping horse, or a woman dancing."

°°°°"So the wheel turns," said Vautrin; "yesterday night at a duchess' ball, this morning in a money-lender's office, on the lowest rung of the ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers' hearts to find something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside down. Just a Parisienne through and through!"

°°°°Father Goriot's face, which had shone at the student's words like the sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of Vautrin's.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. Vauquer, "but where is your adventure? Did you speak to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?"

°°°°"She did not see me," said Eugene. "But only think of meeting one of the prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o'clock! She could not have reached home after the ball till two o'clock this morning. Wasn't it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of adventures."

°°°°"Pshaw! much funnier things than THAT happen here!" exclaimed Vautrin.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

°°°°"Well, did you see?" said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest of the circle. "He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain."

°°°°"Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de Restaud is anything to Father Goriot," cried the student.

°°°°"Well, and if you don't," broke in Vautrin, "we are not set on convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed to be like the sound of a trumpet to a trooper's horse. "Aha!" said Vautrin, stopping in his speech to give her a searching glance, "so we have had our little experiences, have we?"

°°°°The old maid lowered her eyes like a nun who sees a statue.

°°°°"Well," he went on, "when folk of that kind get a notion into their heads, they cannot drop it. They must drink the water from some particular spring--it is stagnant as often as not; but they will sell their wives and families, they will sell their own souls to the devil to get it. For some this spring is play, or the stock-exchange, or music, or a collection of pictures or insects; for others it is some woman who can give them the dainties they like. You might offer these last all the women on earth--they would turn up their noses; they will have the only one who can gratify their passion. It often happens that the woman does not care for them at all, and treats them cruelly; they buy their morsels of satisfaction very dear; but no matter, the fools are never tired of it; they will take their last blanket to the pawnbroker's to give their last five-franc piece to her. Father Goriot here is one of that sort. He is discreet, so the Countess exploits him--just the way of the gay world. The poor old fellow thinks of her and of nothing else. In all other respects you see he is a stupid animal; but get him on that subject, and his eyes sparkle like diamonds. That secret is not difficult to guess. He took some plate himself this morning to the melting-pot, and I saw him at Daddy Gobseck's in the Rue des Gres. And now, mark what follows--he came back here, and gave a letter for the Comtesse de Restaud to that noodle of a Christophe, who showed us the address; there was a receipted bill inside it. It is clear that it was an urgent matter if the Countess also went herself to the old money lender. Father Goriot has financed her handsomely. There is no need to tack a tale together; the thing is self-evident. So that shows you, sir student, that all the time your Countess was smiling, dancing, flirting, swaying her peach-flower crowned head, with her gown gathered into her hand, her slippers were pinching her, as they say; she was thinking of her protested bills, or her lover's protested bills."

°°°°"You have made me wild to know the truth," cried Eugene; "I will go to call on Mme. de Restaud to-morrow."

°°°°"Yes," echoed Poiret; "you must go and call on Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"And perhaps you will find Father Goriot there, who will take payment for the assistance he politely rendered."

°°°°Eugene looked disgusted. "Why, then, this Paris of yours is a slough."

°°°°"And an uncommonly queer slough, too," replied Vautrin. "The mud splashes you as you drive through it in your carriage--you are a respectable person; you go afoot and are splashed--you are a scoundrel. You are so unlucky as to walk off with something or other belonging to somebody else, and they exhibit you as a curiosity in the Place du Palais-de-Justice; you steal a million, and you are pointed out in every salon as a model of virtue. And you pay thirty millions for the police and the courts of justice, for the maintenance of law and order! A pretty slate of things it is!"

°°°°"What," cried Mme. Vauquer, "has Father Goriot really melted down his silver posset-dish?"

°°°°"There were two turtle-doves on the lid, were there not?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that there were."

°°°°"Then, was he fond of it?" said Eugene. "He cried while he was breaking up the cup and plate. I happened to see him by accident."

°°°°"It was dear to him as his own life," answered the widow.

°°°°"There! you see how infatuated the old fellow is!" cried Vautrin. "The woman yonder can coax the soul out of him"

°°°°The student went up to his room. Vautrin went out, and a few moments later Mme. Couture and Victorine drove away in a cab which Sylvie had called for them. Poiret gave his arm to Mlle. Michonneau, and they went together to spend the two sunniest hours of the day in the Jardin des Plantes.

°°°°"Well, those two are as good as married," was the portly Sylvie's comment. "They are going out together to-day for the first time. They are such a couple of dry sticks that if they happen to strike against each other they will draw sparks like flint and steel."

°°°°"Keep clear of Mlle. Michonneau's shawl, then, said Mme. Vauquer, laughing; "it would flare up like tinder."

°°°°At four o'clock that evening, when Goriot came in, he saw, by the light of two smoky lamps, that Victorine's eyes were red. Mme. Vauquer was listening to the history of the visit made that morning to M. Taillefer; it had been made in vain. Taillefer was tired of the annual application made by his daughter and her elderly friend; he gave them a personal interview in order to arrive at an understanding with them.

°°°°"My dear lady," said Mme. Couture, addressing Mme. Vauquer, "just imagine it; he did not even ask Victorine to sit down, she was standing the whole time. He said to me quite coolly, without putting himself in a passion, that we might spare ourselves the trouble of going there; that the young lady (he would not call her his daughter) was injuring her cause by importuning him (IMPORTUNING! once a year, the wretch!); that as Victorine's mother had nothing when he married her, Victorine ought not to expect anything from him; in fact, he said the most cruel things, that made the poor child burst out crying. The little thing threw herself at her father's feet and spoke up bravely; she said that she only persevered in her visits for her mother's sake; that she would obey him without a murmur, but that she begged him to read her poor dead mother's farewell letter. She took it up and gave it to him, saying the most beautiful things in the world, most beautifully expressed; I do not know where she learned them; God

°°°°must have put them into her head, for the poor child was inspired to speak so nicely that it made me cry like a fool to hear her talk. And what do you think the monster was doing all the time? Cutting his nails! He took the letter that poor Mme. Taillefer had soaked with tears, and flung it on to the chimney-piece. 'That is all right,' he said. He held out his hands to raise his daughter, but she covered them with kisses, and he drew them away again. Scandalous, isn't it? And his great booby of a son came in and took no notice of his sister."

°°°°"What inhuman wretches they must be!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"And then they both went out of the room," Mme. Couture went on, without heeding the worthy vermicelli maker's exclamation; "father and son bowed to me, and asked me to excuse them on account of urgent business! That is the history of our call. Well, he has seen his daughter at any rate. How he can refuse to acknowledge her I cannot think, for they are as alike as two peas."

°°°°The boarders dropped in one after another, interchanging greetings and empty jokes that certain classes of Parisians regard as humorous and witty. Dulness is their prevailing ingredient, and the whole point consists in mispronouncing a word or a gesture. This kind of argot is always changing. The essence of the jest consists in some catchword suggested by a political event, an incident in the police courts, a street song, or a bit of burlesque at some theatre, and forgotten in a month. Anything and everything serves to keep up a game of battledore and shuttlecock with words and ideas. The diorama, a recent invention, which carried an optical illusion a degree further than panoramas, had given rise to a mania among art students for ending every word with RAMA. The Maison Vauquer had caught the infection from a young artist among the boarders.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur-r-r Poiret," said the employe from the Museum, "how is your health-orama?" Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned to Mme. Couture and Victorine with a "Ladies, you seem melancholy."

°°°°"Is dinner ready?" cried Horace Bianchon, a medical student, and a friend of Rastignac's; "my stomach is sinking usque ad talones."

°°°°"There is an uncommon frozerama outside," said Vautrin. "Make room there, Father Goriot! Confound it, your foot covers the whole front of the stove."

°°°°"Illustrious M. Vautrin," put in Bianchon, "why do you say frozerama? It is incorrect; it should be frozenrama."

°°°°"No, it shouldn't," said the official from the Museum; "frozerama is right by the same rule that you say 'My feet are froze.' "

°°°°"Ah! ah!"

°°°°"Here is his Excellency the Marquis de Rastignac, Doctor of the Law of Contraries," cried Bianchon, seizing Eugene by the throat, and almost throttling him.

°°°°"Hallo there! hallo!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau came noiselessly in, bowed to the rest of the party, and took her place beside the three women without saying a word.

°°°°"That old bat always makes me shudder," said Bianchon in a low voice, indicating Mlle. Michonneau to Vautrin. "I have studied Gall's system, and I am sure she has the bump of Judas."

°°°°"Then you have seen a case before?" said Vautrin.

°°°°"Who has not?" answered Bianchon. "Upon my word, that ghastly old maid looks just like one of the long worms that will gnaw a beam through, give them time enough."

°°°°"That is the way, young man," returned he of the forty years and the dyed whiskers:

°°°°"The rose has lived the life of a rose--   A morning's space."

°°°°"Aha! here is a magnificent soupe-au-rama," cried Poiret as Christophe came in bearing the soup with cautious heed.

°°°°"I beg your pardon, sir," said Mme. Vauquer; "it is soupe aux choux."

°°°°All the young men roared with laughter.

°°°°"Had you there, Poiret!"

°°°°"Poir-r-r-rette! she had you there!"

°°°°"Score two points to Mamma Vauquer," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Did any of you notice the fog this morning?" asked the official.

°°°°"It was a frantic fog," said Bianchon, "a fog unparalleled, doleful, melancholy, sea-green, asthmatical--a Goriot of a fog!"

°°°°"A Goriorama," said the art student, "because you couldn't see a thing in it."

°°°°"Hey! Milord Gaoriotte, they air talking about yoo-o-ou!"

°°°°Father Goriot, seated at the lower end of the table, close to the door through which the servant entered, raised his face; he had smelt at a scrap of bread that lay under his table napkin, an old trick acquired in his commercial capacity, that still showed itself at times.

°°°°"Well," Madame Vauquer cried in sharp tones, that rang above the rattle of spoons and plates and the sound of other voices, "and is there anything the matter with the bread?"

°°°°"Nothing whatever, madame," he answered; "on the contrary, it is made of the best quality of corn; flour from Etampes."

°°°°"How could you tell?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"By the color, by the flavor."

°°°°"You knew the flavor by the smell, I suppose," said Mme. Vauquer. "You have grown so economical, you will find out how to live on the smell of cooking at last."

°°°°"Take out a patent for it, then," cried the Museum official; "you would make a handsome fortune."

°°°°"Never mind him," said the artist; "he does that sort of thing to delude us into thinking that he was a vermicelli maker."

°°°°"Your nose is a corn-sampler, it appears?" inquired the official.

°°°°"Corn WHAT?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"Corn-el."

°°°°"Corn-et."

°°°°"Corn-elian."

°°°°"Corn-ice."

°°°°"Corn-ucopia."

°°°°"Corn-crake."

°°°°"Corn-cockle."

°°°°"Corn-orama."

°°°°The eight responses came like a rolling fire from every part of the room, and the laughter that followed was the more uproarious because poor Father Goriot stared at the others with a puzzled look, like a foreigner trying to catch the meaning of words in a language which he does not understand.

°°°°"Corn? . . ." he said, turning to Vautrin, his next neighbor.

°°°°"Corn on your foot, old man!" said Vautrin, and he drove Father Goriot's cap down over his eyes by a blow on the crown.

°°°°The poor old man thus suddenly attacked was for a moment too bewildered to do anything. Christophe carried off his plate, thinking that he had finished his soup, so that when Goriot had pushed back his cap from his eyes his spoon encountered the table. Every one burst out laughing. "You are a disagreeable joker, sir," said the old man, "and if you take any further liberties with me----"

°°°°"Well, what then, old boy?" Vautrin interrupted.

°°°°"Well, then, you shall pay dearly for it some day----"

°°°°"Down below, eh?" said the artist, "in the little dark corner where they put naughty boys."

°°°°"Well, mademoiselle," Vautrin said, turning to Victorine, "you are eating nothing. So papa was refractory, was he?"

°°°°"A monster!" said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"Mademoiselle might make application for aliment pending her suit; she is not eating anything. Eh! eh! just see how Father Goriot is staring at Mlle. Victorine."

°°°°The old man had forgotten his dinner, he was so absorbed in gazing at the poor girl; the sorrow in her face was unmistakable,--the slighted love of a child whose father would not recognize her.

°°°°"We are mistaken about Father Goriot, my dear boy," said Eugene in a low voice. "He is not an idiot, nor wanting in energy. Try your Gall system on him, and let me know what you think. I saw him crush a silver dish last night as if it had been made of wax; there seems to be something extra-ordinary going on in his mind just now, to judge by his face. His life is so mysterious that it must be worth studying. Oh! you may laugh, Bianchon; I am not joking."

°°°°"The man is a subject, is he?" said Bianchon; "all right! I will dissect him, if he will give me the chance."

°°°°"No; feel his bumps."

°°°°"Hm!--his stupidity might perhaps be contagious."

°°°°The next day Rastignac dressed himself very elegantly, and about three o'clock in the afternoon went to call on Mme. de Restaud. On the way thither he indulged in the wild intoxicating dreams which fill a young head so full of delicious excitement. Young men at his age take no account of obstacles nor of dangers; they see success in every direction; imagination has free play, and turns their lives into a romance; they are saddened or discouraged by the collapse of one of the visionary schemes that have no existence save in their heated fancy. If youth were not ignorant and timid, civilization would be impossible.

°°°°Eugene took unheard-of pains to keep himself in a spotless condition, but on his way through the streets he began to think about Mme. de Restaud and what he should say to her. He equipped himself with wit, rehearsed repartees in the course of an imaginary conversation, and prepared certain neat speeches a la Talleyrand, conjuring up a series of small events which should prepare the way for the declaration on which he had based his future; and during these musings the law student was bespattered with mud, and by the time he reached the Palais Royal he was obliged to have his boots blacked and his trousers brushed.

°°°°"If I were rich," he said, as he changed the five-franc piece he had brought with him in case anything might happen, "I would take a cab, then I could think at my ease."

°°°°At last he reached the Rue du Helder, and asked for the Comtesse de Restaud. He bore the contemptuous glances of the servants, who had seen him cross the court on foot, with the cold fury of a man who knows that he will succeed some day. He understood the meaning of their glances at once, for he had felt his inferiority as soon as he entered the court, where a smart cab was waiting. All the delights of life in Paris seemed to be implied by this visible and manifest sign of luxury and extravagance. A fine horse, in magnificent harness, was pawing the ground, and all at once the law student felt out of humor with himself. Every compartment in his brain which he had thought to find so full of wit was bolted fast; he grew positively stupid. He sent up his name to the Countess, and waited in the ante-chamber, standing on one foot before a window that looked out upon the court; mechanically he leaned his elbow against the sash, and stared before him. The time seemed long; he would have left the house but for the southern tenacity of purpose which works miracles when it is single-minded.

°°°°"Madame is in her boudoir, and cannot see any one at present, sir," said the servant. "She gave me no answer; but if you will go into the dining-room, there is some one already there."

°°°°Rastignac was impressed with a sense of the formidable power of the lackey who can accuse or condemn his masters by a word; he coolly opened the door by which the man had just entered the ante-chamber, meaning, no doubt, to show these insolent flunkeys that he was familiar with the house; but he found that he had thoughtlessly precipitated himself into a small room full of dressers, where lamps were standing, and hot-water pipes, on which towels were being dried; a dark passage and a back staircase lay beyond it. Stifled laughter from the ante-chamber added to his confusion.

°°°°"This way to the drawing-room, sir," said the servant, with the exaggerated respect which seemed to be one more jest at his expense.

°°°°Eugene turned so quickly that he stumbled against a bath. By good luck, he managed to keep his hat on his head, and saved it from immersion in the water; but just as he turned, a door opened at the further end of the dark passage, dimly lighted by a small lamp. Rastignac heard voices and the sound of a kiss; one of the speakers was Mme. de Restaud, the other was Father Goriot. Eugene followed the servant through the dining-room into the drawing- room; he went to a window that looked out into the courtyard, and stood there for a while. He meant to know whether this Goriot was really the Goriot that he knew. His heart beat unwontedly fast; he remembered Vautrin's hideous insinuations. A well-dressed young man suddenly emerged from the room almost as Eugene entered it, saying impatiently to the servant who stood at the door: "I am going, Maurice. Tell Madame la Comtesse that I waited more than half an hour for her."

°°°°Whereupon this insolent being, who, doubtless, had a right to be insolent, sang an Italian trill, and went towards the window where Eugene was standing, moved thereto quite as much by a desire to see the student's face as by a wish to look out into the courtyard.

°°°°"But M. le Comte had better wait a moment longer; madame is disengaged," said Maurice, as he returned to the ante-chamber.

°°°°Just at that moment Father Goriot appeared close to the gate; he had emerged from a door at the foot of the back staircase. The worthy soul was preparing to open his umbrella regardless of the fact that the great gate had opened to admit a tilbury, in which a young man with a ribbon at his button-hole was seated. Father Goriot had scarcely time to start back and save himself. The horse took fright at the umbrella, swerved, and dashed forward towards the flight of steps. The young man looked round in annoyance, saw Father Goriot, and greeted him as he went out with constrained courtesy, such as people usually show to a money- lender so long as they require his services, or the sort of respect they feel it necessary to show for some one whose reputation has been blown upon, so that they blush to acknowledge his acquaintance. Father Goriot gave him a little friendly nod and a good-natured smile. All this happened with lightning speed. Eugene was so deeply interested that he forgot that he was not alone till he suddenly heard the Countess' voice.

°°°°"Oh! Maxime, were you going away?" she said reproachfully, with a shade of pique in her manner. The Countess had not seen the incident nor the entrance of the tilbury. Rastignac turned abruptly and saw her standing before him, coquettishly dressed in a loose white cashmere gown with knots of rose-colored ribbon here and there; her hair was carelessly coiled about her head, as is the wont of Parisian women in the morning; there was a soft fragrance about her--doubtless she was fresh from a bath;--her graceful form seemed more flexible, her beauty more luxuriant. Her eyes glistened. A young man can see everything at a glance; he feels the radiant influence of woman as a plant discerns and absorbs its nutriment from the air; he did not need to touch her hands to feel their cool freshness. He saw faint rose tints through the cashmere of the dressing gown; it had fallen slightly open, giving glimpses of a bare throat, on which the student's eyes rested. The Countess had no need of the adventitious aid of corsets; her girdle defined the outlines of her slender waist; her throat was a challenge to love; her feet, thrust into slippers, were daintily small. As Maxime took her hand and kissed it, Eugene became aware of Maxime's existence, and the Countess saw Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! is that you M. de Rastignac? I am very glad to see you," she said, but there was something in her manner that a shrewd observer would have taken as a hint to depart.

°°°°Maxime, as the Countess Anastasie had called the young man with the haughty insolence of bearing, looked from Eugene to the lady, and from the lady to Eugene; it was sufficiently evident that he wished to be rid of the latter. An exact and faithful rendering of the glance might be given in the words: "Look here, my dear; I hope you intend to send this little whipper-snapper about his business."

°°°°The Countess consulted the young man's face with an intent submissiveness that betrays all the secrets of a woman's heart, and Rastignac all at once began to hate him violently. To begin with, the sight of the fair carefully arranged curls on the other's comely head had convinced him that his own crop was hideous; Maxime's boots, moreover, were elegant and spotless, while his own, in spite of all his care, bore some traces of his recent walk; and, finally, Maxime's overcoat fitted the outline of his figure gracefully, he looked like a pretty woman, while Eugene was wearing a black coat at half-past two. The quick- witted child of the Charente felt the disadvantage at which he was placed beside this tall, slender dandy, with the clear gaze and the pale face, one of those men who would ruin orphan children without scruple. Mme. de Restaud fled into the next room without waiting for Eugene to speak; shaking out the skirts of her dressing-gown in her flight, so that she looked like a white butterfly, and Maxime hurried after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant's ball; he guessed the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he said to himself, "This is my rival; I mean to cut him out."

°°°°Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls's eye twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and so sulkily, that Anastasie's fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, "Why do you not go?" a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make their exit.

°°°°Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

°°°°"Madame," he began, "I hastened to call upon you----"

°°°°He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess; he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime with a cordial "Good morning," that astonished Eugene not a little. The young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

°°°°"M. de Restaud," said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law student.

°°°°Eugene bowed profoundly.

°°°°"This gentleman," she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband, "is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last ball."

°°°°Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs! These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house, produced a magical effect. The Count's stiff manner relaxed at once as he returned the student's bow.

°°°°"Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance," he said.

°°°°Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a fairy's wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open again; Rastignac's carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer's lodging- house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

°°°°"I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct," the Comte de Restaud said, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, they are extinct," answered the law student. "My great- uncle, the Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family. They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault, Mme. de Beauseant's grandfather on the mother's side. We are the younger branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King's service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated."

°°°°"Was not your great-uncle in command of the Vengeur before 1789?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the Warwick."

°°°°Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who should say, "If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that fellow, it is all over with us." Anastasie understood the glance that M. de Trailles gave her. With a woman's admirable tact, she began to smile and said:

°°°°"Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the Warwick and the Vengeur."

°°°°She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the boudoir. The morganatic couple (to use a convenient German expression which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

°°°°"Anastasie!" he cried pettishly, "just stay a moment, dear; you know very well that----"

°°°°"I am coming back in a minute," she interrupted; "I have a commission for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it."

°°°°She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her husband's voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands' characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, "You are busy, I do not want to interrupt you; good-day," and he went.

°°°°"Just wait a moment, Maxime!" the Count called after him.

°°°°"Come and dine with us," said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure that Rastignac had taken his leave.

°°°°The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover, for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate, hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair typical Parisian.

°°°°"Anastasie!" the Count called again to his wife.

°°°°"Poor Maxime!" she said, addressing the young man. "Come, we must resign ourselves. This evening----"

°°°°"I hope, Nasie," he said in her ear, "that you will give orders not to admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you will compel me to kill him."

°°°°"Are you mad, Maxime?" she said. "A young lad of a student is, on the contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him."

°°°°Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip, and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had been closed after him.

°°°°"What do you think, dear?" cried the Count, her husband, "this gentleman's family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted."

°°°°"Delighted to find that we have acquaintances in common," said the Countess, with a preoccupied manner.

°°°°"More than you think," said Eugene, in a low voice.

°°°°"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

°°°°"Why, only just now," said the student, "I saw a gentleman go out at the gate, Father Goriot, my next door neighbor in the house where I am lodging."

°°°°At the sound of this name, and the prefix that embellished it, the Count, who was stirring the fire, let the tongs fall as though they had burned his fingers, and rose to his feet.

°°°°"Sir," he cried, "you might have called him 'Monsieur Goriot'!"

°°°°The Countess turned pale at first at the sight of her husband's vexation, then she reddened; clearly she was embarrassed, her answer was made in a tone that she tried to make natural, and with an air of assumed carelessness:

°°°°"You could not know any one who is dearer to us both . . ."

°°°°She broke off, glanced at the piano as if some fancy had crossed her mind, and asked, "Are you fond of music, M. de Rastignac?"

°°°°"Exceedingly," answered Eugene, flushing, and disconcerted by a dim suspicion that he had somehow been guilty of a clumsy piece of folly.

°°°°"Do you sing?" she cried, going to the piano, and, sitting down before it, she swept her fingers over the keyboard from end to end. R-r-r-rah!

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°The Comte de Restaud walked to and fro.

°°°°"That is a pity; you are without one great means of success.--Ca- ro, ca-a-ro, ca-a-a-ro, non du-bi-ta-re," sang the Countess.

°°°°Eugene had a second time waved a magic wand when he uttered Goriot's name, but the effect seemed to be entirely opposite to that produced by the formula "related to Mme. de Beauseant." His position was not unlike that of some visitor permitted as a favor to inspect a private collection of curiosities, when by inadvertence he comes into collision with a glass case full of sculptured figures, and three or four heads, imperfectly secured, fall at the shock. He wished the earth would open and swallow him. Mme. de Restaud's expression was reserved and chilly, her eyes had grown indifferent, and sedulously avoided meeting those of the unlucky student of law.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "you wish to talk with M. de Restaud; permit me to wish you good-day----"

°°°°The Countess interrupted him by a gesture, saying hastily, "Whenever you come to see us, both M. de Restaud and I shall be delighted to see you."

°°°°Eugene made a profound bow and took his leave, followed by M. de Restaud, who insisted, in spite of his remonstrances, on accompanying him into the hall.

°°°°"Neither your mistress nor I are at home to that gentleman when he calls," the Count said to Maurice.

°°°°As Eugene set foot on the steps, he saw that it was raining.

°°°°"Come," said he to himself, "somehow I have just made a mess of it, I do not know how. And now I am going to spoil my hat and coat into the bargain. I ought to stop in my corner, grind away at law, and never look to be anything but a boorish country magistrate. How can I go into society, when to manage properly you want a lot of cabs, varnished boots, gold watch chains, and all sorts of things; you have to wear white doeskin gloves that cost six francs in the morning, and primrose kid gloves every evening? A fig for that old humbug of a Goriot!"

°°°°When he reached the street door, the driver of a hackney coach, who had probably just deposited a wedding party at their door, and asked nothing better than a chance of making a little money for himself without his employer's knowledge, saw that Eugene had no umbrella, remarked his black coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, and varnished boots, and stopped and looked at him inquiringly. Eugene, in the blind desperation that drives a young man to plunge deeper and deeper into an abyss, as if he might hope to find a fortunate issue in its lowest depths, nodded in reply to the driver's signal, and stepped into the cab; a few stray petals of orange blossom and scraps of wire bore witness to its recent occupation by a wedding party.

°°°°"Where am I to drive, sir?" demanded the man, who, by this time, had taken off his white gloves.

°°°°"Confound it!" Eugene said to himself, "I am in for it now, and at least I will not spend cab-hire for nothing!--Drive to the Hotel Beauseant," he said aloud.

°°°°"Which?" asked the man, a portentous word that reduced Eugene to confusion. This young man of fashion, species incerta, did not know that there were two Hotels Beauseant; he was not aware how rich he was in relations who did not care about him.

°°°°"The Vicomte de Beauseant, Rue----"

°°°°"De Grenelle," interrupted the driver, with a jerk of his head. "You see, there are the hotels of the Marquis and Comte de Beauseant in the Rue Saint-Dominique," he added, drawing up the step.

°°°°"I know all about that," said Eugene, severely.--"Everybody is laughing at me to-day, it seems!" he said to himself, as he deposited his hat on the opposite seat. "This escapade will cost me a king's ransom, but, at any rate, I shall call on my so- called cousin in a thoroughly aristocratic fashion. Goriot has cost me ten francs already, the old scoundrel. My word! I will tell Mme. de Beauseant about my adventure; perhaps it may amuse her. Doubtless she will know the secret of the criminal relation between that handsome woman and the old rat without a tail. It would be better to find favor in my cousin's eyes than to come in contact with that shameless woman, who seems to me to have very expensive tastes. Surely the beautiful Vicomtesse's personal interest would turn the scale for me, when the mere mention of her name produces such an effect. Let us look higher. If you set yourself to carry the heights of heaven, you must face God."

°°°°The innumerable thoughts that surged through his brain might be summed up in these phrases. He grew calmer, and recovered something of his assurance as he watched the falling rain. He told himself that though he was about to squander two of the precious five-franc pieces that remained to him, the money was well laid out in preserving his coat, boots, and hat; and his cabman's cry of "Gate, if you please," almost put him in spirits. A Swiss, in scarlet and gold, appeared, the great door groaned on its hinges, and Rastignac, with sweet satisfaction, beheld his equipage pass under the archway and stop before the flight of steps beneath the awning. The driver, in a blue-and-red greatcoat, dismounted and let down the step. As Eugene stepped out of the cab, he heard smothered laughter from the peristyle. Three or four lackeys were making merry over the festal appearance of the vehicle. In another moment the law student was enlightened as to the cause of their hilarity; he felt the full force of the contrast between his equipage and one of the smartest broughams in Paris; a coachman, with powdered hair, seemed to find it difficult to hold a pair of spirited horses, who stood chafing the bit. In Mme. de Restaud's courtyard, in the Chaussee d'Antin, he had seen the neat turnout of a young man of six-and-twenty; in the Faubourg Saint-Germain he found the luxurious equipage of a man of rank; thirty thousand francs would not have purchased it.

°°°°"Who can be here?" said Eugene to himself. He began to understand, though somewhat tardily, that he must not expect to find many women in Paris who were not already appropriated, and that the capture of one of these queens would be likely to cost something more than bloodshed. "Confound it all! I expect my cousin also has her Maxime."

°°°°He went up the steps, feeling that he was a blighted being. The glass door was opened for him; the servants were as solemn as jackasses under the curry comb. So far, Eugene had only been in the ballroom on the ground floor of the Hotel Beauseant; the fete had followed so closely on the invitation, that he had not had time to call on his cousin, and had therefore never seen Mme. de Beauseant's apartments; he was about to behold for the first time a great lady among the wonderful and elegant surroundings that reveal her character and reflect her daily life. He was the more curious, because Mme. de Restaud's drawing-room had provided him with a standard of comparison.

°°°°At half-past four the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was visible. Five minutes earlier she would not have received her cousin, but Eugene knew nothing of the recognized routine of various houses in Paris. He was conducted up the wide, white-painted, crimson- carpeted staircase, between the gilded balusters and masses of flowering plants, to Mme. de Beauseant's apartments. He did not know the rumor current about Mme. de Beauseant, one of the biographies told, with variations, in whispers, every evening in the salons of Paris.

°°°°For three years past her name had been spoken of in connection with that of one of the most wealthy and distinguished Portuguese nobles, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto. It was one of those innocent liaisons which possess so much charm for the two thus attached to each other that they find the presence of a third person intolerable. The Vicomte de Beauseant, therefore, had himself set an example to the rest of the world by respecting, with as good a grace as might be, this morganatic union. Any one who came to call on the Vicomtesse in the early days of this friendship was sure to find the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto there. As, under the circumstances, Mme. de Beauseant could not very well shut her door against these visitors, she gave them such a cold reception, and showed so much interest in the study of the ceiling, that no one could fail to understand how much he bored her; and when it became known in Paris that Mme. de Beauseant was bored by callers between two and four o'clock, she was left in perfect solitude during that interval. She went to the Bouffons or to the Opera with M. de Beauseant and M. d'Ajuda-Pinto; and M. de Beauseant, like a well-bred man of the world, always left his wife and the Portuguese as soon as he had installed them. But M. d'Ajuda-Pinto must marry, and a Mlle. de Rochefide was the young lady. In the whole fashionable world there was but one person who as yet knew nothing of the arrangement, and that was Mme. de Beauseant. Some of her friends had hinted at the possibility, and she had laughed at them, believing that envy had prompted those ladies to try to make mischief. And now, though the bans were about to be published, and although the handsome Portuguese had come that day to break the news to the Vicomtesse, he had not found courage as yet to say one word about his treachery. How was it? Nothing is doubtless more difficult than the notification of an ultimatum of this kind. There are men who feel more at their ease when they stand up before another man who threatens their lives with sword or pistol than in the presence of a woman who, after two hours of lamentations and reproaches, falls into a dead swoon and requires salts. At this moment, therefore, M. d'Ajuda-Pinto was on thorns, and anxious to take his leave. He told himself that in some way or other the news would reach Mme. de Beauseant; he would write, it would be much better to do it by letter, and not to utter the words that should stab her to the heart.

°°°°So when the servant announced M. Eugene de Rastignac, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto trembled with joy. To be sure, a loving woman shows even more ingenuity in inventing doubts of her lover than in varying the monotony of his happiness; and when she is about to be forsaken, she instinctively interprets every gesture as rapidly as Virgil's courser detected the presence of his companion by snuffing the breeze. It was impossible, therefore, that Mme. de Beauseant should not detect that involuntary thrill of satisfaction; slight though it was, it was appalling in its artlessness.

°°°°Eugene had yet to learn that no one in Paris should present himself in any house without first making himself acquainted with the whole history of its owner, and of its owner's wife and family, so that he may avoid making any of the terrible blunders which in Poland draw forth the picturesque exclamation, "Harness five bullocks to your cart!" probably because you will need them all to pull you out of the quagmire into which a false step has plunged you. If, down to the present day, our language has no name for these conversational disasters, it is probably because they are believed to be impossible, the publicity given in Paris to every scandal is so prodigious. After the awkward incident at Mme. de Restaud's, no one but Eugene could have reappeared in his character of bullock-driver in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room. But if Mme. de Restaud and M. de Trailles had found him horribly in the way, M. d'Ajuda hailed his coming with relief.

°°°°"Good-bye," said the Portuguese, hurrying to the door, as Eugene made his entrance into a dainty little pink-and-gray drawing- room, where luxury seemed nothing more than good taste.

°°°°"Until this evening," said Mme. de Beauseant, turning her head to give the Marquis a glance. "We are going to the Bouffons, are we not?"

°°°°"I cannot go," he said, with his fingers on the door handle.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant rose and beckoned to him to return. She did not pay the slightest attention to Eugene, who stood there dazzled by the sparkling marvels around him; he began to think that this was some story out of the Arabian Nights made real, and did not know where to hide himself, when the woman before him seemed to be unconscious of his existence. The Vicomtesse had raised the forefinger of her right hand, and gracefully signed to the Marquis to seat himself beside her. The Marquis felt the imperious sway of passion in her gesture; he came back towards her. Eugene watched him, not without a feeling of envy.

°°°°"That is the owner of the brougham!" he said to himself. "But is it necessary to have a pair of spirited horses, servants in livery, and torrents of gold to draw a glance from a woman here in Paris?"

°°°°The demon of luxury gnawed at his heart, greed burned in his veins, his throat was parched with the thirst of gold.

°°°°He had a hundred and thirty francs every quarter. His father, mother, brothers, sisters, and aunt did not spend two hundred francs a month among them. This swift comparison between his present condition and the aims he had in view helped to benumb his faculties.

°°°°"Why not?" the Vicomtesse was saying, as she smiled at the Portuguese. "Why cannot you come to the Italiens?"

°°°°"Affairs! I am to dine with the English Ambassador."

°°°°"Throw him over."

°°°°When a man once enters on a course of deception, he is compelled to add lie to lie. M. d'Ajuda therefore said, smiling, "Do you lay your commands on me?"

°°°°"Yes, certainly."

°°°°"That was what I wanted to have you say to me," he answered, dissembling his feelings in a glance which would have reassured any other woman.

°°°°He took the Vicomtesse's hand, kissed it, and went.

°°°°Eugene ran his fingers through his hair, and constrained himself to bow. He thought that now Mme. de Beauseant would give him her attention; but suddenly she sprang forward, rushed to a window in the gallery, and watched M. d'Ajuda step into his carriage; she listened to the order that he gave, and heard the Swiss repeat it to the coachman:

°°°°"To M. de Rochefide's house."

°°°°Those words, and the way in which M. d'Ajuda flung himself back in the carriage, were like a lightning flash and a thunderbolt for her; she walked back again with a deadly fear gnawing at her heart. The most terrible catastrophes only happen among the heights. The Vicomtesse went to her own room, sat down at a table, and took up a sheet of dainty notepaper.

°°°°"When, instead of dining with the English Ambassador,"   she wrote, "you go to the Rochefides, you owe me an   explanation, which I am waiting to hear."

°°°°She retraced several of the letters, for her hand was trembling so that they were indistinct; then she signed the note with an initial C for "Claire de Bourgogne," and rang the bell.

°°°°"Jacques," she said to the servant, who appeared immediately, "take this note to M. de Rochefide's house at half-past seven and ask for the Marquis d'Ajuda. If M. d'Ajuda is there, leave the note without waiting for an answer; if he is not there, bring the note back to me."

°°°°"Madame la Vicomtess, there is a visitor in the drawing-room."

°°°°"Ah! yes, of course," she said, opening the door.

°°°°Eugene was beginning to feel very uncomfortable, but at last the Vicomtesse appeared; she spoke to him, and the tremulous tones of her voice vibrated through his heart.

°°°°"Pardon me, monsieur," she said; "I had a letter to write. Now I am quite at liberty."

°°°°She scarcely knew what she was saying, for even as she spoke she thought, "Ah! he means to marry Mlle. de Rochefide? But is he still free? This evening the marriage shall be broken off, or else . . . But before to-morrow I shall know."

°°°°"Cousin . . ." the student replied.

°°°°"Eh?" said the Countess, with an insolent glance that sent a cold shudder through Eugene; he understood what that "Eh?" meant; he had learned a great deal in three hours, and his wits were on the alert. He reddened:

°°°°"Madame . . ." he began; he hesitated a moment, and then went on. "Pardon me; I am in such need of protection that the nearest scrap of relationship could do me no harm."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant smiled but there was sadness in her smile; even now she felt forebodings of the coming pain, the air she breathed was heavy with the storm that was about to burst.

°°°°"If you knew how my family are situated," he went on, "you would love to play the part of a beneficent fairy godmother who graciously clears the obstacles from the path of her protege."

°°°°"Well, cousin," she said, laughing, "and how can I be of service to you?"

°°°°"But do I know even that? I am distantly related to you, and this obscure and remote relationship is even now a perfect godsend to me. You have confused my ideas; I cannot remember the things that I meant to say to you. I know no one else here in Paris. . . . Ah! if I could only ask you to counsel me, ask you to look upon me as a poor child who would fain cling to the hem of your dress, who would lay down his life for you."

°°°°"Would you kill a man for me?"

°°°°"Two," said Eugene.

°°°°"You, child. Yes, you are a child," she said, keeping back the tears that came to her eyes; "you would love sincerely."

°°°°"Oh!" he cried, flinging up his head.

°°°°The audacity of the student's answer interested the Vicomtesse in him. The southern brain was beginning to scheme for the first time. Between Mme. de Restaud's blue boudoir and Mme. de Beauseant's rose-colored drawing-room he had made a three years' advance in a kind of law which is not a recognized study in Paris, although it is a sort of higher jurisprudence, and, when well understood, is a highroad to success of every kind.

°°°°"Ah! that is what I meant to say!" said Eugene. "I met Mme. de Restaud at your ball, and this morning I went to see her.

°°°°"You must have been very much in the way," said Mme. de Beauseant, smiling as she spoke.

°°°°"Yes, indeed. I am a novice, and my blunders will set every one against me, if you do not give me your counsel. I believe that in Paris it is very difficult to meet with a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion who would be willing to teach me, what you women can explain so well--life. I shall find a M. de Trailles everywhere. So I have come to you to ask you to give me a key to a puzzle, to entreat you to tell me what sort of blunder I made this morning. I mentioned an old man----"

°°°°"Madame la Duchess de Langeais," Jacques cut the student short; Eugene gave expression to his intense annoyance by a gesture.

°°°°"If you mean to succeed," said the Vicomtesse in a low voice, "in the first place you must not be so demonstrative."

°°°°"Ah! good morning, dear," she continued, and rising and crossing the room, she grasped the Duchess' hands as affectionately as if they had been sisters; the Duchess responded in the prettiest and most gracious way.

°°°°"Two intimate friends!" said Rastignac to himself. "Henceforward I shall have two protectresses; those two women are great friends, no doubt, and this newcomer will doubtless interest herself in her friend's cousin."

°°°°"To what happy inspiration do I owe this piece of good fortune, dear Antoinette?" asked Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°"Well, I saw M. d'Ajuda-Pinto at M. de Rochefide's door, so I thought that if I came I should find you alone."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant's mouth did not tighten, her color did not rise, her expression did not alter, or rather, her brow seemed to clear as the Duchess uttered those deadly words.

°°°°"If I had known that you were engaged----" the speaker added, glancing at Eugene.

°°°°"This gentleman is M. Eugene de Rastignac, one of my cousins," said the Vicomtesse. "Have you any news of General de Montriveau?" she continued. "Serizy told me yesterday that he never goes anywhere now; has he been to see you to-day?"

°°°°It was believed that the Duchess was desperately in love with M. de Montriveau, and that he was a faithless lover; she felt the question in her very heart, and her face flushed as she answered:

°°°°"He was at the Elysee yesterday."

°°°°"In attendance?"

°°°°"Claire," returned the Duchess, and hatred overflowed in the glances she threw at Mme. de Beauseant; "of course you know that M. d'Ajuda-Pinto is going to marry Mlle. de Rochefide; the bans will be published to-morrow."

°°°°This thrust was too cruel; the Vicomtesse's face grew white, but she answered, laughing, "One of those rumors that fools amuse themselves with. What should induce M. d'Ajuda to take one of the noblest names in Portugal to the Rochefides? The Rochefides were only ennobled yesterday."

°°°°"But Bertha will have two hundred thousand livres a year, they say."

°°°°"M. d'Ajuda is too wealthy to marry for money."

°°°°"But, my dear, Mlle. de Rochefide is a charming girl."

°°°°"Indeed?"

°°°°"And, as a matter of fact, he is dining with them to-day; the thing is settled. It is very surprising to me that you should know so little about it."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant turned to Rastignac. "What was the blunder that you made, monsieur?" she asked. "The poor boy is only just launched into the world, Antoinette, so that he understands nothing of all this that we are speaking of. Be merciful to him, and let us finish our talk to-morrow. Everything will be announced to-morrow, you know, and your kind informal communication can be accompanied by official confirmation."

°°°°The Duchess gave Eugene one of those insolent glances that measure a man from head to foot, and leave him crushed and annihilated.

°°°°"Madame, I have unwittingly plunged a dagger into Mme. de Restaud's heart; unwittingly--therein lies my offence," said the student of law, whose keen brain had served him sufficiently well, for he had detected the biting epigrams that lurked beneath this friendly talk. "You continue to receive, possibly you fear, those who know the amount of pain that they deliberately inflict; but a clumsy blunderer who has no idea how deeply he wounds is looked upon as a fool who does not know how to make use of his opportunities, and every one despise him."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant gave the student a glance, one of those glances in which a great soul can mingle dignity and gratitude. It was like balm to the law student, who was still smarting under the Duchess' insolent scrutiny; she had looked at him as an auctioneer might look at some article to appraise its value.

°°°°"Imagine, too, that I had just made some progress with the Comte de Restaud; for I should tell you, madame," he went on, turning to the Duchess with a mixture of humility and malice in his manner, "that as yet I am only a poor devil of a student, very much alone in the world, and very poor----"

°°°°"You should not tell us that, M. de Rastignac. We women never care about anything that no one else will take."

°°°°"Bah!" said Eugene. "I am only two-and-twenty, and I must make up my mind to the drawbacks of my time of life. Besides, I am confessing my sins, and it would be impossible to kneel in a more charming confessional; you commit your sins in one drawing-room, and receive absolution for them in another."

°°°°The Duchess' expression grew colder, she did not like the flippant tone of these remarks, and showed that she considered them to be in bad taste by turning to the Vicomtesse with--"This gentleman has only just come----"

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant began to laugh outright at her cousin and at the Duchess both.

°°°°"He has only just come to Paris, dear, and is in search of some one who will give him lessons in good taste."

°°°°"Mme. la Duchesse," said Eugene, "is it not natural to wish to be initiated into the mysteries which charm us?" ("Come, now," he said to himself, "my language is superfinely elegant, I'm sure.")

°°°°"But Mme. de Restaud is herself, I believe, M. de Trailles' pupil," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Of that I had no idea, madame," answered the law student, "so I rashly came between them. In fact, I got on very well with the lady's husband, and his wife tolerated me for a time until I took it into my head to tell them that I knew some one of whom I had just caught a glimpse as he went out by a back staircase, a man who had given the Countess a kiss at the end of a passage."

°°°°"Who was it?" both women asked together.

°°°°"An old man who lives at the rate of two louis a month in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, where I, a poor student, lodge likewise. He is a truly unfortunate creature, everybody laughs at him--we all call him 'Father Goriot.' "

°°°°"Why, child that you are," cried the Vicomtesse, "Mme. de Restaud was a Mlle. Goriot!"

°°°°"The daughter of a vermicelli manufacturer," the Duchess added; "and when the little creature went to Court, the daughter of a pastry-cook was presented on the same day. Do you remember, Claire? The King began to laugh, and made some joke in Latin about flour. People--what was it?--people----"

°°°°"Ejusdem farinae," said Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that was it," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Oh! is that her father?" the law student continued, aghast.

°°°°"Yes, certainly; the old man had two daughters; he dotes on them, so to speak, though they will scarcely acknowledge him."

°°°°"Didn't the second daughter marry a banker with a German name?" the Vicomtesse asked, turning to Mme. de Langeais, "a Baron de Nucingen? And her name is Delphine, is it not? Isn't she a fair- haired woman who has a side-box at the Opera? She comes sometimes to the Bouffons, and laughs loudly to attract attention."

°°°°The Duchess smiled and said:

°°°°"I wonder at you, dear. Why do you take so much interest in people of that kind? One must have been as madly in love as Restaud was, to be infatuated with Mlle. Anastasie and her flour sacks. Oh! he will not find her a good bargain! She is in M. de Trailles' hands, and he will ruin her."

°°°°"And they do not acknowledge their father!" Eugene repeated.

°°°°"Oh! well, yes, their father, the father, a father," replied the Vicomtesse, "a kind father who gave them each five or six hundred thousand francs, it is said, to secure their happiness by marrying them well; while he only kept eight or ten thousand livres a year for himself, thinking that his daughters would always be his daughters, thinking that in them he would live his life twice over again, that in their houses he should find two homes, where he would be loved and looked up to, and made much of. And in two years' time both his sons-in-law had turned him out of their houses as if he were one of the lowest outcasts."

°°°°Tears came into Eugene's eyes. He was still under the spell of youthful beliefs, he had just left home, pure and sacred feelings had been stirred within him, and this was his first day on the battlefield of civilization in Paris. Genuine feeling is so infectious that for a moment the three looked at each other in silence.

°°°°"Eh, mon Dieu!" said Mme. de Langeais; "yes, it seems very horrible, and yet we see such things every day. Is there not a reason for it? Tell me, dear, have you ever really thought what a son-in-law is? A son-in-law is the man for whom we bring up, you and I, a dear little one, bound to us very closely in innumerable ways; for seventeen years she will be the joy of her family, its 'white soul,' as Lamartine says, and suddenly she will become its scourge. When HE comes and takes her from us, his love from the very beginning is like an axe laid to the root of all the old affection in our darling's heart, and all the ties that bound her to her family are severed. But yesterday our little daughter thought of no one but her mother and father, as we had no thought that was not for her; by to-morrow she will have become a hostile stranger. The tragedy is always going on under our eyes. On the one hand you see a father who has sacrificed himself to his son, and his daughter-in-law shows him the last degree of insolence. On the other hand, it is the son-in-law who turns his wife's mother out of the house. I sometimes hear it said that there is nothing dramatic about society in these days; but the Drama of the Son-in-law is appalling, to say nothing of our marriages, which have come to be very poor farces. I can explain how it all came about in the old vermicelli maker's case. I think I recollect that Foriot----"

°°°°"Goriot, madame."

°°°°"Yes, that Moriot was once President of his Section during the Revolution. He was in the secret of the famous scarcity of grain, and laid the foundation of his fortune in those days by selling flour for ten times its cost. He had as much flour as he wanted. My grandmother's steward sold him immense quantities. No doubt Noriot shared the plunder with the Committee of Public Salvation, as that sort of person always did. I recollect the steward telling my grandmother that she might live at Grandvilliers in complete security, because her corn was as good as a certificate of civism. Well, then, this Loriot, who sold corn to those butchers, has never had but one passion, they say--he idolizes his daughters. He settled one of them under Restaud's roof, and grafted the other into the Nucingen family tree, the Baron de Nucingen being a rich banker who had turned Royalist. You can quite understand that so long as Bonaparte was Emperor, the two sons-in-law could manage to put up with the old Ninety-three; but after the restoration of the Bourbons, M. de Restaud felt bored by the old man's society, and the banker was still more tired of it. His daughters were still fond of him; they wanted 'to keep the goat and the cabbage,' so they used to see Joriot whenever there was no one there, under pretence of affection. 'Come to- day, papa, we shall have you all to ourselves, and that will be much nicer!' and all that sort of thing. As for me, dear, I believe that love has second-sight: poor Ninety-three; his heart must have bled. He saw that his daughters were ashamed of him, that if they loved their husbands his visits must make mischief. So he immolated himself. He made the sacrifice because he was a father; he went into voluntary exile. His daughters were satisfied, so he thought that he had done the best thing he could; but it was a family crime, and father and daughters were accomplices. You see this sort of thing everywhere. What could this old Doriot have been but a splash of mud in his daughters' drawing-rooms? He would only have been in the way, and bored other people, besides being bored himself. And this that happened between father and daughters may happen to the prettiest woman in

°°°°Paris and the man she loves the best; if her love grows tiresome, he will go; he will descend to the basest trickery to leave her. It is the same with all love and friendship. Our heart is a treasury; if you pour out all its wealth at once, you are bankrupt. We show no more mercy to the affection that reveals its utmost extent than we do to another kind of prodigal who has not a penny left. Their father had given them all he had. For twenty years he had given his whole heart to them; then, one day, he gave them all his fortune too. The lemon was squeezed; the girls left the rest in the gutter."

°°°°"The world is very base," said the Vicomtesse, plucking at the threads of her shawl. She did not raise her head as she spoke; the words that Mme. de Langeais had meant for her in the course of her story had cut her to the quick.

°°°°"Base? Oh, no," answered the Duchess; "the world goes its own way, that is all. If I speak in this way, it is only to show that I am not duped by it. I think as you do," she said, pressing the Vicomtesse's hand. "The world is a slough; let us try to live on the heights above it."

°°°°She rose to her feet and kissed Mme. de Beauseant on the forehead as she said: "You look very charming to-day, dear. I have never seen such a lovely color in your cheeks before."

°°°°Then she went out with a slight inclination of the head to the cousin.

°°°°"Father Goriot is sublime!" said Eugene to himself, as he remembered how he had watched his neighbor work the silver vessel into a shapeless mass that night.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant did not hear him; she was absorbed in her own thoughts. For several minutes the silence remained unbroken till the law student became almost paralyzed with embarrassment, and was equally afraid to go or stay or speak a word.

°°°°"The world is basely ungrateful and ill-natured," said the Vicomtesse at last. "No sooner does a trouble befall you than a friend is ready to bring the tidings and to probe your heart with the point of a dagger while calling on you to admire the handle. Epigrams and sarcasms already! Ah! I will defend myself!"

°°°°She raised her head like the great lady that she was, and lightnings flashed from her proud eyes.

°°°°"Ah!" she said, as she saw Eugene, "are you there?"

°°°°"Still," he said piteously.

°°°°"Well, then, M. de Rastignac, deal with the world as it deserves. You are determined to succeed? I will help you. You shall sound the depths of corruption in woman; you shall measure the extent of man's pitiful vanity. Deeply as I am versed in such learning, there were pages in the book of life that I had not read. Now I know all. The more cold-blooded your calculations, the further you will go. Strike ruthlessly; you will be feared. Men and women for you must be nothing more than post-horses; take a fresh relay, and leave the last to drop by the roadside; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition. You will be nothing here, you see, unless a woman interests herself in you; and she must be young and wealthy, and a woman of the world. Yet, if you have a heart, lock it carefully away like a treasure; do not let any one suspect it, or you will be lost; you would cease to be the executioner, you would take the victim's place. And if ever you should love, never let your secret escape you! Trust no one until you are very sure of the heart to which you open your heart. Learn to mistrust every one; take every precaution for the sake of the love which does not exist as yet. Listen, Miguel"-- the name slipped from her so naturally that she did not notice her mistake--"there is something still more appalling than the ingratitude of daughters who have cast off their old father and wish that he were dead, and that is a rivalry between two sisters. Restaud comes of a good family, his wife has been received into their circle; she has been presented at court; and her sister, her wealthy sister, Mme. Delphine de Nucingen, the wife of a great capitalist, is consumed with envy, and ready to die of spleen. There is gulf set between the sisters--indeed, they are sisters no longer--the two women who refuse to acknowledge their father do not acknowledge each other. So Mme. de Nucingen would lap up all the mud that lies between the Rue Saint-Lazare and the Rue de Grenelle to gain admittance to my salon. She fancied that she should gain her end through de Marsay; she has made herself de Marsay's slave, and she bores him. De Marsay cares very little about her. If you will introduce her to me, you will be her darling, her Benjamin; she will idolize you. If, after that, you can love her, do so; if not, make her useful. I will ask her to come once or twice to one of my great crushes, but I will never receive her here in the morning. I will bow to her when I see her, and that will be quite sufficient. You have shut the Comtesse de Restaud's door against you by mentioning Father Goriot's name. Yes, my good friend, you may call at her house twenty times, and every time out of the twenty you will find that she is not at home. The servants have their orders, and will not admit you. Very well, then, now let Father Goriot gain the right of entry into her sister's house for you. The beautiful Mme. de Nucingen will give the signal for a battle. As soon as she singles you out, other women will begin to lose their heads about you, and her enemies and rivals and intimate friends will all try to take you from her. There are women who will fall in love with a man because another woman has chosen him; like the city madams, poor things, who copy our millinery, and hope thereby to acquire our manners. You will have a success, and in Paris success is everything; it is the key of power. If the women credit you with wit and talent, the men will follow suit so long as you do not undeceive them yourself. There will be nothing you may not aspire to; you will go everywhere, and you will find out what the world is--an assemblage of fools and knaves. But you must be neither the one nor the other. I am giving you my name like Ariadne's clue of thread to take with you into the labyrinth; make no unworthy use of it," she said, with a queenly glance and curve of her throat; "give it back to me unsullied. And now, go; leave me. We women also have our battles to fight."

°°°°"And if you should ever need some one who would gladly set a match to a train for you----"

°°°°"Well?" she asked.

°°°°He tapped his heart, smiled in answer to his cousin's smile, and went.

°°°°It was five o'clock, and Eugene was hungry; he was afraid lest he should not be in time for dinner, a misgiving which made him feel that it was pleasant to be borne so quickly across Paris. This sensation of physical comfort left his mind free to grapple with the thoughts that assailed him. A mortification usually sends a young man of his age into a furious rage; he shakes his fist at society, and vows vengeance when his belief in himself is shaken. Just then Rastignac was overwhelmed by the words, "You have shut the Countess' door against you."

°°°°"I shall call!" he said to himself, "and if Mme. de Beauseant is right, if I never find her at home--I . . . well, Mme. de Restaud shall meet me in every salon in Paris. I will learn to fence and have some pistol practice, and kill that Maxime of hers!"

°°°°"And money?" cried an inward monitor. "How about money, where is that to come from?" And all at once the wealth displayed in the Countess de Restaud's drawing-room rose before his eyes. That was the luxury which Goriot's daughter had loved too well, the gilding, the ostentatious splendor, the unintelligent luxury of the parvenu, the riotous extravagance of a courtesan. Then the attractive vision suddenly went under an eclipse as he remembered the stately grandeur of the Hotel de Beauseant. As his fancy wandered among these lofty regions in the great world of Paris, innumerable dark thoughts gathered in his heart; his ideas widened, and his conscience grew more elastic. He saw the world as it is; saw how the rich lived beyond the jurisdiction of law and public opinion, and found in success the ultima ratio mundi.

°°°°"Vautrin is right, success is virtue!" he said to himself.

°°°°Arrived in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, he rushed up to his room for ten francs wherewith to satisfy the demands of the cabman, and went in to dinner. He glanced round the squalid room, saw the eighteen poverty-stricken creatures about to feed like cattle in their stalls, and the sight filled him with loathing. The transition was too sudden, and the contrast was so violent that it could not but act as a powerful stimulant; his ambition developed and grew beyond all social bounds. On the one hand, he beheld a vision of social life in its most charming and refined forms, of quick-pulsed youth, of fair, impassioned faces invested with all the charm of poetry, framed in a marvelous setting of luxury or art; and, on the other hand, he saw a sombre picture, the miry verge beyond these faces, in which passion was extinct and nothing was left of the drama but the cords and pulleys and bare mechanism. Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, the words uttered in anger by the forsaken lady, her petulant offer, came to his mind, and poverty was a ready expositor. Rastignac determined to open two parallel trenches so as to insure success; he would be a learned doctor of law and a man of fashion. Clearly he was still a child! Those two lines are asymptotes, and will never meet.

°°°°"You are very dull, my lord Marquis," said Vautrin, with one of the shrewd glances that seem to read the innermost secrets of another mind.

°°°°"I am not in the humor to stand jokes from people who call me 'my lord Marquis,' " answered Eugene. "A marquis here in Paris, if he is not the veriest sham, ought to have a hundred thousand livres a year at least; and a lodger in the Maison Vauquer is not exactly Fortune's favorite."

°°°°Vautrin's glance at Rastignac was half-paternal, half- contemptuous. "Puppy!" it seemed to say; "I should make one mouthful of him!" Then he answered:

°°°°"You are in a bad humor; perhaps your visit to the beautiful Comtesse de Restaud was not a success."

°°°°"She has shut her door against me because I told her that her father dined at our table," cried Rastignac.

°°°°Glances were exchanged all round the room; Father Goriot looked down.

°°°°"You have sent some snuff into my eye," he said to his neighbor, turning a little aside to rub his hand over his face.

°°°°"Any one who molests Father Goriot will have henceforward to reckon with me," said Eugene, looking at the old man's neighbor; "he is worth all the rest of us put together.--I am not speaking of the ladies," he added, turning in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer.

°°°°Eugene's remarks produced a sensation, and his tone silenced the dinner-table. Vautrin alone spoke. "If you are going to champion Father Goriot, and set up for his responsible editor into the bargain, you had need be a crack shot and know how to handle the foils," he said, banteringly.

°°°°"So I intend," said Eugene.

°°°°"Then you are taking the field today?"

°°°°"Perhaps," Rastignac answered. "But I owe no account of myself to any one, especially as I do not try to find out what other people do of a night."

°°°°Vautrin looked askance at Rastignac.

°°°°"If you do not mean to be deceived by the puppets, my boy, you must go behind and see the whole show, and not peep through holes in the curtain. That is enough," he added, seeing that Eugene was about to fly into a passion. "We can have a little talk whenever you like."

°°°°There was a general feeling of gloom and constraint. Father Goriot was so deeply dejected by the student's remark that he did not notice the change in the disposition of his fellow-lodgers, nor know that he had met with a champion capable of putting an end to the persecution.

°°°°"Then, M. Goriot sitting there is the father of a countess," said Mme. Vauquer in a low voice.

°°°°"And of a baroness," answered Rastignac.

°°°°"That is about all he is capable of," said Bianchon to Rastignac; "I have taken a look at his head; there is only one bump--the bump of Paternity; he must be an ETERNAL FATHER."

°°°°Eugene was too intent on his thoughts to laugh at Bianchon's joke. He determined to profit by Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, and was asking himself how he could obtain the necessary money. He grew grave. The wide savannas of the world stretched before his eyes; all things lay before him, nothing was his. Dinner came to an end, the others went, and he was left in the dining-room.

°°°°"So you have seen my daughter?" Goriot spoke tremulously, and the sound of his voice broke in upon Eugene's dreams. The young man took the elder's hand, and looked at him with something like kindness in his eyes.

°°°°"You are a good and noble man," he said. "We will have some talk about your daughters by and by."

°°°°He rose without waiting for Goriot's answer, and went to his room. There he wrote the following letter to his mother:--

°°°°"My Dear Mother,--Can you nourish your child from your breast again? I am in a position to make a rapid fortune, but I want twelve hundred francs--I must have them at all costs. Say nothing about this to my father; perhaps he might make objections, and unless I have the money, I may be led to put an end to myself, and so escape the clutches of despair. I will tell you everything when I see you. I will not begin to try to describe my present situation; it would take volumes to put the whole story clearly and fully. I have not been gambling, my kind mother, I owe no one a penny; but if you would preserve the life that you gave me, you must send me the sum I mention. As a matter of fact, I go to see the Vicomtesse de Beauseant; she is using her influence for me; I am obliged to go into society, and I have not a penny to lay out on clean gloves. I can manage to exist on bread and water, or go without food, if need be, but I cannot do without the tools with which they cultivate the vineyards in this country. I must resolutely make up my mind at once to make my way, or stick in the mire for the rest of my days. I know that all your hopes are set on me, and I want to realize them quickly. Sell some of your old jewelry, my kind mother; I will give you other jewels very soon. I know enough of our affairs at home to know all that such a sacrifice means, and you must not think that I would lightly ask you to make it; I should be a monster if I could. You must think of my entreaty as a cry forced from me by imperative necessity. Our whole future lies in the subsidy with which I must begin my first campaign, for life in Paris is one continual battle. If you cannot otherwise procure the whole of the money, and are forced to sell our aunt's lace, tell her that I will send her some still handsomer," and so forth.

°°°°He wrote to ask each of his sisters for their savings--would they despoil themselves for him, and keep the sacrifice a secret from the family? To his request he knew that they would not fail to respond gladly, and he added to it an appeal to their delicacy by touching the chord of honor that vibrates so loudly in young and high-strung natures.

°°°°Yet when he had written the letters, he could not help feeling misgivings in spite of his youthful ambition; his heart beat fast, and he trembled. He knew the spotless nobleness of the lives buried away in the lonely manor house; he knew what trouble and what joy his request would cause his sisters, and how happy they would be as they talked at the bottom of the orchard of that dear brother of theirs in Paris. Visions rose before his eyes; a sudden strong light revealed his sisters secretly counting over their little store, devising some girlish stratagem by which the money could be sent to him incognito, essaying, for the first time in their lives, a piece of deceit that reached the sublime in its unselfishness.

°°°°"A sister's heart is a diamond for purity, a deep sea of tenderness!" he said to himself. He felt ashamed of those letters.

°°°°What power there must be in the petitions put up by such hearts; how pure the fervor that bears their souls to Heaven in prayer! What exquisite joy they would find in self-sacrifice! What a pang for his mother's heart if she could not send him all that he asked for! And this noble affection, these sacrifices made at such terrible cost, were to serve as the ladder by which he meant to climb to Delphine de Nucingen. A few tears, like the last grains of incense flung upon the sacred alter fire of the hearth, fell from his eyes. He walked up and down, and despair mingled with his emotion. Father Goriot saw him through the half-open door.

°°°°"What is the matter, sir?" he asked from the threshold.

°°°°"Ah! my good neighbor, I am as much a son and brother as you are a father. You do well to fear for the Comtesse Anastasie; there is one M. Maxime de Trailles, who will be her ruin."

°°°°Father Goriot withdrew, stammering some words, but Eugene failed to catch their meaning.

°°°°The next morning Rastignac went out to post his letters. Up to the last moment he wavered and doubted, but he ended by flinging them into the box. "I shall succeed!" he said to himself. So says the gambler; so says the great captain; but the three words that have been the salvation of some few, have been the ruin of many more.

°°°°A few days after this Eugene called at Mme. de Restaud's house; she was not at home. Three times he tried the experiment, and three times he found her doors closed against him, though he was careful to choose an hour when M. de Trailles was not there. The Vicomtesse was right.

°°°°The student studied no longer. He put in an appearance at lectures simply to answer to his name, and after thus attesting his presence, departed forthwith. He had been through a reasoning process familiar to most students. He had seen the advisability of deferring his studies to the last moment before going up for his examinations; he made up his mind to cram his second and third years' work into the third year, when he meant to begin to work in earnest, and to complete his studies in law with one great effort. In the meantime he had fifteen months in which to navigate the ocean of Paris, to spread the nets and set the lines that would bring him a protectress and a fortune. Twice during that week he saw Mme. de Beauseant; he did not go to her house until he had seen the Marquis d'Ajuda drive away.

°°°°Victory for yet a few more days was with the great lady, the most poetic figure in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; and the marriage of the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto with Mlle. de Rochefide was postponed. The dread of losing her happiness filled those days with a fever of joy unknown before, but the end was only so much the nearer. The Marquis d'Ajuda and the Rochefides agreed that this quarrel and reconciliation was a very fortunate thing; Mme. de Beauseant (so they hoped) would gradually become reconciled to the idea of the marriage, and in the end would be brought to sacrifice d'Ajuda's morning visits to the exigencies of a man's career, exigencies which she must have foreseen. In spite of the most solemn promises, daily renewed, M. d'Ajuda was playing a part, and the Vicomtesse was eager to be deceived. "Instead of taking a leap heroically from the window, she is falling headlong down the staircase," said her most intimate friend, the Duchesse de Langeais. Yet this after-glow of happiness lasted long enough for the Vicomtesse to be of service to her young cousin. She had a half-superstitious affection for him. Eugene had shown her sympathy and devotion at a crisis when a woman sees no pity, no real comfort in any eyes; when if a man is ready with soothing flatteries, it is because he has an interested motive.

°°°°Rastignac made up his mind that he must learn the whole of Goriot's previous history; he would come to his bearings before attempting to board the Maison de Nucingen. The results of his inquiries may be given briefly as follows:--

°°°°In the days before the Revolution, Jean-Joachim Goriot was simply a workman in the employ of a vermicelli maker. He was a skilful, thrifty workman, sufficiently enterprising to buy his master's business when the latter fell a chance victim to the disturbances of 1789. Goriot established himself in the Rue de la Jussienne, close to the Corn Exchange. His plain good sense led him to accept the position of President of the Section, so as to secure for his business the protection of those in power at that dangerous epoch. This prudent step had led to success; the foundations of his fortune were laid in the time of the Scarcity (real or artificial), when the price of grain of all kinds rose enormously in Paris. People used to fight for bread at the bakers' doors; while other persons went to the grocers' shops and bought Italian paste foods without brawling over it. It was during this year that Goriot made the money, which, at a later time, was to give him all the advantage of the great capitalist over the small buyer; he had, moreover, the usual luck of average ability; his mediocrity was the salvation of him. He excited no one's envy, it was not even suspected that he was rich till the peril of being rich was over, and all his intelligence was concentrated, not on political, but on commercial speculations. Goriot was an authority second to none on all questions relating to corn, flour, and "middlings"; and the production, storage, and quality of grain. He could estimate the yield of the harvest, and foresee market prices; he bought his cereals in Sicily, and imported Russian wheat. Any one who had heard him hold forth on the regulations that control the importation and exportation of grain, who had seen his grasp of the subject, his clear insight into the principles involved, his appreciation of weak points in the way that the system worked, would have thought that here was the stuff of which a minister is made. Patient, active, and persevering, energetic and prompt in action, he surveyed his business horizon with an eagle eye. Nothing there took him by surprise; he foresaw all things, knew all that was happening, and kept his own counsel; he was a diplomatist in his quick comprehension of a situation; and in the routine of business he was as patient and plodding as a soldier on the march. But beyond this business horizon he could not see. He used to spend his hours of leisure on the threshold of his shop, leaning against the framework of the door. Take him from his dark little counting-house, and he became once more the rough, slow-witted workman, a man who cannot understand a piece of reasoning, who is indifferent to all intellectual pleasures, and falls asleep at the play, a Parisian Dolibom in short, against whose stupidity other minds are powerless.

°°°°Natures of this kind are nearly all alike; in almost all of them you will find some hidden depth of sublime affection. Two all- absorbing affections filled the vermicelli maker's heart to the exclusion of every other feeling; into them he seemed to put all the forces of his nature, as he put the whole power of his brain into the corn trade. He had regarded his wife, the only daughter of a rich farmer of La Brie, with a devout admiration; his love for her had been boundless. Goriot had felt the charm of a lovely and sensitive nature, which, in its delicate strength, was the very opposite of his own. Is there any instinct more deeply implanted in the heart of man than the pride of protection, a protection which is constantly exerted for a fragile and defenceless creature? Join love thereto, the warmth of gratitude that all generous souls feel for the source of their pleasures, and you have the explanation of many strange incongruities in human nature.

°°°°After seven years of unclouded happiness, Goriot lost his wife. It was very unfortunate for him. She was beginning to gain an ascendency over him in other ways; possibly she might have brought that barren soil under cultivation, she might have widened his ideas and given other directions to his thoughts. But when she was dead, the instinct of fatherhood developed in him till it almost became a mania. All the affection balked by death seemed to turn to his daughters, and he found full satisfaction for his heart in loving them. More or less brilliant proposals were made to him from time to time; wealthy merchants or farmers with daughters vied with each other in offering inducements to him to marry again; but he determined to remain a widower. His father-in-law, the only man for whom he felt a decided friendship, gave out that Goriot had made a vow to be faithful to his wife's memory. The frequenters of the Corn Exchange, who could not comprehend this sublime piece of folly, joked about it among themselves, and found a ridiculous nickname for him. One of them ventured (after a glass over a bargain) to call him by it, and a blow from the vermicelli maker's fist sent him headlong into a gutter in the Rue Oblin. He could think of nothing else when his children were concerned; his love for them made him fidgety and anxious; and this was so well known, that one day a competitor, who wished to get rid of him to secure the field to himself, told Goriot that Delphine had just been knocked down by a cab. The vermicelli maker turned ghastly pale, left the Exchange at once, and did not return for several days afterwards; he was ill in consequence of the shock and the subsequent relief on discovering that it was a false alarm. This time, however, the offender did not escape with a bruised shoulder; at a critical moment in the man's affairs, Goriot drove him into bankruptcy, and forced him to disappear from the Corn Exchange.

°°°°As might have been expected, the two girls were spoiled. With an income of sixty thousand francs, Goriot scarcely spent twelve hundred on himself, and found all his happiness in satisfying the whims of the two girls. The best masters were engaged, that Anastasie and Delphine might be endowed with all the accomplishments which distinguish a good education. They had a chaperon--luckily for them, she was a woman who had good sense and good taste;--they learned to ride; they had a carriage for their use; they lived as the mistress of a rich old lord might live; they had only to express a wish, their father would hasten to give them their most extravagant desires, and asked nothing of them in return but a kiss. Goriot had raised the two girls to the level of the angels; and, quite naturally, he himself was left beneath them. Poor man! he loved them even for the pain that they gave him.

°°°°When the girls were old enough to be married, they were left free to choose for themselves. Each had half her father's fortune as her dowry; and when the Comte de Restaud came to woo Anastasie for her beauty, her social aspirations led her to leave her father's house for a more exalted sphere. Delphine wished for money; she married Nucingen, a banker of German extraction, who became a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire. Goriot remained a vermicelli maker as before. His daughters and his sons-in-law began to demur; they did not like to see him still engaged in trade, though his whole life was bound up with his business. For five years he stood out against their entreaties, then he yielded, and consented to retire on the amount realized by the sale of his business and the savings of the last few years. It was this capital that Mme. Vauquer, in the early days of his residence with her, had calculated would bring in eight or ten thousand livres in a year. He had taken refuge in her lodging- house, driven there by despair when he knew that his daughters were compelled by their husbands not only to refuse to receive him as an inmate in their houses, but even to see him no more except in private.

°°°°This was all the information which Rastignac gained from a M. Muret who had purchased Goriot's business, information which confirmed the Duchesse de Langeais' suppositions, and herewith the preliminary explanation of this obscure but terrible Parisian tragedy comes to an end.

°°°°Towards the end of the first week in December Rastignac received two letters--one from his mother, and one from his eldest sister. His heart beat fast, half with happiness, half with fear, at the sight of the familiar handwriting. Those two little scraps of paper contained life or death for his hopes. But while he felt a shiver of dread as he remembered their dire poverty at home, he knew their love for him so well that he could not help fearing that he was draining their very life-blood. His mother's letter ran as follows:--

°°°°"My Dear Child,--I am sending you the money that you asked for. Make a good use of it. Even to save your life I could not raise so large a sum a second time without your father's knowledge, and there would be trouble about it. We should be obliged to mortgage the land. It is impossible to judge of the merits of schemes of which I am ignorant; but what sort of schemes can they be, that you should fear to tell me about them? Volumes of explanation would not have been needed; we mothers can understand at a word, and that word would have spared me the anguish of uncertainty. I do not know how to hide the painful impression that your letter has made upon me, my dear son. What can you have felt when you were moved to send this chill of dread through my heart? It must have been very painful to you to write the letter that gave me so much pain as I read it. To what courses are you committed? You are going to appear to be something that you are not, and your whole life and success depends upon this? You are about to see a society into which you cannot enter without rushing into expense that you cannot afford, without losing precious time that is needed for your studies. Ah! my dear Eugene, believe your mother, crooked ways cannot lead to great ends. Patience and endurance are the two qualities most needed in your position. I am not scolding you; I do not want any tinge of bitterness to spoil our offering. I am only talking like a mother whose trust in you is as great as her foresight for you. You know the steps that you must take, and I, for my part, know the purity of heart, and how good your intentions are; so I can say to you without a doubt, 'Go forward, beloved!' If I tremble, it is because I am a mother, but my prayers and blessings will be with you at every step. Be very careful, dear boy. You must have a man's prudence, for it lies with you to shape the destinies of five others who are dear to you, and must look to you. Yes, our fortunes depend upon you, and your success is ours. We all pray to God to be with you in all that you do. Your aunt Marcillac has been most generous beyond words in this matter; she saw at once how it was, even down to your gloves. 'But I have a weakness for the eldest!' she said gaily. You must love your aunt very much, dear Eugene. I shall wait till you have succeeded before telling you all that she has done for you, or her money would burn your fingers. You, who are young, do not know what it is to part with something that is a piece of your past! But what would we not sacrifice for your sakes? Your aunt says that I am to send you a kiss on the forehead from her, and that kiss is to bring you luck again and again, she says. She would have written you herself, the dear kind-hearted woman, but she is troubled with the gout in her fingers just now. Your father is very well. The vintage of 1819 has turned out better than we expected. Good-bye, dear boy; I will say nothing about your sisters, because Laure is writing to you, and I must let her have the pleasure of giving you all the home news. Heaven send that you may succeed! Oh! yes, dear Eugene, you must succeed. I have come, through you, to a knowledge of a pain so sharp that I do not think I could endure it a second time. I have come to know what it is to be poor, and to long for money for my children's sake. There, good-bye! Do not leave us for long without news of you; and here, at the last, take a kiss from your mother."

°°°°By the time Eugene had finished the letter he was in tears. He thought of Father Goriot crushing his silver keepsake into a shapeless mass before he sold it to meet his daughter's bill of exchange.

°°°°"Your mother has broken up her jewels for you," he said to himself; "your aunt shed tears over those relics of hers before she sold them for your sake. What right have you to heap execrations on Anastasie? You have followed her example; you have selfishly sacrificed others to your own future, and she sacrifices her father to her lover; and of you two, which is the worse?"

°°°°He was ready to renounce his attempts; he could not bear to take that money. The fires of remorse burned in his heart, and gave him intolerable pain, the generous secret remorse which men seldom take into account when they sit in judgment upon their fellow-men; but perhaps the angels in heaven, beholding it, pardon the criminal whom our justice condemns. Rastignac opened his sister's letter; its simplicity and kindness revived his heart.

°°°°"Your letter came just at the right time, dear brother. Agathe and I had thought of so many different ways of spending our money, that we did not know what to buy with it; and now you have come in, and, like the servant who upset all the watches that belonged to the King of Spain, you have restored harmony; for, really and truly, we did not know which of all the things we wanted we wanted most, and we were always quarreling about it, never thinking, dear Eugene, of a way of spending our money which would satisfy us completely. Agathe jumped for you. Indeed, we have been like two mad things all day, 'to such a prodigious degree' (as aunt would say), that mother said, with her severe expression, 'Whatever can be the matter with you, mesdemoiselles?' I think if we had been scolded a little, we should have been still better pleased. A woman ought to be very glad to suffer for one she loves! I, however, in my inmost soul, was doleful and cross in the midst of all my joy. I shall make a bad wife, I am afraid, I am too fond of spending. I had bought two sashes and a nice little stiletto for piercing eyelet-holes in my stays, trifles that I really did not want, so that I have less than that slow-coach Agathe, who is so economical, and hoards her money like a magpie. She had two hundred francs! And I have only one hundred and fifty! I am nicely punished; I could throw my sash down the well; it will be painful to me to wear it now. Poor dear, I have robbed you. And Agathe was so nice about it. She said, 'Let us send the three hundred and fifty francs in our two names!' But I could not help telling you everything just as it happened.

°°°°"Do you know how we managed to keep your commandments? We took our glittering hoard, we went out for a walk, and when once fairly on the highway we ran all the way to Ruffec, where we handed over the coin, without more ado, to M. Grimbert of the Messageries Royales. We came back again like swallows on the wing. 'Don't you think that happiness has made us lighter?' Agathe said. We said all sorts of things, which I shall not tell you, Monsieur le Parisien, because they were all about you. Oh, we love you dearly, dear brother; it was all summed up in those few words. As for keeping the secret, little masqueraders like us are capable of anything (according to our aunt), even of holding our tongues. Our mother has been on a mysterious journey to Angouleme, and the aunt went with her, not without solemn councils, from which we were shut out, and M. le Baron likewise. They are silent as to the weighty political considerations that prompted their mission, and conjectures are rife in the State of Rastignac. The Infantas are embroidering a muslin robe with open- work sprigs for her Majesty the Queen; the work progresses in the most profound secrecy. There be but two more breadths to finish. A decree has gone forth that no wall shall be built on the side of Verteuil, but that a hedge shall be planted instead thereof. Our subjects may sustain some disappointment of fruit and espaliers, but strangers will enjoy a fair prospect. Should the heir-presumptive lack pocket-handkerchiefs, be it known unto him that the dowager Lady of Marcillac, exploring the recesses of her drawers and boxes (known respectively as Pompeii and Herculaneum), having brought to light a fair piece of cambric whereof she wotted not, the Princesses Agathe and Laure place at their brother's disposal their thread, their needles, and hands somewhat of the reddest. The two young Princes, Don Henri and Don Gabriel, retain their fatal habits of stuffing themselves with grape-jelly, of teasing their sisters, of taking their pleasure by going a-bird-nesting, and of cutting switches for themselves from the osier-beds, maugre the laws of the realm. Moreover, they list not to learn naught, wherefore the Papal Nuncio (called of the commonalty, M. le Cure) threateneth them with excommunication, since that they neglect the sacred canons of grammatical construction for the construction of other canon, deadly engines made of the stems of elder.

°°°°"Farewell, dear brother, never did letter carry so many wishes for your success, so much love fully satisfied. You will have a great deal to tell us when you come home! You will tell me everything, won't you? I am the oldest. From something the aunt let fall, we think you must have had some success.

°°°°"Something was said of a lady, but nothing more was said . . .

°°°°"Of course not, in our family! Oh, by-the-by, Eugene, would you rather that we made that piece of cambric into shirts for you instead of pocket-handkerchiefs? If you want some really nice shirts at once, we ought to lose no time in beginning upon them; and if the fashion is different now in Paris, send us one for a pattern; we want more particularly to know about the cuffs. Good- bye! Good-bye! Take my kiss on the left side of your forehead, on the temple that belongs to me, and to no one else in the world. I am leaving the other side of the sheet for Agathe, who has solemnly promised not to read a word that I have written; but, all the same, I mean to sit by her side while she writes, so as to be quite sure that she keeps her word.--Your loving sister, "Laure de Rastignac."

°°°°"Yes!" said Eugene to himself. "Yes! Success at all costs now! Riches could not repay such devotion as this. I wish I could give them every sort of happiness! Fifteen hundred and fifty francs," he went on after a pause. "Every shot must go to the mark! Laure is right. Trust a woman! I have only calico shirts. Where some one else's welfare is concerned, a young girl becomes as ingenious as a thief. Guileless where she herself is in question, and full of foresight for me,--she is like a heavenly angel forgiving the strange incomprehensible sins of earth."

°°°°The world lay before him. His tailor had been summoned and sounded, and had finally surrendered. When Rastignac met M. de Trailles, he had seen at once how great a part the tailor plays in a young man's career; a tailor is either a deadly enemy or a staunch friend, with an invoice for a bond of friendship; between these two extremes there is, alack! no middle term. In this representative of his craft Eugene discovered a man who understood that his was a sort of paternal function for young men at their entrance into life, who regarded himself as a stepping- stone between a young man's present and future. And Rastignac in gratitude made the man's fortune by an epigram of a kind in which he excelled at a later period of his life.

°°°°"I have twice known a pair of trousers turned out by him make a match of twenty thousand livres a year!"

°°°°Fifteen hundred francs, and as many suits of clothes as he chose to order! At that moment the poor child of the South felt no more doubts of any kind. The young man went down to breakfast with the indefinable air which the consciousness of the possession of money gives to youth. No sooner are the coins slipped into a student's pocket than his wealth, in imagination at least, is piled into a fantastic column, which affords him a moral support. He begins to hold up his head as he walks; he is conscious that he has a means of bringing his powers to bear on a given point; he looks you straight in the face; his gestures are quick and decided; only yesterday he was diffident and shy, any one might have pushed him aside; to-morrow, he will take the wall of a prime minister. A miracle has been wrought in him. Nothing is beyond the reach of his ambition, and his ambition soars at random; he is light-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic; in short, the fledgling bird has discovered that he has wings. A poor student snatches at every chance pleasure much as a dog runs all sorts of risks to steal a bone, cracking it and sucking the marrow as he flies from pursuit; but a young man who can rattle a few runaway gold coins in his pocket can take his pleasure deliberately, can taste the whole of the sweets of secure possession; he soars far above earth; he has forgotten what the word POVERTY means; all Paris is his. Those are days when the whole world shines radiant with light, when everything glows and sparkles before the eyes of youth, days that bring joyous energy that is never brought into harness, days of debts and of painful fears that go hand in hand with every delight. Those who do not know the left bank of the Seine between the Rue Saint-Jacques and the Rue des Saints-Peres know nothing of life.

°°°°"Ah! if the women of Paris but knew," said Rastignac, as he devoured Mme. Vauquer's stewed pears (at five for a penny), "they would come here in search of a lover."

°°°°Just then a porter from the Messageries Royales appeared at the door of the room; they had previously heard the bell ring as the wicket opened to admit him. The man asked for M. Eugene de Rastignac, holding out two bags for him to take, and a form of receipt for his signature. Vautrin's keen glance cut Eugene like a lash.

°°°°"Now you will be able to pay for those fencing lessons and go to the shooting gallery," he said.

°°°°"Your ship has come in," said Mme. Vauquer, eyeing the bags.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau did not dare to look at the money, for fear her eyes should betray her cupidity.

°°°°"You have a kind mother," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"You have a kind mother, sir," echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, mamma has been drained dry," said Vautrin, "and now you can have your fling, go into society, and fish for heiresses, and dance with countesses who have peach blossom in their hair. But take my advice, young man, and don't neglect your pistol practice."

°°°°Vautrin struck an attitude, as if he were facing an antagonist. Rastignac, meaning to give the porter a tip, felt in his pockets and found nothing. Vautrin flung down a franc piece on the table.

°°°°"Your credit is good," he remarked, eyeing the student, and Rastignac was forced to thank him, though, since the sharp encounter of wits at dinner that day, after Eugene came in from calling on Mme. de Beauseant, he had made up his mind that Vautrin was insufferable. For a week, in fact, they had both kept silence in each other's presence, and watched each other. The student tried in vain to account to himself for this attitude.

°°°°An idea, of course, gains in force by the energy with which it is expressed; it strikes where the brain sends it, by a law as mathematically exact as the law that determines the course of a shell from a mortar. The amount of impression it makes is not to be determined so exactly. Sometimes, in an impressible nature, the idea works havoc, but there are, no less, natures so robustly protected, that this sort of projectile falls flat and harmless on skulls of triple brass, as cannon-shot against solid masonry; then there are flaccid and spongy-fibred natures into which ideas from without sink like spent bullets into the earthworks of a redoubt. Rastignac's head was something of the powder-magazine order; the least shock sufficed to bring about an explosion. He was too quick, too young, not to be readily accessible to ideas; and open to that subtle influence of thought and feeling in others which causes so many strange phenomena that make an impression upon us of which we are all unconscious at the time. Nothing escaped his mental vision; he was lynx-eyed; in him the mental powers of perception, which seem like duplicates of the senses, had the mysterious power of swift projection that astonishes us in intellects of a high order--slingers who are quick to detect the weak spot in any armor.

°°°°In the past month Eugene's good qualities and defects had rapidly developed with his character. Intercourse with the world and the endeavor to satisfy his growing desires had brought out his defects. But Rastignac came from the South side of the Loire, and had the good qualities of his countrymen. He had the impetuous courage of the South, that rushes to the attack of a difficulty, as well as the southern impatience of delay or suspense. These traits are held to be defects in the North; they made the fortune of Murat, but they likewise cut short his career. The moral would appear to be that when the dash and boldness of the South side of the Loire meets, in a southern temperament, with the guile of the North, the character is complete, and such a man will gain (and keep) the crown of Sweden.

°°°°Rastignac, therefore, could not stand the fire from Vautrin's batteries for long without discovering whether this was a friend or a foe. He felt as if this strange being was reading his inmost soul, and dissecting his feelings, while Vautrin himself was so close and secretive that he seemed to have something of the profound and unmoved serenity of a sphinx, seeing and hearing all things and saying nothing. Eugene, conscious of that money in his pocket, grew rebellious.

°°°°"Be so good as to wait a moment," he said to Vautrin, as the latter rose, after slowly emptying his coffee-cup, sip by sip.

°°°°"What for?" inquired the older man, as he put on his large- brimmed hat and took up the sword-cane that he was wont to twirl like a man who will face three or four footpads without flinching.

°°°°"I will repay you in a minute," returned Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he spoke, counted out a hundred and forty francs, and pushed them towards Mme. Vauquer. "Short reckonings make good friends" he added, turning to the widow; "that clears our accounts till the end of the year. Can you give me change for a five-franc piece?"

°°°°"Good friends make short reckonings," echoed Poiret, with a glance at Vautrin.

°°°°"Here is your franc," said Rastignac, holding out the coin to the sphinx in the black wig.

°°°°"Any one might think that you were afraid to owe me a trifle," exclaimed this latter, with a searching glance that seemed to read the young man's inmost thoughts; there was a satirical and cynical smile on Vautrin's face such as Eugene had seen scores of times already; every time he saw it, it exasperated him almost beyond endurance.

°°°°"Well . . . so I am," he answered. He held both the bags in his hand, and had risen to go up to his room.

°°°°Vautrin made as if he were going out through the sitting-room, and the student turned to go through the second door that opened into the square lobby at the foot of the staircase.

°°°°"Do you know, Monsieur le Marquis de Rastignacorama, that what you were saying just now was not exactly polite?" Vautrin remarked, as he rattled his sword-cane across the panels of the sitting-room door, and came up to the student.

°°°°Rastignac looked coolly at Vautrin, drew him to the foot of the staircase, and shut the dining-room door. They were standing in the little square lobby between the kitchen and the dining-room; the place was lighted by an iron-barred fanlight above a door that gave access into the garden. Sylvie came out of her kitchen, and Eugene chose that moment to say:

°°°°MONSIEUR Vautrin, I am not a marquis, and my name is not Rastignacorama."

°°°°"They will fight," said Mlle. Michonneau, in an indifferent tone.

°°°°"Fight!" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Not they," replied Mme. Vauquer, lovingly fingering her pile of coins.

°°°°"But there they are under the lime-trees," cried Mlle. Victorine, who had risen so that she might see out into the garden. "Poor young man! he was in the right, after all."

°°°°"We must go upstairs, my pet," said Mme. Couture; "it is no business of ours."

°°°°At the door, however, Mme. Couture and Victorine found their progress barred by the portly form of Sylvie the cook.

°°°°"What ever can have happened?" she said. "M. Vautrin said to M. Eugene, 'Let us have an explanation!' then he took him by the arm, and there they are, out among the artichokes."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking. "Mamma Vauquer," he said smiling, "don't frighten yourself at all. I am only going to try my pistols under the lime-trees."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur," cried Victorine, clasping her hands as she spoke, "why do you want to kill M. Eugene?"

°°°°Vautrin stepped back a pace or two, and gazed at Victorine.

°°°°"Oh! this is something fresh!" he exclaimed in a bantering tone, that brought the color into the poor girl's face. "That young fellow yonder is very nice, isn't he?" he went on. "You have given me a notion, my pretty child; I will make you both happy."

°°°°Mme. Couture laid her hand on the arm of her ward, and drew the girl away, as she said in her ear:

°°°°"Why, Victorine, I cannot imagine what has come over you this morning."

°°°°"I don't want any shots fired in my garden," said Mme. Vauquer. "You will frighten the neighborhood and bring the police up here all in a moment."

°°°°"Come, keep cool, Mamma Vauquer," answered Vautrin. "There, there; it's all right; we will go to the shooting-gallery."

°°°°He went back to Rastignac, laying his hand familiarly on the young man's arm.

°°°°"When I have given you ocular demonstration of the fact that I can put a bullet through the ace on a card five times running at thirty-five paces," he said, "that won't take away your appetite, I suppose? You look to me to be inclined to be a trifle quarrelsome this morning, and as if you would rush on your death like a blockhead."

°°°°"Do you draw back?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Don't try to raise my temperature," answered Vautrin, "it is not cold this morning. Let us go and sit over there," he added, pointing to the green-painted garden seats; "no one can overhear us. I want a little talk with you. You are not a bad sort of youngster, and I have no quarrel with you. I like you, take Trump--(confound it!)--take Vautrin's word for it. What makes me like you? I will tell you by-and-by. Meantime, I can tell you that I know you as well as if I had made you myself, as I will prove to you in a minute. Put down your bags," he continued, pointing to the round table.

°°°°Rastignac deposited his money on the table, and sat down. He was consumed with curiosity, which the sudden change in the manner of the man before him had excited to the highest pitch. Here was a strange being who, a moment ago, had talked of killing him, and now posed as his protector.

°°°°"You would like to know who I really am, what I was, and what I do now," Vautrin went on. "You want to know too much, youngster. Come! come! keep cool! You will hear more astonishing things than that. I have had my misfortunes. Just hear me out first, and you shall have your turn afterwards. Here is my past in three words. Who am I? Vautrin. What do I do? Just what I please. Let us change the subject. You want to know my character. I am good- natured to those who do me a good turn, or to those whose hearts speak to mine. These last may do anything they like with me; they may bruise my shins, and I shall not tell them to 'mind what they are about'; but, nom d'une pipe, the devil himself is not an uglier customer than I can be if people annoy me, or if I don't happen to take to them; and you may just as well know at once that I think no more of killing a man than of that," and he spat before him as he spoke. "Only when it is absolutely necessary to do so, I do my best to kill him properly. I am what you call an artist. I have read Benvenuto Cellini's Memoirs, such as you see me; and, what is more, in Italian: A fine-spirited fellow he was! From him I learned to follow the example set us by Providence, who strikes us down at random, and to admire the beautiful whenever and wherever it is found. And, setting other questions aside, is it not a glorious part to play, when you pit yourself against mankind, and the luck is on your side? I have thought a good deal about the constitution of your present social Dis- order. A duel is downright childish, my boy! utter nonsense and folly! When one of two living men must be got out of the way, none but an idiot would leave chance to decide which it is to be; and in a duel it is a toss-up--heads or tails--and there you are! Now I, for instance, can hit the ace in the middle of a card five times running, send one bullet after another through the same hole, and at thirty-five paces, moreover! With that little accomplishment you might think yourself certain of killing your man, mightn't you. Well, I have fired, at twenty paces, and missed, and the rogue who had never handled a pistol in his life-- look here!"--(he unbuttoned his waistcoat and exposed his chest, covered, like a bear's back, with a shaggy fell; the student gave a startled shudder)--"he was a raw lad, but he made his mark on me," the extraordinary man went on, drawing Rastignac's fingers over a deep scar on his breast. But that happened when I myself was a mere boy; I was one-and-twenty then (your age), and I had some beliefs left--in a woman's love, and in a pack of rubbish that you will be over head and ears in directly. You and I were to have fought just now, weren't we? You might have killed me. Suppose that I were put under the earth, where would you be? You would have to clear out of this, go to Switzerland, draw on papa's purse--and he has none too much in it as it is. I mean to open your eyes to your real position, that is what I am going to do: but I shall do it from the point of view of a man who, after studying the world very closely, sees that there are but two alternatives--stupid obedience or revolt. I obey nobody; is that clear? Now, do you know how much you will want at the pace you are going? A million; and promptly, too, or that little head of ours will be swaying to and fro in the drag-nets at Saint-Cloud, while we are gone to find out whether or no there is a Supreme Being. I will put you in the way of that million."

°°°°He stopped for a moment and looked at Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! you do not look so sourly at papa Vautrin now! At the mention of the million you look like a young girl when somebody has said, 'I will come for you this evening!' and she betakes herself to her toilette as a cat licks its whiskers over a saucer of milk. All right. Come, now, let us go into the question, young man; all between ourselves, you know. We have a papa and mamma down yonder, a great-aunt, two sisters (aged eighteen and seventeen), two young brothers (one fifteen, and the other ten), that is about the roll-call of the crew. The aunt brings up the two sisters; the cure comes and teaches the boys Latin. Boiled chestnuts are oftener on the table than white bread. Papa makes a suit of clothes last a long while; if mamma has a different dress winter and summer, it is about as much as she has; the sisters manage as best they can. I know all about it; I have lived in the south.

°°°°"That is how things are at home. They send you twelve hundred francs a year, and the whole property only brings in three thousand francs all told. We have a cook and a manservant; papa is a baron, and we must keep up appearances. Then we have our ambitions; we are connected with the Beauseants, and we go afoot through the streets; we want to be rich, and we have not a penny; we eat Mme. Vauquer's messes, and we like grand dinners in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; we sleep on a truckle-bed, and dream of a mansion! I do not blame you for wanting these things. What sort of men do the women run after? Men of ambition. Men of ambition have stronger frames, their blood is richer in iron, their hearts are warmer than those of ordinary men. Women feel that when their power is greatest, they look their best, and that those are their happiest hours; they like power in men, and prefer the strongest even if it is a power that may be their own destruction. I am going to make an inventory of your desires in order to put the question at issue before you. Here it is:--

°°°°"We are as hungry as a wolf, and those newly-cut teeth of ours are sharp; what are we to do to keep the pot boiling? In the first place, we have the Code to browse upon; it is not amusing, and we are none the wiser for it, but that cannot be helped. So far so good. We mean to make an advocate of ourselves with a prospect of one day being made President of a Court of Assize, when we shall send poor devils, our betters, to the galleys with a T.F.* [*Travaux forces.] on their shoulders, so that the rich may be convinced that they can sleep in peace. There is no fun in that; and you are a long while coming to it; for, to begin with, there are two years of nauseous drudgery in Paris, we see all the lollipops that we long for out of our reach. It is tiresome to want things and never to have them. If you were a pallid creature of the mollusk order, you would have nothing to fear, but it is different when you have the hot blood of a lion and are ready to get into a score of scrapes every day of your life. This is the ghastliest form of torture known in this inferno of God's making, and you will give in to it. Or suppose that you are a good boy, drink nothing stronger than milk, and bemoan your hard lot; you, with your generous nature, will endure hardships that would drive a dog mad, and make a start, after long waiting, as deputy to some rascal or other in a hole of a place where the Government will fling you a thousand francs a year like the scraps that are thrown to the butcher's dog. Bark at thieves, plead the cause of the rich, send men of heart to the guillotine, that is your work! Many thanks! If you have no influence, you may rot in your provincial tribunal. At thirty you will be a Justice with twelve hundred francs a year (if you have not flung off the gown for good before then). By the time you are forty you may look to marry a miller's daughter, an heiress with some six thousand livres a year. Much obliged! If you have influence, you may possibly be a Public Prosecutor by the time you are thirty; with a salary of a thousand crowns, you could look to marry the mayor's daughter. Some petty piece of political trickery, such as mistaking Villele for Manuel in a bulletin (the names rhyme, and that quiets your conscience), and you will probably be a Procureur General by the time you are forty, with a chance of becoming a deputy. Please to observe, my dear boy, that our conscience will have been a little damaged in the process, and that we shall endure twenty years of drudgery and hidden poverty, and that our sisters are wearing Dian's livery. I have the honor to call your attention to another fact: to wit, that there are but twenty Procureurs Generaux at a time in all France, while there are some twenty thousand of you young men who aspire to that elevated position; that there are some mountebanks among you who would sell their family to screw their fortunes a peg higher. If this sort of thing sickens you, try another course. The Baron de Rastignac thinks of becoming an advocate, does he? There's a nice prospect for you! Ten years of drudgery straight away. You are obliged to live at the rate of a thousand francs a month; you must have a library of law books, live in chambers, go into society, go down on your knees to ask a solicitor for briefs, lick the dust off the floor of the Palais de Justice. If this kind of business led to anything, I should not say no; but just give me the names of five advocates here in Paris who by the time that they are fifty are making fifty thousand francs a year! Bah! I would sooner turn pirate on the high seas than have my soul shrivel up inside me like that. How will you find the capital? There is but one way, marry a woman who has money. There is no fun in it. Have you a mind to marry? You hang a stone around your neck; for if you marry for money, what becomes of our exalted notions of honor and so forth? You might as well fly in the face of social conventions at once. Is it nothing to crawl like a serpent before your wife, to lick her mother's feet, to descend to dirty actions that would sicken swine--faugh!--never mind if you at least make your fortune. But you will be as doleful as a dripstone if you marry for money. It is better to wrestle with men than to wrangle at home with your wife. You are at the crossway of the roads of life, my boy; choose your way.

°°°°"But you have chosen already. You have gone to see your cousin of Beauseant, and you have had an inkling of luxury; you have been to Mme. de Restaud's house, and in Father Goriot's daughter you have seen a glimpse of the Parisienne for the first time. That day you came back with a word written on your forehead. I knew it, I could read it--'SUCCESS!' Yes, success at any price. 'Bravo,' said I to myself, 'here is the sort of fellow for me.' You wanted money. Where was it all to come from? You have drained your sisters' little hoard (all brothers sponge more or less on their sisters). Those fifteen hundred francs of yours (got together, God knows how! in a country where there are more chestnuts than five-franc pieces) will slip away like soldiers after pillage. And, then, what will you do? Shall you begin to work? Work, or what you understand by work at this moment, means, for a man of Poiret's calibre, an old age in Mamma Vauquer's lodging-house. There are fifty thousand young men in your position at this moment, all bent as you are on solving one and the same problem--how to acquire a fortune rapidly. You are but a unit in that aggregate. You can guess, therefore, what efforts you must make, how desperate the struggle is. There are not fifty thousand good positions for you; you must fight and devour one another like spiders in a pot. Do you know how a man makes his way here? By brilliant genius or by skilful corruption. You must either cut your way through these masses of men like a cannon ball, or steal among them like a plague. Honesty is nothing to the purpose. Men bow before the power of genius; they hate it, and try to slander it, because genius does not divide the spoil; but if genius persists, they bow before it. To sum it all up in a phrase, if they fail to smother genius in the mud, they fall on their knees and worship it. Corruption is a great power in the world, and talent is scarce. So corruption is the weapon of superfluous mediocrity; you will be made to feel the point of it everywhere. You will see women who spend more than ten thousand francs a year on dress, while their husband's salary (his whole income) is six thousand francs. You will see officials buying estates on twelve thousand francs a year. You will see women who sell themselves body and soul to drive in a carriage belonging to the son of a peer of France, who has a right to drive in the middle rank at Longchamp. You have seen that poor simpleton of a Goriot obliged to meet a bill with his daughter's name at the back of it, though her husband has fifty thousand francs a year. I defy you to walk a couple of yards anywhere in Paris without stumbling on some infernal complication. I'll bet my head to a head of that salad that you will stir up a hornet's nest by taking a fancy to the first young, rich, and pretty woman you meet. They are all dodging the law, all at loggerheads with their husbands. If I were to begin to tell you all that vanity or necessity (virtue is not often mixed up in it, you may be sure), all that vanity and necessity drive them to do for lovers, finery, housekeeping, or children, I should never come to an end. So an honest man is the common enemy.

°°°°"But do you know what an honest man is? Here, in Paris, an honest man is the man who keeps his own counsel, and will not divide the plunder. I am not speaking now of those poor bond-slaves who do the work of the world without a reward for their toil--God Almighty's outcasts, I call them. Among them, I grant you, is virtue in all the flower of its stupidity, but poverty is no less their portion. At this moment, I think I see the long faces those good folk would pull if God played a practical joke on them and stayed away at the Last Judgment.

°°°°"Well, then, if you mean to make a fortune quickly, you must either be rich to begin with, or make people believe that you are rich. It is no use playing here except for high stakes; once take to low play, it is all up with you. If in the scores of professions that are open to you, there are ten men who rise very rapidly, people are sure to call them thieves. You can draw your own conclusions. Such is life. It is no cleaner than a kitchen; it reeks like a kitchen; and if you mean to cook your dinner, you must expect to soil your hands; the real art is in getting them clean again, and therein lies the whole morality of our epoch. If I take this tone in speaking of the world to you, I have the right to do so; I know it well. Do you think that I am blaming it? Far from it; the world has always been as it is now. Moralists' strictures will never change it. Mankind are not perfect, but one age is more or less hypocritical than another, and then simpletons say that its morality is high or low. I do not think that the rich are any worse than the poor; man is much the same, high or low, or wherever he is. In a million of these human cattle there may be half a score of bold spirits who rise above the rest, above the laws; I am one of them. And you, if you are cleverer than your fellows, make straight to your end, and hold your head high. But you must lay your account with envy and slander and mediocrity, and every man's hand will be against you. Napoleon met with a Minister of War, Aubry by name, who all but sent him to the colonies.

°°°°"Feel your pulse. Think whether you can get up morning after morning, strengthened in yesterday's purpose. In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline. Listen attentively. You see, I have an idea of my own. My idea is to live a patriarchal life on a vast estate, say a hundred thousand acres, somewhere in the Southern States of America. I mean to be a planter, to have slaves, to make a few snug millions by selling my cattle, timber, and tobacco; I want to live an absolute monarch, and to do just as I please; to lead such a life as no one here in these squalid dens of lath and plaster ever imagines. I am a great poet; I do not write my poems, I feel them, and act them. At this moment I have fifty thousand francs, which might possibly buy forty negroes. I want two hundred thousand francs, because I want to have two hundred negroes to carry out my notions of the patriarachal life properly. Negroes, you see, are like a sort of family ready grown, and there are no inquisitive public prosecutors out there to interfere with you. That investment in ebony ought to mean three or four million francs in ten years' time. If I am successful, no one will ask me who I am. I shall be Mr. Four Millions, an American citizen. I shall be fifty years old by then, and sound and hearty still; I shall enjoy life after my own fashion. In two words, if I find you an heiress with a million, will you give me two hundred thousand francs? Twenty per cent commission, eh? Is that too much? Your little wife will be very much in love with you. Once married, you will show signs of uneasiness and remorse; for a couple of weeks you will be depressed. Then, some night after sundry grimacings, comes the confession, between two kisses, 'Two hundred thousand francs of debts, my darling!' This sort of farce is played every day in Paris, and by young men of the highest fashion. When a young wife has given her heart, she will not refuse her purse. Perhaps you are thinking that you will lose the money for good? Not you. You will make two hundred thousand francs again by some stroke of business. With your capital and your brains you should be able to accumulate as large a fortune as you could wish. ERGO, in six months you will have made your own fortune, and our old friend Vautrin's, and made an amiable woman very happy, to say nothing of your people at home, who must blow on their fingers to warm them, in the winter, for lack of firewood. You need not be surprised at my proposal, nor at the demand I make. Forty-seven out of every sixty great matches here in Paris are made after just such a bargain as this. The Chamber of Notaries compels my gentleman to----"

°°°°"What must I do?" said Rastignac, eagerly interrupting Vautrin's speech.

°°°°"Next to nothing," returned the other, with a slight involuntary movement, the suppressed exultation of the angler when he feels a bite at the end of his line. "Follow me carefully! The heart of a girl whose life is wretched and unhappy is a sponge that will thirstily absorb love; a dry sponge that swells at the first drop of sentiment. If you pay court to a young girl whose existence is a compound of loneliness, despair, and poverty, and who has no suspicion that she will come into a fortune, good Lord! it is quint and quatorze at piquet; it is knowing the numbers of the lottery before-hand; it is speculating in the funds when you have news from a sure source; it is building up a marriage on an indestructible foundation. The girl may come in for millions, and she will fling them, as if they were so many pebbles, at your feet. 'Take it, my beloved! Take it, Alfred, Adolphe, Eugene!' or whoever it was that showed his sense by sacrificing himself for her. And as for sacrificing himself, this is how I understand it. You sell a coat that is getting shabby, so that you can take her to the Cadran bleu, treat her to mushrooms on toast, and then go to the Ambigu-Comique in the evening; you pawn your watch to buy her a shawl. I need not remind you of the fiddle-faddle sentimentality that goes down so well with all women; you spill a few drops of water on your stationery, for instance; those are the tears you shed while far away from her. You look to me as if you were perfectly acquainted with the argot of the heart. Paris, you see, is like a forest in the New World, where you have to deal with a score of varieties of savages--Illinois and Hurons, who live on the proceed of their social hunting. You are a hunter of millions; you set your snares; you use lures and nets; there are many ways of hunting. Some hunt heiresses, others a legacy; some fish for souls, yet others sell their clients, bound hand and foot. Every one who comes back from the chase with his game- bag well filled meets with a warm welcome in good society. In justice to this hospitable part of the world, it must be said that you have to do with the most easy and good-natured of great cities. If the proud aristocracies of the rest of Europe refuse admittance among their ranks to a disreputable millionaire, Paris stretches out a hand to him, goes to his banquets, eats his dinners, and hobnobs with his infamy."

°°°°"But where is such a girl to be found?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Under your eyes; she is yours already."

°°°°"Mlle. Victorine?"

°°°°"Precisely."

°°°°"And what was that you said?"

°°°°"She is in love with you already, your little Baronne de Rastignac!"

°°°°"She has not a penny," Eugene continued, much mystified.

°°°°"Ah! now we are coming to it! Just another word or two, and it will all be clear enough. Her father, Taillefer, is an old scoundrel; it is said that he murdered one of his friends at the time of the Revolution. He is one of your comedians that sets up to have opinions of his own. He is a banker--senior partner in the house of Frederic Taillefer and Company. He has one son, and means to leave all he has to the boy, to the prejudice of Victorine. For my part, I don't like to see injustice of this sort. I am like Don Quixote, I have a fancy for defending the weak against the strong. If it should please God to take that youth away from him, Taillefer would have only his daughter left; he would want to leave his money to some one or other; an absurd notion, but it is only human nature, and he is not likely to have any more children, as I know. Victorine is gentle and amiable; she will soon twist her father round her fingers, and set his head spinning like a German top by plying him with sentiment! She will be too much touched by your devotion to forget you; you will marry her. I mean to play Providence for you, and Providence is to do my will. I have a friend whom I have attached closely to myself, a colonel in the Army of the Loire, who has just been transferred into the garde royale. He has taken my advice and turned ultra-royalist; he is not one of those fools who never change their opinions. Of all pieces of advice, my cherub, I would give you this--don't stick to your opinions any more than to your words. If any one asks you for them, let him have them-- at a price. A man who prides himself on going in a straight line through life is an idiot who believes in infallibility. There are no such things as principles; there are only events, and there are no laws but those of expediency: a man of talent accepts events and the circumstances in which he finds himself, and turns everything to his own ends. If laws and principles were fixed and invariable, nations would not change them as readily as we change our shirts. The individual is not obliged to be more particular than the nation. A man whose services to France have been of the very slightest is a fetich looked on with superstitious awe because he has always seen everything in red; but he is good, at the most, to be put into the Museum of Arts and Crafts, among the automatic machines, and labeled La Fayette; while the prince at whom everybody flings a stone, the man who despises humanity so much that he spits as many oaths as he is asked for in the face of humanity, saved France from being torn in pieces at the Congress of Vienna; and they who should have given him laurels fling mud at him. Oh! I know something of affairs, I can tell you; I have the secrets of many men! Enough. When I find three minds in agreement as to the application of a principle, I shall have a fixed and immovable opinion--I shall have to wait a long while first. In the Tribunals you will not find three judges of the same opinion on a single point of law. To return to the man I was telling you of. He would crucify Jesus Christ again, if I bade him. At a word from his old chum Vautrin he will pick a quarrel with a scamp that will not send so much as five francs to his sister, poor girl, and" (here Vautrin rose to his feet and stood like a fencing-master about to lunge)--"turn him off into the dark!" he added.

°°°°"How frightful!" said Eugene. "You do not really mean it? M. Vautrin, you are joking!"

°°°°"There! there! Keep cool!" said the other. "Don't behave like a baby. But if you find any amusement in it, be indignant, flare up! Say that I am a scoundrel, a rascal, a rogue, a bandit; but do not call me a blackleg nor a spy! There, out with it, fire away! I forgive you; it is quite natural at your age. I was like that myself once. Only remember this, you will do worse things yourself some day. You will flirt with some pretty woman and take her money. You have thought of that, of course," said Vautrin, "for how are you to succeed unless love is laid under contribution? There are no two ways about virtue, my dear student; it either is, or it is not. Talk of doing penance for your sins! It is a nice system of business, when you pay for your crime by an act of contrition! You seduce a woman that you may set your foot on such and such a rung of the social ladder; you sow dissension among the children of a family; you descend, in short, to every base action that can be committed at home or abroad, to gain your own ends for your own pleasure or your profit; and can you imagine that these are acts of faith, hope, or charity? How is it that a dandy, who in a night has robbed a boy of half his fortune, gets only a couple of months in prison; while a poor devil who steals a banknote for a thousand francs, with aggravating circumstances, is condemned to penal servitude? Those are your laws. Not a single provision but lands you in some absurdity. That man with yellow gloves and a golden tongue commits many a murder; he sheds no blood, but he drains his victim's veins as surely; a desperado forces open a door with a crowbar, dark deeds both of them! You yourself will do every one of those things that I suggest to you to-day, bar the bloodshed. Do you believe that there is any absolute standard in this world? Despise mankind and find out the meshes that you can slip through in the net of the Code. The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out, because it was properly executed."

°°°°"Silence, sir! I will not hear any more; you make me doubt myself. At this moment my sentiments are all my science."

°°°°"Just as you please, my fine fellow; I did think you were so weak-minded," said Vautrin, "I shall say no more about it. One last word, however," and he looked hard at the student--"you have my secret," he said.

°°°°"A young man who refuses your offer knows that he must forget it."

°°°°"Quite right, quite right; I am glad to hear you say so. Somebody else might not be so scrupulous, you see. Keep in mind what I want to do for you. I will give you a fortnight. The offer is still open."

°°°°"What a head of iron the man has!" said Eugene to himself, as he watched Vautrin walk unconcernedly away with his cane under his arm. "Yet Mme. de Beauseant said as much more gracefully; he has only stated the case in cruder language. He would tear my heart with claws of steel. What made me think of going to Mme. de Nucingen? He guessed my motives before I knew them myself. To sum it up, that outlaw has told me more about virtue than all I have learned from men and books. If virtue admits of no compromises, I have certainly robbed my sisters," he said, throwing down the bags on the table.

°°°°He sat down again and fell, unconscious of his surroundings, into deep thought.

°°°°"To be faithful to an ideal of virtue! A heroic martyrdom! Pshaw! every one believes in virtue, but who is virtuous? Nations have made an idol of Liberty, but what nation on the face of the earth is free? My youth is still like a blue and cloudless sky. If I set myself to obtain wealth or power, does it mean that I must make up my mind to lie, and fawn, and cringe, and swagger, and flatter, and dissemble? To consent to be the servant of others who have likewise fawned, and lied, and flattered? Must I cringe to them before I can hope to be their accomplice? Well, then, I decline. I mean to work nobly and with a single heart. I will work day and night; I will owe my fortune to nothing but my own exertions. It may be the slowest of all roads to success, but I shall lay my head on the pillow at night untroubled by evil thoughts. Is there a greater thing than this--to look back over your life and know that it is stainless as a lily? I and my life are like a young man and his betrothed. Vautrin has put before me all that comes after ten years of marriage. The devil! my head is swimming. I do not want to think at all; the heart is a sure guide."

°°°°Eugene was roused from his musings by the voice of the stout Sylvie, who announced that the tailor had come, and Eugene therefore made his appearance before the man with the two money bags, and was not ill pleased that it should be so. When he had tried on his dress suit, he put on his new morning costume, which completely metamorphosed him.

°°°°"I am quite equal to M. de Trailles," he said to himself. "In short, I look like a gentleman."

°°°°"You asked me, sir, if I knew the houses where Mme. de Nucingen goes," Father Goriot's voice spoke from the doorway of Eugene's room."

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Very well then, she is going to the Marechale Carigliano's ball on Monday. If you can manage to be there, I shall hear from you whether my two girls enjoyed themselves, and how they were dressed, and all about it in fact."

°°°°"How did you find that out, my good Goriot?" said Eugene, putting a chair by the fire for his visitor.

°°°°"Her maid told me. I hear all about their doings from Therese and Constance," he added gleefully.

°°°°The old man looked like a lover who is still young enough to be made happy by the discovery of some little stratagem which brings him information of his lady-love without her knowledge.

°°°°"YOU will see them both!" he said, giving artless expression to a pang of jealousy.

°°°°"I do not know," answered Eugene. "I will go to Mme. de Beauseant and ask her for an introduction to the Marechale."

°°°°Eugene felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought of appearing before the Vicomtesse, dressed as henceforward he always meant to be. The "abysses of the human heart," in the moralists' phrase, are only insidious thoughts, involuntary promptings of personal interest. The instinct of enjoyment turns the scale; those rapid changes of purpose which have furnished the text for so much rhetoric are calculations prompted by the hope of pleasure. Rastignac beholding himself well dressed and impeccable as to gloves and boots, forgot his virtuous resolutions. Youth, moreover, when bent upon wrongdoing does not dare to behold himself in the mirror of consciousness; mature age has seen itself; and therein lies the whole difference between these two phases of life.

°°°°A friendship between Eugene and his neighbor, Father Goriot, had been growing up for several days past. This secret friendship and the antipathy that the student had begun to entertain for Vautrin arose from the same psychological causes. The bold philosopher who shall investigate the effects of mental action upon the physical world will doubtless find more than one proof of the material nature of our sentiments in other animals. What physiognomist is as quick to discern character as a dog is to discover from a stranger's face whether this is a friend or no? Those by-words--"atoms," "affinities"--are facts surviving in modern languages for the confusion of philosophic wiseacres who amuse themselves by winnowing the chaff of language to find its grammatical roots. We FEEL that we are loved. Our sentiments make themselves felt in everything, even at a great distance. A letter is a living soul, and so faithful an echo of the voice that speaks in it, that finer natures look upon a letter as one of love's most precious treasures. Father Goriot's affection was of the instinctive order, a canine affection raised to a sublime pitch; he had scented compassion in the air, and the kindly respect and youthful sympathy in the student's heart. This friendship had, however, scarcely reached the stage at which confidences are made. Though Eugene had spoken of his wish to meet Mme. de Nucingen, it was not because he counted on the old man to introduce him to her house, for he hoped that his own audacity might stand him in good stead. All that Father Goriot had said as yet about his daughters had referred to the remarks that the student had made so freely in public on that day of the two visits.

°°°°"How could you think that Mme. de Restaud bore you a grudge for mentioning my name?" he had said on the day following that scene at dinner. "My daughters are very fond of me; I am a happy father; but my sons-in-law have behaved badly to me, and rather than make trouble between my darlings and their husbands, I choose to see my daughters secretly. Fathers who can see their daughters at any time have no idea of all the pleasure that all this mystery gives me; I cannot always see mine when I wish, do you understand? So when it is fine I walk out in the Champs- Elysees, after finding out from their waiting-maids whether my daughters mean to go out. I wait near the entrance; my heart beats fast when the carriages begin to come; I admire them in their dresses, and as they pass they give me a little smile, and it seems as if everything was lighted up for me by a ray of bright sunlight. I wait, for they always go back the same way, and then I see them again; the fresh air has done them good and brought color into their cheeks; all about me people say, 'What a beautiful woman that is!' and it does my heart good to hear them.

°°°°"Are they not my own flesh and blood? I love the very horses that draw them; I envy the little lap-dog on their knees. Their happiness is my life. Every one loves after his own fashion, and mine does no one any harm; why should people trouble their heads about me? I am happy in my own way. Is there any law against going to see my girls in the evening when they are going out to a ball? And what a disappointment it is when I get there too late, and am told that 'Madame has gone out!' Once I waited till three o'clock in the morning for Nasie; I had not seen her for two whole days. I was so pleased, that it was almost too much for me! Please do not speak of me unless it is to say how good my daughters are to me. They are always wanting to heap presents upon me, but I will not have it. 'Just keep your money,' I tell them. 'What should I do with it? I want nothing.' And what am I, sir, after all? An old carcase, whose soul is always where my daughters are. When you have seen Mme. de Nucingen, tell me which you like the most," said the old man after a moment's pause, while Eugene put the last touches to his toilette. The student was about to go out to walk in the Garden of the Tuileries until the hour when he could venture to appear in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room.

°°°°That walk was a turning-point in Eugene's career. Several women noticed him; he looked so handsome, so young, and so well dressed. This almost admiring attention gave a new turn to his thoughts. He forgot his sisters and the aunt who had robbed herself for him; he no longer remembered his own virtuous scruples. He had seen hovering above his head the fiend so easy to mistake for an angel, the Devil with rainbow wings, who scatters rubies, and aims his golden shafts at palace fronts, who invests women with purple, and thrones with a glory that dazzles the eyes of fools till they forget the simple origins of royal dominion; he had heard the rustle of that Vanity whose tinsel seems to us to be the symbol of power. However cynical Vautrin's words had been, they had made an impression on his mind, as the sordid features of the old crone who whispers, "A lover, and gold in torrents," remain engraven on a young girl's memory.

°°°°Eugene lounged about the walks till it was nearly five o'clock, then he went to Mme. de Beauseant, and received one of the terrible blows against which young hearts are defenceless. Hitherto the Vicomtesse had received him with the kindly urbanity, the bland grace of manner that is the result of fine breeding, but is only complete when it comes from the heart.

°°°°Today Mme. de Beauseant bowed constrainedly, and spoke curtly:

°°°°"M. de Rastignac, I cannot possibly see you, at least not at this moment. I am engaged . . ."

°°°°An observer, and Rastignac instantly became an observer, could read the whole history, the character and customs of caste, in the phrase, in the tones of her voice, in her glance and bearing. He caught a glimpse of the iron hand beneath the velvet glove-- the personality, the egoism beneath the manner, the wood beneath the varnish. In short, he heard that unmistakable I THE KING that issues from the plumed canopy of the throne, and finds its last echo under the crest of the simplest gentleman.

°°°°Eugene had trusted too implicitly to the generosity of a woman; he could not believe in her haughtiness. Like all the unfortunate, he had subscribed, in all good faith, the generous compact which should bind the benefactor to the recipient, and the first article in that bond, between two large-hearted natures, is a perfect equality. The kindness which knits two souls together is as rare, as divine, and as little understood as the passion of love, for both love and kindness are the lavish generosity of noble natures. Rastignac was set upon going to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball, so he swallowed down this rebuff.

°°°°"Madame," he faltered out, "I would not have come to trouble you about a trifling matter; be so kind as to permit me to see you later, I can wait."

°°°°"Very well, come and dine with me," she said, a little confused by the harsh way in which she had spoken, for this lady was as genuinely kind-hearted as she was high-born.

°°°°Eugene was touched by this sudden relenting, but none the less he said to himself as he went away, "Crawl in the dust, put up with every kind of treatment. What must the rest of the world be like when one of the kindest of women forgets all her promises of befriending me in a moment, and tosses me aside like an old shoe? So it is every one for himself? It is true that her house is not a shop, and I have put myself in the wrong by needing her help. You should cut your way through the world like a cannon ball, as Vautrin said."

°°°°But the student's bitter thoughts were soon dissipated by the pleasure which he promised himself in this dinner with the Vicomtesse. Fate seemed to determine that the smallest accidents in his life should combine to urge him into a career, which the terrible sphinx of the Maison Vauquer had described as a field of battle where you must either slay or be slain, and cheat to avoid being cheated. You leave your conscience and your heart at the barriers, and wear a mask on entering into this game of grim earnest, where, as in ancient Sparta, you must snatch your prize without being detected if you would deserve the crown.

°°°°On his return he found the Vicomtesse gracious and kindly, as she had always been to him. They went together to the dining-room, where the Vicomte was waiting for his wife. In the time of the Restoration the luxury of the table was carried, as is well known, to the highest degree, and M. de Beauseant, like many jaded men of the world, had few pleasures left but those of good cheer; in this matter, in fact, he was a gourmand of the schools of Louis XVIII. and of the Duc d'Escars, and luxury was supplemented by splendor. Eugene, dining for the first time in a house where the traditions of grandeur had descended through many generations, had never seen any spectacle like this that now met his eyes. In the time of the Empire, balls had always ended with a supper, because the officers who took part in them must be fortified for immediate service, and even in Paris might be called upon to leave the ballroom for the battlefield. This arrangement had gone out of fashion under the Monarchy, and Eugene had so far only been asked to dances. The self-possession which pre-eminently distinguished him in later life already stood him in good stead, and he did not betray his amazement. Yet as he saw for the first time the finely wrought silver plate, the completeness of every detail, the sumptuous dinner, noiselessly served, it was difficult for such an ardent imagination not to prefer this life of studied and refined luxury to the hardships of the life which he had chosen only that morning.

°°°°His thoughts went back for a moment to the lodging-house, and with a feeling of profound loathing, he vowed to himself that at New Year he would go; prompted at least as much by a desire to live among cleaner surroundings as by a wish to shake off Vautrin, whose huge hand he seemed to feel on his shoulder at that moment. When you consider the numberless forms, clamorous or mute, that corruption takes in Paris, common-sense begins to wonder what mental aberration prompted the State to establish great colleges and schools there, and assemble young men in the capital; how it is that pretty women are respected, or that the gold coin displayed in the money-changer's wooden saucers does not take to itself wings in the twinkling of an eye; and when you come to think further, how comparatively few cases of crime there are, and to count up the misdemeanors committed by youth, is there not a certain amount of respect due to these patient Tantaluses who wrestle with themselves and nearly always come off victorious? The struggles of the poor student in Paris, if skilfully drawn, would furnish a most dramatic picture of modern civilization.

°°°°In vain Mme. de Beauseant looked at Eugene as if asking him to speak; the student was tongue-tied in the Vicomte's presence.

°°°°"Are you going to take me to the Italiens this evening?" the Vicomtesse asked her husband.

°°°°"You cannot doubt that I should obey you with pleasure," he answered, and there was a sarcastic tinge in his politeness which Eugene did not detect, "but I ought to go to meet some one at the Varietes."

°°°°"His mistress," said she to herself.

°°°°"Then, is not Ajuda coming for you this evening?" inquired the Vicomte.

°°°°"No," she answered, petulantly.

°°°°"Very well, then, if you really must have an arm, take that of M. de Rastignac."

°°°°The Vicomtess turned to Eugene with a smile.

°°°°"That would be a very compromising step for you," she said.

°°°°" 'A Frenchman loves danger, because in danger there is glory,' to quote M. de Chateaubriand," said Rastignac, with a bow.

°°°°A few moments later he was sitting beside Mme. de Beauseant in a brougham, that whirled them through the streets of Paris to a fashionable theatre. It seemed to him that some fairy magic had suddenly transported him into a box facing the stage. All the lorgnettes of the house were pointed at him as he entered, and at the Vicomtesse in her charming toilette. He went from enchantment to enchantment.

°°°°"You must talk to me, you know," said Mme. de Beauseant. "Ah! look! There is Mme. de Nucingen in the third box from ours. Her sister and M. de Trailles are on the other side."

°°°°The Vicomtesse glanced as she spoke at the box where Mlle. de Rochefide should have been; M. d'Ajuda was not there, and Mme. de Beauseant's face lighted up in a marvelous way.

°°°°"She is charming," said Eugene, after looking at Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"She has white eyelashes."

°°°°"Yes, but she has such a pretty slender figure!"

°°°°"Her hands are large."

°°°°"Such beautiful eyes!"

°°°°"Her face is long."

°°°°"Yes, but length gives distinction."

°°°°"It is lucky for her that she has some distinction in her face. Just see how she fidgets with her opera-glass! The Goriot blood shows itself in every movement," said the Vicomtesse, much to Eugene's astonishment.

°°°°Indeed, Mme. de Beauseant seemed to be engaged in making a survey of the house, and to be unconscious of Mme. Nucingen's existence; but no movement made by the latter was lost upon the Vicomtesse. The house was full of the loveliest women in Paris, so that Delphine de Nucingen was not a little flattered to receive the undivided attention of Mme. de Beauseant's young, handsome, and well-dressed cousin, who seemed to have no eyes for any one else.

°°°°"If you look at her so persistently, you will make people talk, M. de Rastignac. You will never succeed if you fling yourself at any one's head like that."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Eugene, "you have protected me indeed so far, and now if you would complete your work, I only ask of you a favor which will cost you but little, and be of very great service to me. I have lost my heart."

°°°°"Already!"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"And to that woman!"

°°°°"How could I aspire to find any one else to listen to me?" he asked, with a keen glance at his cousin. "Her Grace the Duchesse de Carigliano is a friend of the Duchesse de Berri," he went on, after a pause; "you are sure to see her, will you be so kind as to present me to her, and to take me to her ball on Monday? I shall meet Mme. de Nucingen there, and enter into my first skirmish."

°°°°"Willingly," she said. "If you have a liking for her already, your affairs of the heart are like to prosper. That is de Marsay over there in the Princesse Galathionne's box. Mme. de Nucingen is racked with jealousy. There is no better time for approaching a woman, especially if she happens to be a banker's wife. All those ladies of the Chaussee-d'Antin love revenge."

°°°°"Then, what would you do yourself in such a case?"

°°°°"I should suffer in silence."

°°°°At this point the Marquis d'Ajuda appeared in Mme. de Beauseant's box.

°°°°"I have made a muddle of my affairs to come to you," he said, "and I am telling you about it, so that it may not be a sacrifice."

°°°°Eugene saw the glow of joy on the Vicomtesse's face, and knew that this was love, and learned the difference between love and the affectations of Parisian coquetry. He admired his cousin, grew mute, and yielded his place to M. d'Ajuda with a sigh.

°°°°"How noble, how sublime a woman is when she loves like that!" he said to himself. "And HE could forsake her for a doll! Oh! how could any one forsake her?"

°°°°There was a boy's passionate indignation in his heart. He could have flung himself at Mme. de Beauseant's feet; he longed for the power of the devil if he could snatch her away and hide her in his heart, as an eagle snatches up some white yeanling from the plains and bears it to its eyrie. It was humiliating to him to think that in all this gallery of fair pictures he had not one picture of his own. "To have a mistress and an almost royal position is a sign of power," he said to himself. And he looked at Mme. de Nucingen as a man measures another who has insulted him.

°°°°The Vicomtesse turned to him, and the expression of her eyes thanked him a thousand times for his discretion. The first act came to an end just then.

°°°°"Do you know Mme. de Nucingen well enough to present M. de Rastignac to her?" she asked of the Marquis d'Ajuda.

°°°°"She will be delighted," said the Marquis. The handsome Portuguese rose as he spoke and took the student's arm, and in another moment Eugene found himself in Mme. de Nucingen's box.

°°°°"Madame," said the Marquis, "I have the honor of presenting to you the Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac; he is a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's. You have made so deep an impression upon him, that I thought I would fill up the measure of his happiness by bringing him nearer to his divinity."

°°°°Words spoken half jestingly to cover their somewhat disrespectful import; but such an implication, if carefully disguised, never gives offence to a woman. Mme. de Nucingen smiled, and offered Eugene the place which her husband had just left.

°°°°"I do not venture to suggest that you should stay with me, monsieur," she said. "Those who are so fortunate as to be in Mme. de Beauseant's company do not desire to leave it."

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, lowering his voice, "I think that to please my cousin I should remain with you. Before my lord Marquis came we were speaking of you and of your exceedingly distinguished appearance," he added aloud.

°°°°M. d'Ajuda turned and left them.

°°°°"Are you really going to stay with me, monsieur?" asked the Baroness. "Then we shall make each other's acquaintance. Mme. de Restaud told me about you, and has made me anxious to meet you."

°°°°"She must be very insincere, then, for she has shut her door on me."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Madame, I will tell you honestly the reason why; but I must crave your indulgence before confiding such a secret to you. I am your father's neighbor; I had no idea that Mme. de Restaud was his daughter. I was rash enough to mention his name; I meant no harm, but I annoyed your sister and her husband very much. You cannot think how severely the Duchesse de Langeais and my cousin blamed this apostasy on a daughter's part, as a piece of bad taste. I told them all about it, and they both burst out laughing. Then Mme. de Beauseant made some comparison between you and your sister, speaking in high terms of you, and saying how very fond you were of my neighbor, M. Goriot. And, indeed, how could you help loving him? He adores you so passionately that I am jealous already. We talked about you this morning for two hours. So this evening I was quite full of all that your father had told me, and while I was dining with my cousin I said that you could not be as beautiful as affectionate. Mme. de Beauseant meant to gratify such warm admiration, I think, when she brought me here, telling me, in her gracious way, that I should see you."

°°°°"Then, even now, I owe you a debt of gratitude, monsieur," said the banker's wife. "We shall be quite old friends in a little while."

°°°°"Although a friendship with you could not be like an ordinary friendship," said Rastignac; "I should never wish to be your friend."

°°°°Such stereotyped phrases as these, in the mouths of beginners, possess an unfailing charm for women, and are insipid only when read coldly; for a young man's tone, glance and attitude give a surpassing eloquence to the banal phrases. Mme. de Nucingen thought that Rastignac was adorable. Then, woman-like, being at a loss how to reply to the student's outspoken admiration, she answered a previous remark.

°°°°"Yes, it is very wrong of my sister to treat our poor father as she does," she said; "he has been a Providence to us. It was not until M. de Nucingen positively ordered me only to receive him in the mornings that I yielded the point. But I have been unhappy about it for a long while; I have shed many tears over it. This violence to my feelings, with my husband's brutal treatment, have been two causes of my unhappy married life. There is certainly no woman in Paris whose lot seems more enviable than mine, and yet, in reality, there is not one so much to be pitied. You will think I must be out of my senses to talk to you like this; but you know my father, and I cannot regard you as a stranger."

°°°°"You will find no one," said Eugene, "who longs as eagerly as I do to be yours. What do all women seek? Happiness." (He answered his own question in low, vibrating tones.) "And if happiness for a woman means that she is to be loved and adored, to have a friend to whom she can pour out her wishes, her fancies, her sorrows and joys; to whom she can lay bare her heart and soul, and all her fair defects and her gracious virtues, without fear of a betrayal; believe me, the devotion and the warmth that never fails can only be found in the heart of a young man who, at a bare sign from you, would go to his death, who neither knows nor cares to know anything as yet of the world, because you will be all the world to him. I myself, you see (you will laugh at my simplicity), have just come from a remote country district; I am quite new to this world of Paris; I have only known true and loving hearts; and I made up my mind that here I should find no love. Then I chanced to meet my cousin, and to see my cousin's heart from very near; I have divined the inexhaustible treasures of passion, and, like Cherubino, I am the lover of all women, until the day comes when I find THE woman to whom I may devote myself. As soon as I saw you, as soon as I came into the theatre this evening, I felt myself borne towards you as if by the current of a stream. I had so often thought of you already, but I had never dreamed that you would be so beautiful! Mme. de Beauseant told me that I must not look so much at you. She does not know the charm of your red lips, your fair face, nor see how soft your eyes are. . . . I also am beginning to talk nonsense; but let me talk."

°°°°Nothing pleases a woman better than to listen to such whispered words as these; the most puritanical among them listens even when she ought not to reply to them; and Rastignac, having once begun, continued to pour out his story, dropping his voice, that she might lean and listen; and Mme. de Nucingen, smiling, glanced from time to time at de Marsay, who still sat in the Princesse Galathionne's box.

°°°°Rastignac did not leave Mme. de Nucingen till her husband came to take her home.

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, "I shall have the pleasure of calling upon you before the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball."

°°°°"If Matame infites you to come," said the Baron, a thickset Alsatian, with indications of a sinister cunning in his full-moon countenance, "you are quide sure of being well receifed."

°°°°"My affairs seem to be in a promising way," said Eugene to himself.--" 'Can you love me?' I asked her, and she did not resent it. The bit is in the horse's mouth, and I have only to mount and ride;" and with that he went to pay his respects to Mme. de Beauseant, who was leaving the theatre on d'Ajuda's arm.

°°°°The student did not know that the Baroness' thoughts had been wandering; that she was even then expecting a letter from de Marsay, one of those letters that bring about a rupture that rends the soul; so, happy in his delusion, Eugene went with the Vicomtesse to the peristyle, where people were waiting till their carriages were announced.

°°°°"That cousin of yours is hardly recognizable for the same man," said the Portuguese laughingly to the Vicomtesse, when Eugene had taken leave of them. "He will break the bank. He is as supple as an eel; he will go a long way, of that I am sure. Who else could have picked out a woman for him, as you did, just when she needed consolation?"

°°°°"But it is not certain that she does not still love the faithless lover," said Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°The student meanwhile walked back from the Theatre-Italien to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, making the most delightful plans as he went. He had noticed how closely Mme. de Restaud had scrutinized him when he sat beside Mme. de Nucingen, and inferred that the Countess' doors would not be closed in the future. Four important houses were now open to him--for he meant to stand well with the Marechale; he had four supporters in the inmost circle of society in Paris. Even now it was clear to him that, once involved in this intricate social machinery, he must attach himself to a spoke of the wheel that was to turn and raise his fortunes; he would not examine himself too curiously as to the methods, but he was certain of the end, and conscious of the power to gain and keep his hold.

°°°°"If Mme. de Nucingen takes an interest in me, I will teach her how to manage her husband. That husband of hers is a great speculator; he might put me in the way of making a fortune by a single stroke."

°°°°He did not say this bluntly in so many words; as yet, indeed, he was not sufficient of a diplomatist to sum up a situation, to see its possibilities at a glance, and calculate the chances in his favor. These were nothing but hazy ideas that floated over his mental horizon; they were less cynical than Vautrin's notions; but if they had been tried in the crucible of conscience, no very pure result would have issued from the test. It is by a succession of such like transactions that men sink at last to the level of the relaxed morality of this epoch, when there have never been so few of those who square their courses with their theories, so few of those noble characters who do not yield to temptation, for whom the slightest deviation from the line of rectitude is a crime. To these magnificent types of uncompromising Right we owe two masterpieces--the Alceste of Moliere, and, in our own day, the characters of Jeanie Deans and her father in Sir Walter Scott's novel. Perhaps a work which should chronicle the opposite course, which should trace out all the devious courses through which a man of the world, a man of ambitions, drags his conscience, just steering clear of crime that he may gain his end and yet save appearances, such a chronicle would be no less edifying and no less dramatic.

°°°°Rastignac went home. He was fascinated by Mme. de Nucingen; he seemed to see her before him, slender and graceful as a swallow. He recalled the intoxicating sweetness of her eyes, her fair hair, the delicate silken tissue of the skin, beneath which it almost seemed to him that he could see the blood coursing; the tones of her voice still exerted a spell over him; he had forgotten nothing; his walk perhaps heated his imagination by sending a glow of warmth through his veins. He knocked unceremoniously at Goriot's door.

°°°°"I have seen Mme. Delphine, neighbor," said he.

°°°°"Where?"

°°°°"At the Italiens."

°°°°"Did she enjoy it?. . . . Just come inside," and the old man left his bed, unlocked the door, and promptly returned again.

°°°°It was the first time that Eugene had been in Father Goriot's room, and he could not control his feeling of amazement at the contrast between the den in which the father lived and the costume of the daughter whom he had just beheld. The window was curtainless, the walls were damp, in places the varnished wall- paper had come away and gave glimpses of the grimy yellow plaster beneath. The wretched bed on which the old man lay boasted but one thin blanket, and a wadded quilt made out of large pieces of Mme. Vauquer's old dresses. The floor was damp and gritty. Opposite the window stood a chest of drawers made of rosewood, one of the old-fashioned kind with a curving front and brass handles, shaped like rings of twisted vine stems covered with flowers and leaves. On a venerable piece of furniture with a wooden shelf stood a ewer and basin and shaving apparatus. A pair of shoes stood in one corner; a night-table by the bed had neither a door nor marble slab. There was not a trace of a fire in the empty grate; the square walnut table with the crossbar against which Father Goriot had crushed and twisted his posset- dish stood near the hearth. The old man's hat was lying on a broken-down bureau. An armchair stuffed with straw and a couple of chairs completed the list of ramshackle furniture. From the tester of the bed, tied to the ceiling by a piece of rag, hung a strip of some cheap material in large red and black checks. No poor drudge in a garret could be worse lodged than Father Goriot in Mme. Vauquer's lodging-house. The mere sight of the room sent a chill through you and a sense of oppression; it was like the worst cell in a prison. Luckily, Goriot could not see the effect that his surroundings produced on Eugene as the latter deposited his candle on the night-table. The old man turned round, keeping the bedclothes huddled up to his chin.

°°°°"Well," he said, "and which do you like the best, Mme. de Restaud or Mme. de Nucingen?"

°°°°"I like Mme. Delphine the best," said the law student, "because she loves you the best."

°°°°At the words so heartily spoken the old man's hand slipped out from under the bedclothes and grasped Eugene's.

°°°°"Thank you, thank you," he said, gratefully. "Then what did she say about me?"

°°°°The student repeated the Baroness' remarks with some embellishments of his own, the old man listening the while as though he heard a voice from Heaven.

°°°°"Dear child!" he said. "Yes, yes, she is very fond of me. But you must not believe all that she tells you about Anastasie. The two sisters are jealous of each other, you see, another proof of their affection. Mme. de Restaud is very fond of me too. I know she is. A father sees his children as God sees all of us; he looks into the very depths of their hearts; he knows their intentions; and both of them are so loving. Oh! if I only had good sons-in-law, I should be too happy, and I dare say there is no perfect happiness here below. If I might live with them-- simply hear their voices, know that they are there, see them go and come as I used to do at home when they were still with me; why, my heart bounds at the thought. . . . Were they nicely dressed?"

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene. "But, M. Goriot, how is it that your daughters have such fine houses, while you live in such a den as this?"

°°°°"Dear me, why should I want anything better?" he replied, with seeming carelessness. "I can't quite explain to you how it is; I am not used to stringing words together properly, but it all lies there----" he said, tapping his heart. "My real life is in my two girls, you see; and so long as they are happy, and smartly dressed, and have soft carpets under their feet, what does it matter what clothes I wear or where I lie down of a night? I shall never feel cold so long as they are warm; I shall never feel dull if they are laughing. I have no troubles but theirs. When you, too, are a father, and you hear your children's little voices, you will say to yourself, 'That has all come from me.' You will feel that those little ones are akin to every drop in your veins, that they are the very flower of your life (and what else are they?); you will cleave so closely to them that you seem to feel every movement that they make. Everywhere I hear their voices sounding in my ears. If they are sad, the look in their eyes freezes my blood. Some day you will find out that there is far more happiness in another's happiness than in your own. It is something that I cannot explain, something within that sends a glow of warmth all through you. In short, I live my life three times over. Shall I tell you something funny? Well, then, since I have been a father, I have come to understand God. He is everywhere in the world, because the whole world comes from Him. And it is just the same with my children, monsieur. Only, I love my daughters better than God loves the world, for the world is not so beautiful as God Himself is, but my children are more beautiful than I am. Their lives are so bound up with mine that I felt somehow that you would see them this evening. Great Heaven! If any man would make my little Delphine as happy as a wife is when she is loved, I would black his boots and run on his errands. That miserable M. de Marsay is a cur; I know all about him from her maid. A longing to wring his neck comes over me now and then. He does not love her! does not love a pearl of a woman, with a voice like a nightingale and shaped like a model. Where can her eyes have been when she married that great lump of an Alsatian? They ought both of them to have married young men, good-looking and good-tempered--but, after all, they had their own way."

°°°°Father Goriot was sublime. Eugene had never yet seen his face light up as it did now with the passionate fervor of a father's love. It is worthy of remark that strong feeling has a very subtle and pervasive power; the roughest nature, in the endeavor to express a deep and sincere affection, communicates to others the influence that has put resonance into the voice, and eloquence into every gesture, wrought a change in the very features of the speaker; for under the inspiration of passion the stupidest human being attains to the highest eloquence of ideas, if not of language, and seems to move in some sphere of light. In the old man's tones and gesture there was something just then of the same spell that a great actor exerts over his audience. But does not the poet in us find expression in our affections?

°°°°"Well," said Eugene, "perhaps you will not be sorry to hear that she is pretty sure to break with de Marsay before long. That sprig of fashion has left her for the Princesse Galathionne. For my part, I fell in love with Mme. Delphine this evening."

°°°°"Stuff!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"I did indeed, and she did not regard me with aversion. For a whole hour we talked of love, and I am to go to call on her on Saturday, the day after to-morrow."

°°°°"Oh! how I should love you, if she should like you. You are kind- hearted; you would never make her miserable. If you were to forsake her, I would cut your throat at once. A woman does not love twice, you see! Good heavens! what nonsense I am talking, M. Eugene! It is cold; you ought not to stay here. MON DIEU! so you have heard her speak? What message did she give you for me?"

°°°°"None at all," said Eugene to himself; aloud he answered, "She told me to tell you that your daughter sends you a good kiss."

°°°°"Good-night, neighbor! Sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you! I have mine already made for me by that message from her. May God grant you all your desires! You have come in like a good angel on me to-night, and brought with you the air that my daughter breathes."

°°°°"Poor old fellow!" said Eugene as he lay down. "It is enough to melt a heart of stone. His daughter no more thought of him than of the Grand Turk."

°°°°Ever after this conference Goriot looked upon his neighbor as a friend, a confidant such as he had never hoped to find; and there was established between the two the only relationship that could attach this old man to another man. The passions never miscalculate. Father Goriot felt that this friendship brought him closer to his daughter Delphine; he thought that he should find a warmer welcome for himself if the Baroness should care for Eugene. Moreover, he had confided one of his troubles to the younger man. Mme. de Nucingen, for whose happiness he prayed a thousand times daily, had never known the joys of love. Eugene was certainly (to make use of his own expression) one of the nicest young men that he had ever seen, and some prophetic instinct seemed to tell him that Eugene was to give her the happiness which had not been hers. These were the beginnings of a friendship that grew up between the old man and his neighbor; but for this friendship the catastrophe of the drama must have remained a mystery.

°°°°The affection with which Father Goriot regarded Eugene, by whom he seated himself at breakfast, the change in Goriot's face, which as a rule, looked as expressionless as a plaster cast, and a few words that passed between the two, surprised the other lodgers. Vautrin, who saw Eugene for the first time since their interview, seemed as if he would fain read the student's very soul. During the night Eugene had had some time in which to scan the vast field which lay before him; and now, as he remembered yesterday's proposal, the thought of Mlle. Taillefer's dowry came, of course, to his mind, and he could not help thinking of Victorine as the most exemplary youth may think of an heiress. It chanced that their eyes met. The poor girl did not fail to see that Eugene looked very handsome in his new clothes. So much was said in the glance, thus exchanged, that Eugene could not doubt but that he was associated in her mind with the vague hopes that lie dormant in a girl's heart and gather round the first attractive newcomer. "Eight hundred thousand francs!" a voice cried in his ears, but suddenly he took refuge in the memories of yesterday evening, thinking that his extemporized passion for Mme. de Nucingen was a talisman that would preserve him from this temptation.

°°°°"They gave Rossini's Barber of Seville at the Italiens yesterday evening," he remarked. "I never heard such delicious music. Good gracious! how lucky people are to have a box at the Italiens!"

°°°°Father Goriot drank in every word that Eugene let fall, and watched him as a dog watches his master's slightest movement.

°°°°"You men are like fighting cocks," said Mme. Vauquer; "you do what you like."

°°°°"How did you get back?" inquired Vautrin.

°°°°"I walked," answered Eugene.

°°°°"For my own part," remarked the tempter, "I do not care about doing things by halves. If I want to enjoy myself that way, I should prefer to go in my carriage, sit in my own box, and do the thing comfortably. Everything or nothing; that is my motto."

°°°°"And a good one, too," commented Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Perhaps you will see Mme. de Nucingen to-day," said Eugene, addressing Goriot in an undertone. "She will welcome you with open arms, I am sure; she would want to ask you for all sorts of little details about me. I have found out that she will do anything in the world to be known by my cousin Mme. de Beauseant; don't forget to tell her that I love her too well not to think of trying to arrange this."

°°°°Rastignac went at once to the Ecole de Droit. He had no mind to stay a moment longer than was necessary in that odious house. He wasted his time that day; he had fallen a victim to that fever of the brain that accompanies the too vivid hopes of youth. Vautrin's arguments had set him meditating on social life, and he was deep in these reflections when he happened on his friend Bianchon in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

°°°°"What makes you look so solemn?" said the medical student, putting an arm through Eugene's as they went towards the Palais.

°°°°"I am tormented by temptations."

°°°°"What kind? There is a cure for temptation."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Yielding to it."

°°°°"You laugh, but you don't know what it is all about. Have you read Rousseau?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Do you remember that he asks the reader somewhere what he would do if he could make a fortune by killing an old mandarin somewhere in China by mere force of wishing it, and without stirring from Paris?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Well, then?"

°°°°"Pshaw! I am at my thirty-third mandarin."

°°°°"Seriously, though. Look here, suppose you were sure that you could do it, and had only to give a nod. Would you do it?"

°°°°"Is he well stricken in years, this mandarin of yours? Pshaw! after all, young or old, paralytic, or well and sound, my word for it. . . . Well, then. Hang it, no!"

°°°°"You are a good fellow, Bianchon. But suppose you loved a woman well enough to lose your soul in hell for her, and that she wanted money for dresses and a carriage, and all her whims, in fact?"

°°°°"Why, here you are taking away my reason, and want me to reason!"

°°°°"Well, then, Bianchon, I am mad; bring me to my senses. I have two sisters as beautiful and innocent as angels, and I want them to be happy. How am I to find two hundred thousand francs apiece for them in the next five years? Now and then in life, you see, you must play for heavy stakes, and it is no use wasting your luck on low play."

°°°°"But you are only stating the problem that lies before every one at the outset of his life, and you want to cut the Gordian knot with a sword. If that is the way of it, dear boy, you must be an Alexander, or to the hulks you go. For my own part, I am quite contented with the little lot I mean to make for myself somewhere in the country, when I mean to step into my father's shoes and plod along. A man's affections are just as fully satisfied by the smallest circle as they can be by a vast circumference. Napoleon himself could only dine once, and he could not have more mistresses than a house student at the Capuchins. Happiness, old man, depends on what lies between the sole of your foot and the crown of your head; and whether it costs a million or a hundred louis, the actual amount of pleasure that you receive rests entirely with you, and is just exactly the same in any case. I am for letting that Chinaman live."

°°°°"Thank you, Bianchon; you have done me good. We will always be friends."

°°°°"I say," remarked the medical student, as they came to the end of a broad walk in the Jardin des Plantes, "I saw the Michonneau and Poiret a few minutes ago on a bench chatting with a gentleman whom I used to see in last year's troubles hanging about the Chamber of Deputies; he seems to me, in fact, to be a detective dressed up like a decent retired tradesman. Let us keep an eye on that couple; I will tell you why some time. Good-bye; it is nearly four o'clock, and I must be in to answer to my name."

°°°°When Eugene reached the lodging-house, he found Father Goriot waiting for him.

°°°°"Here," cried the old man, "here is a letter from her. Pretty handwriting, eh?"

°°°°Eugene broke the seal and read:--

°°°°"Sir,--I have heard from my father that you are fond of Italian music. I shall be delighted if you will do me the pleasure of accepting a seat in my box. La Fodor and Pellegrini will sing on Saturday, so I am sure that you will not refuse me. M. de Nucingen and I shall be pleased if you will dine with us; we shall be quite by ourselves. If you will come and be my escort, my husband will be glad to be relieved from his conjugal duties. Do not answer, but simply come.--Yours sincerely, D. DE N."

°°°°"Let me see it," said Father Goriot, when Eugene had read the letter. "You are going, aren't you?" he added, when he had smelled the writing-paper. "How nice it smells! Her fingers have touched it, that is certain."

°°°°"A woman does not fling herself at a man's head in this way," the student was thinking. "She wants to use me to bring back de Marsay; nothing but pique makes a woman do a thing like this."

°°°°"Well," said Father Goriot, "what are you thinking about?"

°°°°Eugene did not know the fever or vanity that possessed some women in those days; how should he imagine that to open a door in the Faubourg Saint-Germain a banker's wife would go to almost any length. For the coterie of the Faubourg Saint-Germain was a charmed circle, and the women who moved in it were at that time the queens of society; and among the greatest of these Dames du Petit-Chateau, as they were called, were Mme. de Beauseant and her friends the Duchesse de Langeais and the Duchesse de Maufrigneause. Rastignac was alone in his ignorance of the frantic efforts made by women who lived in the Chausee-d'Antin to enter this seventh heaven and shine among the brightest constellations of their sex. But his cautious disposition stood him in good stead, and kept his judgment cool, and the not altogether enviable power of imposing instead of accepting conditions.

°°°°"Yes, I am going," he replied.

°°°°So it was curiosity that drew him to Mme. de Nucingen; while, if she had treated him disdainfully, passion perhaps might have brought him to her feet. Still he waited almost impatiently for to-morrow, and the hour when he could go to her. There is almost as much charm for a young man in a first flirtation as there is in first love. The certainty of success is a source of happiness to which men do not confess, and all the charm of certain women lies in this. The desire of conquest springs no less from the easiness than from the difficulty of triumph, and every passion is excited or sustained by one or the other of these two motives which divide the empire of love. Perhaps this division is one result of the great question of temperaments; which, after all, dominates social life. The melancholic temperament may stand in need of the tonic of coquetry, while those of nervous or sanguine complexion withdraw if they meet with a too stubborn resistance. In other words, the lymphatic temperament is essentially despondent, and the rhapsodic is bilious.

°°°°Eugene lingered over his toilette with an enjoyment of all its little details that is grateful to a young man's self-love, though he will not own to it for fear of being laughed at. He thought, as he arranged his hair, that a pretty woman's glances would wander through the dark curls. He indulged in childish tricks like any young girl dressing for a dance, and gazed complacently at his graceful figure while he smoothed out the creases of his coat.

°°°°"There are worse figures, that is certain," he said to himself.

°°°°Then he went downstairs, just as the rest of the household were sitting down to dinner, and took with good humor the boisterous applause excited by his elegant appearance. The amazement with which any attention to dress is regarded in a lodging-house is a very characteristic trait. No one can put on a new coat but every one else must say his say about it.

°°°°"Clk! clk! clk!" cried Bianchon, making the sound with his tongue against the roof of his mouth, like a driver urging on a horse.

°°°°"He holds himself like a duke and a peer of France," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Are you going a-courting?" inquired Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried the artist.

°°°°"My compliments to my lady your wife," from the employe at the Museum.

°°°°"Your wife; have you a wife?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, in compartments, water-tight and floats, guaranteed fast color, all prices from twenty-five to forty sous, neat check patterns in the latest fashion and best taste, will wash, half- linen, half-cotton, half-wool; a certain cure for toothache and other complaints under the patronage of the Royal College of Physicians! children like it! a remedy for headache, indigestion, and all other diseases affecting the throat, eyes, and ears!" cried Vautrin, with a comical imitation of the volubility of a quack at a fair. "And how much shall we say for this marvel, gentlemen? Twopence? No. Nothing of the sort. All that is left in stock after supplying the Great Mogul. All the crowned heads of Europe, including the Gr-r-rand Duke of Baden, have been anxious to get a sight of it. Walk up! walk up! gentlemen! Pay at the desk as you go in! Strike up the music there! Brooum, la, la, trinn! la, la, boum! boum! Mister Clarinette, there you are out of tune!" he added gruffly; "I will rap your knuckles for you!"

°°°°"Goodness! what an amusing man!" said Mme. Vauquer to Mme. Couture; "I should never feel dull with him in the house."

°°°°This burlesque of Vautrin's was the signal for an outburst of merriment, and under cover of jokes and laughter Eugene caught a glance from Mlle. Taillefer; she had leaned over to say a few words in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"The cab is at the door," announced Sylvie.

°°°°"But where is he going to dine?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"With Madame la Baronne de Nucingen."

°°°°"M. Goriot's daughter," said the law student.

°°°°At this, all eyes turned to the old vermicelli maker; he was gazing at Eugene with something like envy in his eyes.

°°°°Rastignac reached the house in the Rue Saint-Lazare, one of those many-windowed houses with a mean-looking portico and slender columns, which are considered the thing in Paris, a typical banker's house, decorated in the most ostentatious fashion; the walls lined with stucco, the landings of marble mosaic. Mme. de Nucingen was sitting in a little drawing-room; the room was painted in the Italian fashion, and decorated like a restaurant. The Baroness seemed depressed. The effort that she made to hide her feelings aroused Eugene's interest; it was plain that she was not playing a part. He had expected a little flutter of excitement at his coming, and he found her dispirited and sad. The disappointment piqued his vanity.

°°°°"My claim to your confidence is very small, madame," he said, after rallying her on her abstracted mood; "but if I am in the way, please tell me so frankly; I count on your good faith."

°°°°"No, stay with me," she said; "I shall be all alone if you go. Nucingen is dining in town, and I do not want to be alone; I want to be taken out of myself."

°°°°"But what is the matter?"

°°°°"You are the very last person whom I should tell," she exclaimed.

°°°°"Then I am connected in some way in this secret. I wonder what it is?"

°°°°"Perhaps. Yet, no," she went on; "it is a domestic quarrel, which ought to be buried in the depths of the heart. I am very unhappy; did I not tell you so the day before yesterday? Golden chains are the heaviest of all fetters."

°°°°When a woman tells a young man that she is very unhappy, and when the young man is clever, and well dressed, and has fifteen hundred francs lying idle in his pocket, he is sure to think as Eugene said, and he becomes a coxcomb.

°°°°"What can you have left to wish for?" he answered. "You are young, beautiful, beloved, and rich."

°°°°"Do not let us talk of my affairs," she said shaking her head mournfully. "We will dine together tete-a-tete, and afterwards we will go to hear the most exquisite music. Am I to your taste?" she went on, rising and displaying her gown of white cashmere, covered with Persian designs in the most superb taste.

°°°°"I wish that you were altogether mine," said Eugene; "you are charming."

°°°°"You would have a forlorn piece of property," she said, smiling bitterly. "There is nothing about me that betrays my wretchedness; and yet, in spite of appearances, I am in despair. I cannot sleep; my troubles have broken my night's rest; I shall grow ugly."

°°°°"Oh! that is impossible," cried the law student; "but I am curious to know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface."

°°°°"Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me," she said. "Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else, for pity's sake," she added. "Let me show you my rooms."

°°°°"No; let us stay here," answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen's hand in his. She surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

°°°°"Listen," said Rastignac; "if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end to them, even if I have to kill half-a- dozen men; or I shall go, never to return."

°°°°"Very well," she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of despair, "I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes," she said to herself, "I have no other resource left."

°°°°She rang the bell.

°°°°"Are the horses put in for the master?" she asked of the servant.

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve dinner at seven o'clock."

°°°°"Now, come with me," she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in the banker's carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be dreaming.

°°°°"To the Palais-Royal," she said to the coachman; "stop near the Theatre-Francais."

°°°°She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

°°°°"Another moment and she will escape me," he said to himself.

°°°°When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

°°°°"Is it true that you love me?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes," he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the uneasiness that he felt.

°°°°"You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"Are you ready to do my bidding?"

°°°°"Blindly."

°°°°"Have you ever been to a gaming-house?" she asked in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Never."

°°°°"Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse," she said. "Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my troubles when you come back."

°°°°"Devil take me, I'm sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am about, but I will obey you," he added, with inward exultation, as he thought, "She has gone too far to draw back-- she can refuse me nothing now!"

°°°°Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand clothes-dealer, and hurried to number 9, which happened to be the nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his stakes.

°°°°"If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it turns up, you will win thirty-six louis," said a respectable- looking, white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

°°°°Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number 21 (his own age). There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had won.

°°°°"Take your money off, sir," said the old gentleman; "you don't often win twice running by that system."

°°°°Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once more.

°°°°"You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own," the old gentleman said in his ear. "Take my advice and go away with your winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable, you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck."

°°°°Rastignac's head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the white-haired man's possession, and went down-stairs with his seven thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his luck.

°°°°"So, that is over; and now where will you take me?" he asked, as soon as the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild embrace.

°°°°"You have saved me!" she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

°°°°"I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then," she went on, "I wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over disgracefully. If, at a woman's utmost need, SOMEBODY heaps gold upon her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever! But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept money in such a way? MON DIEU! is it not natural to share everything with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how, then, can our interests be separate?

°°°°"You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I longed to escape, to run away . . . where, I did not know. Half the women in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture. Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think of me as a woman whom he has paid." She tried to conceal her tears from him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

°°°°"It is hideous, is it not," she cried, "to speak in a breath of money and affection. You cannot love me after this," she added.

°°°°The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great, and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution of society, had thrown Eugene's thoughts into confusion; he uttered soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

°°°°"You will not remember this against me?" she asked; "promise me that you will not."

°°°°"Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so," he said. She took his hand and held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep gratitude.

°°°°"I am free and happy once more, thanks to you," she said. "Oh! I have felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this," she went on, as she took only six of the banknotes. "In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns, for I really ought to go halves with you."

°°°°Eugene's maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, "I am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy," he took the money.

°°°°"It shall be a last stake in reserve," he said, "in case of misfortune."

°°°°"That was what I was dreading to hear," she cried, turning pale. "Oh, if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you! I should die of sorrow!"

°°°°They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin's cynical words began to ring in his ears.

°°°°"Seat yourself there," said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside the fire. "I have a difficult letter to write," she added. "Tell me what to say."

°°°°"Say nothing," Eugene answered her. "Put the bills in an envelope, direct it, and send it by your maid."

°°°°"Why, you are a love of a man," she said. "Ah! see what it is to have been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through," she went on, smiling at him.

°°°°"She is charming," thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

°°°°"Do you like it?" she asked, as she rang for the maid.

°°°°"Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me."

°°°°Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

°°°°Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of the table which he had admired in his cousin's house.

°°°°"Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens afterwards," she said.

°°°°"I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am a poor student, and I have my way to make."

°°°°"Oh! you will succeed," she said laughing. "You will see. All that you wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy."

°°°°It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris, believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

°°°°Eugene took the Baroness' hand in his, and by some light pressure of the fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

°°°°"That was gratitude," she said, "for devotion that I did not dare to hope for, but now it would be a promise."

°°°°"And will you give me no promise, ingrate?"

°°°°He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a discontented air that delighted her.

°°°°"I shall see you at the ball on Monday," she said.

°°°°As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections. He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible excuses for appropriating it.

°°°°He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the stairhead he saw a light in Goriot's room; the old man had lighted a candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and go to his room without "telling him all about his daughter," to use his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without reserve.

°°°°"Then they think that I am ruined!" cried Father Goriot, in an agony of jealousy and desperation. "Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a year! MON DIEU! Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why did not YOU come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I had hold of them, I would wring their necks. MON DIEU! CRYING! Did you say she was crying?"

°°°°"With her head on my waistcoat," said Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! give it to me," said Father Goriot. "What! my daughter's tears have fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me have it. By the terms of her marriage- contract, she ought to have the use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth."

°°°°"Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the waistcoat."

°°°°Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student's hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

°°°°"You will succeed," the old man said. "God is just, you see. I know an honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to save one tear to either of them."

°°°°"An honest man!" said Eugene to himself as he lay down. "Upon my word, I think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey the voice of conscience." Perhaps none but believers in God do good in secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

°°°°The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant, who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball. The Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there. Delphine's dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene's eyes; she was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who can guess all that passes in a woman's mind. Who has not refrained from giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure; he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room; all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

°°°°Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

°°°°The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in a diabolical fashion.

°°°°"And do you suppose," cried that cold-blooded logician, "that a young man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, in the Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way, I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but, after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be out of place here, where we only aim at the purely patriarchalorama. If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend," Vautrin continued, with half-paternal jocularity, "you must have three horses, a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further. Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good- bye to your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe going to carry your billets-doux for you? Do you mean to employ the stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom of your elders!" he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each syllable. "Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously, and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way."

°°°°Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by which he had sought to corrupt the student's mind.

°°°°Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve in the small hours. He rose at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew. He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money, and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

°°°°One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in their youth and in the almost frantic eagerness with which youth grasps at pleasure. They are reckless with anything obtained on credit, while everything for which they must pay in ready money is made to last as long as possible; if they cannot have all that they want, they make up for it, it would seem, by squandering what they have. To state the matter simply--a student is far more careful of his hat than of his coat, because the latter being a comparatively costly article of dress, it is in the nature of things that a tailor should be a creditor; but it is otherwise with the hatter; the sums of money spent with him are so modest, that he is the most independent and unmanageable of his tribe, and it is almost impossible to bring him to terms. The young man in the balcony of a theatre who displays a gorgeous waistcoat for the benefit of the fair owners of opera glasses, has very probably no socks in his wardrobe, for the hosier is another of the genus of weevils that nibble at the purse. This was Rastignac's condition. His purse was always empty for Mme. Vauquer, always full at the demand of vanity; there was a periodical ebb and flow in his fortunes, which was seldom favorable to the payment of just debts. If he was to leave that unsavory and mean abode, where from time to time his pretensions met with humiliation, the first step was to pay his hostess for a month's board and lodging, and the second to purchase furniture worthy of the new lodgings he must take in his quality of dandy, a course that remained impossible. Rastignac, out of his winnings at cards, would pay his jeweler exorbitant prices for gold watches and chains, and then, to meet the exigencies of play, would carry them to the pawnbroker, that discreet and forbidding- looking friend of youth; but when it was a question of paying for board or lodging, or for the necessary implements for the cultivation of his Elysian fields, his imagination and pluck alike deserted him. There was no inspiration to be found in vulgar necessity, in debts contracted for past requirements. Like most of those who trust to their luck, he put off till the last moment the payment of debts that among the bourgeoisie are regarded as sacred engagements, acting on the plan of Mirabeau, who never settled his baker's bill until it underwent a formidable transformation into a bill of exchange.

°°°°It was about this time when Rastignac was down on his luck and fell into debt, that it became clear to the law student's mind that he must have some more certain source of income if he meant to live as he had been doing. But while he groaned over the thorny problems of his precarious situation, he felt that he could not bring himself to renounce the pleasures of this extravagant life, and decided that he must continue it at all costs. His dreams of obtaining a fortune appeared more and more chimerical, and the real obstacles grew more formidable. His initiation into the secrets of the Nucingen household had revealed to him that if he were to attempt to use this love affair as a means of mending his fortunes, he must swallow down all sense of decency, and renounce all the generous ideas which redeem the sins of youth. He had chosen this life of apparent splendor, but secretly gnawed by the canker worm of remorse, a life of fleeting pleasure dearly paid for by persistent pain; like Le Distrait of La Bruyere, he had descended so far as to make his bed in a ditch; but (also like Le Distrait) he himself was uncontaminated as yet by the mire that stained his garments.

°°°°"So we have killed our mandarin, have we?" said Bianchon one day as they left the dinner table.

°°°°"Not yet," he answered, "but he is at his last gasp."

°°°°The medical student took this for a joke, but it was not a jest. Eugene had dined in the house that night for the first time for a long while, and had looked thoughtful during the meal. He had taken his place beside Mlle. Taillefer, and stayed through the dessert, giving his neighbor an expressive glance from time to time. A few of the boarders discussed the walnuts at the table, and others walked about the room, still taking part in the conversation which had begun among them. People usually went when they chose; the amount of time that they lingered being determined by the amount of interest that the conversation possessed for them, or by the difficulty of the process of digestion. In winter-time the room was seldom empty before eight o'clock, when the four women had it all to themselves, and made up for the silence previously imposed upon them by the preponderating masculine element. This evening Vautrin had noticed Eugene's abstractedness, and stayed in the room, though he had seemed to be in a hurry to finish his dinner and go. All through the talk afterwards he had kept out of the sight of the law student, who quite believed that Vautrin had left the room. He now took up his position cunningly in the sitting-room instead of going when the last boarders went. He had fathomed the young man's thoughts, and felt that a crisis was at hand. Rastignac was, in fact, in a dilemma, which many another young man must have known.

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen might love him, or might merely be playing with him, but in either case Rastignac had been made to experience all the alternations of hope and despair of genuine passion, and all the diplomatic arts of a Parisienne had been employed on him. After compromising herself by continually appearing in public with Mme. de Beauseant's cousin she still hesitated, and would not give him the lover's privileges which he appeared to enjoy. For a whole month she had so wrought on his senses, that at last she had made an impression on his heart. If in the earliest days the student had fancied himself to be master, Mme. de Nucingen had since become the stronger of the two, for she had skilfully roused and played upon every instinct, good or bad, in the two or three men comprised in a young student in Paris. This was not the result of deep design on her part, nor was she playing a part, for women are in a manner true to themselves even through their grossest deceit, because their actions are prompted by a natural impulse. It may have been that Delphine, who had allowed this young man to gain such an ascendency over her, conscious that she had been too demonstrative, was obeying a sentiment of dignity, and either repented of her concessions, or it pleased her to suspend them. It is so natural to a Parisienne, even when passion has almost mastered her, to hesitate and pause before taking the plunge; to probe the heart of him to whom she intrusts her future. And once already Mme. de Nucingen's hopes had been betrayed, and her loyalty to a selfish young lover had been despised. She had good reason to be suspicious. Or it may have been that something in Eugene's manner (for his rapid success was making a coxcomb of him) had warned her that the grotesque nature of their position had lowered her somewhat in his eyes. She doubtless wished to assert her dignity; he was young, and she would be great in his eyes; for the lover who had forsaken her had held her so cheap that she was determined that Eugene should not think her an easy conquest, and for this very reason--he knew that de Marsay had been his predecessor. Finally, after the degradation of submission to the pleasure of a heartless young rake, it was so sweet to her to wander in the flower-strewn realms of love, that it was not wonderful that she should wish to dwell a while on the prospect, to tremble with the vibrations of love, to feel the freshness of the breath of its dawn. The true lover was suffering for the sins of the false. This inconsistency is unfortunately only to be expected so long as men do not know how many flowers are mown down in a young woman's soul by the first stroke of treachery.

°°°°Whatever her reasons may have been, Delphine was playing with Rastignac, and took pleasure in playing with him, doubtless because she felt sure of his love, and confident that she could put an end to the torture as soon as it was her royal pleasure to do so. Eugene's self-love was engaged; he could not suffer his first passage of love to end in a defeat, and persisted in his suit like a sportsman determined to bring down at least one partridge to celebrate his first Feast of Saint-Hubert. The pressure of anxiety, his wounded self-love, his despair, real or feigned, drew him nearer and nearer to this woman. All Paris credited him with this conquest, and yet he was conscious that he had made no progress since the day when he saw Mme. de Nucingen for the first time. He did not know as yet that a woman's coquetry is sometimes more delightful than the pleasure of secure possession of her love, and was possessed with helpless rage. If, at this time, while she denied herself to love, Eugene gathered the springtide spoils of his life, the fruit, somewhat sharp and green, and dearly bought, was no less delicious to the taste. There were moments when he had not a sou in his pockets, and at such times he thought in spite of his conscience of Vautrin's offer and the possibility of fortune by a marriage with Mlle. Taillefer. Poverty would clamor so loudly that more than once he was on the point of yielding to the cunning temptations of the terrible sphinx, whose glance had so often exerted a strange spell over him.

°°°°Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau went up to their rooms; and Rastignac, thinking that he was alone with the women in the dining-room, sat between Mme. Vauquer and Mme. Couture, who was nodding over the woolen cuffs that she was knitting by the stove, and looked at Mlle. Taillefer so tenderly that she lowered her eyes.

°°°°"Can you be in trouble, M. Eugene?" Victorine said after a pause.

°°°°"Who has not his troubles?" answered Rastignac. "If we men were sure of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should have no troubles."

°°°°For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible to mistake its meaning.

°°°°"You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to- day, but are you sure that it will never change?"

°°°°A smile flitted over the poor girl's lips; it seemed as if a ray of light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

°°°°"Ah! but suppose," he said, "that you should be rich and happy to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of poverty?"

°°°°A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

°°°°"Even if he were very poor?"

°°°°Again the same mute answer.

°°°°"What nonsense are you talking, you two?" exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Never mind," answered Eugene; "we understand each other."

°°°°"So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?" The words were uttered in Vautrin's deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door as he spoke.

°°°°"Oh! how you startled me!" Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed together.

°°°°"I might make a worse choice," said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin's voice had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

°°°°"No bad jokes, gentlemen!" said Mme. Couture. "My dear, let us go upstairs."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene and Vautrin were left alone.

°°°°"I felt sure you would come round to it," said the elder man with the coolness that nothing seemed to shake. "But stay a moment! I have as much delicacy as anybody else. Don't make up your mind on the spur of the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like."

°°°°The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes, which he fluttered before the student's eyes. Eugene was in a most painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis to the Marquis d'Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud's house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

°°°°"You must see," said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor, "that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself under any obligation to you."

°°°°"Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise," answered the tempter. "You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion, and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women. Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you? Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account," Vautrin went on, and a smile stole over his lips. "Take these bits of paper and write across this," he added, producing a piece of stamped paper, "Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day twelvemonth, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful. In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of strength, my boy."

°°°°"What manner of man are you?" cried Eugene. "Were you created to torment me?"

°°°°"Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes, and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your first fright will go off like a conscript's terror on the battlefield. You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, 'Here are a hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,' and you could sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won't compromise you in any way, and you hesitate. 'Tis an effeminate age."

°°°°Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for it.

°°°°"Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally," Vautrin continued. "I mean to leave this country in a few months' time for America, and set about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do; I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look at. What is a man's life to me? Not THAT," he said, and he snapped his thumb-nail against his teeth. "A man, in short, is everything to me, or just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret; you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin, but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A sentiment-- what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part, I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is my passion. I knew Venice Preserved by heart. Have you met many men plucky enough when a comrade says, 'Let us bury a dead body!' to go and do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!"

°°°°Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student's repudiation, he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying their blameworthy actions to themselves.

°°°°"He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is certain," said Eugene to himself.

°°°°He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of Vautrin's ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for his own ends, raised him in the student's eyes; but the thought of a compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de Restaud's.

°°°°For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid Messieurs de Trailles and d'Ajuda, played at whist for part of the evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to consider that his luck was heaven's reward for his perseverance in the right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin whether the bill he had given was still in the other's possession; and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand francs with a not unnatural relief.

°°°°"Everything is going on well," said Vautrin.

°°°°"But I am not your accomplice," said Eugene.

°°°°"I know, I know," Vautrin broke in. "You are still acting like a child. You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset."

°°°°Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not without good reason, his own suspicions.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," this M. Gondureau was saying, "I do not see any cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of Police----"

°°°°"Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter," said Gondureau.

°°°°Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by that word "police," and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers, confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where the BONUS flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature (an illegible scrawl) and by his title--"His Excellency Monseigneur le Ministre," five words which produce as much effect as the il Bondo Cani of the Calife de Bagdad, five words which in the eyes of this low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a moment? Pronounce the words "His Excellency," and these poor folk will forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests. Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences, annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the deus ex machina, the magical words "His Excellency," so as to dazzle Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

°°°°"If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister . . . Ah! that is quite another thing," said Poiret.

°°°°"You seem to be guided by this gentleman's opinion, and you hear what he says," said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau. "Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the nickname Trompe-la-Mort."

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort?" said Pioret. "Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves that nickname."

°°°°"Well, yes," said the detective. "They call him so because he has been so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----"

°°°°"Then is he a man of honor?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man's crime upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler, who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been unexceptionable."

°°°°"But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, why should he want me?" asked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Oh yes," said Poiret, "if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as to tell us, really knows for a certainty----"

°°°°"Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed Trompe-la- Mort, is in the confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing their affairs, which want a MAN OF MARK to see about them."

°°°°"Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?" asked Poiret. "This gentleman calls himself a MAN OF MARK because he is a MARKED MAN-- branded, you know."

°°°°"This so-called Vautrin," said the detective, "receives the money belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for their benefit."

°°°°"Their mistresses! You mean their wives," remarked Poiret.

°°°°"No, sir. A convict's wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We call them concubines."

°°°°"Then they all live in a state of concubinage?"

°°°°"Naturally."

°°°°"Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow. Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society."

°°°°"But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues, my dear sir----"

°°°°"Of course not, sir; but still----"

°°°°"Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie," said Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"You see how it is, mademoiselle," Gondureau continued. "The Government may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the Society of the Ten Thousand----"

°°°°"Ten Thousand Thieves!" cried Pioret in alarm.

°°°°"No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they won't touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society. If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds, we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again; they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, "What is there to hinder Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?"

°°°°"Oh!" said the detective, "a man is told off to follow him everywhere he goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions."

°°°°"You are quite right, sir," said Poiret, "utterly disgraced he would be."

°°°°"But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without more ado," remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but," he added in her ear, "keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.-- Trompe-la-Mort, when he came back here," he went on aloud "slipped into the skin of an honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning, that he is! You don't catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of consequence, who transacts a good deal of business."

°°°°"Naturally," said Poiret to himself.

°°°°"And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of the real Vautrin, he would put every one's back up among the business men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about."

°°°°"Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman," said Mlle. Michonneau briskly.

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him," said the detective. "I will tell you a secret--he does not like them."

°°°°"Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to identify him for two thousand francs."

°°°°"Nothing simpler," said the stranger. "I will send you a little bottle containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder, and PRESTO! the letters will appear."

°°°°"Why, that is just nothing at all," said Poiret.

°°°°"Well, do you agree?" said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

°°°°"But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all," said Mlle. Michonneau; "am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"What will you give me then?"

°°°°"Five hundred francs."

°°°°"It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir."

°°°°"I assure you," said Poiret, "that mademoiselle has a great deal of conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very intelligent."

°°°°"Well, now," Mlle. Michonneau went on, "make it three thousand francs if he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man."

°°°°"Done!" said Gondureau, "but on the condition that the thing is settled to-morrow."

°°°°"Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first."

°°°°"You are a sly one," said the detective as he rose to his feet. "Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M. Gondureau."

°°°°Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier's lecture, overheard the sufficiently striking nickname of Trompe-la-Mort, and caught the celebrated chief detective's "Done!"

°°°°"Why didn't you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a year," said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Why didn't I?" she asked. "Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without paying, and that would be an abominable sell."

°°°°"And suppose you did warn him," Poiret went on, "didn't that gentleman say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything."

°°°°"Anyhow," thought Mlle. Michonneau, "I can't abide him. He says nothing but disagreeable things to me."

°°°°"But you can do better than that," Poiret resumed. "As that gentleman said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief. Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into the bargain!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau's musings did not permit her to listen very closely to the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret's lips like water dripping from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

°°°°By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau versus Dame Morin, when he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

°°°°As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"I knew how it would end," remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. "They have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week past."

°°°°"Yes," he answered. "So she was found guilty."

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. Morin."

°°°°"I am talking about Mlle. Victorine," said Mlle, Michonneau, as she entered Poiret's room with an absent air, "and you answer, 'Mme. Morin.' Who may Mme. Morin be?"

°°°°"What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?" demanded Poiret.

°°°°"Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!"

°°°°That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel's voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac's face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately; he had said to himself that a woman's happiness should atone for this venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face; the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice broke in upon their bliss.

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity,"

°°°°he sang mockingly.

°°°°Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand, the light touch of Rastignac's hair against her cheek, a word whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student's warm breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love's sake in the most famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

°°°°"The thing is arranged," Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. "Our two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half- past eight in the morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father's fortune and affections. A funny way of putting it, isn't it? Taillefer's youngster is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know."

°°°°Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders likewise appeared.

°°°°"That is just as I intended." Vautrin said. "You know quite well what you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you."

°°°°He made as though he would take Eugene's hand, but Rastignac hastily withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

°°°°"Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes of virtue about us!" murmured Vautrin. "But Papa Doliban has three millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride's white dress, even in your own eyes."

°°°°Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, "You look melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me."

°°°°The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

°°°°"Let us go up to your room," the worthy soul remarked, when he had asked Sylvie for the law student's key. "This morning," he resumed, "you thought that SHE did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting ME! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move into it in three days' time. Don't split upon me. She wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn't bear to keep the secret from you. You will be in the Rue d'Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that won't run away."

°°°°Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student's back was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney- piece and set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac's arms stamped in gold on the leather.

°°°°"My dear boy," said the kind soul, "I have been up to the eyes in this business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?"

°°°°"What is it?"

°°°°"There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn't that so? I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say to myself, 'He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.' If I were ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs- Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my little girl again, so light- hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, 'I am very happy, papa!' When they say 'father' stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me 'papa,' it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else."

°°°°The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

°°°°"It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!" he said, raising his head after a pause. "All the time we were going about together she chatted away about you. 'He is so nice-looking, papa; isn't he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?' Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no sign, and he was dying of impatience.

°°°°Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were written:

°°°°"I want you to think of me every hour, BECAUSE . . .   "DELPHINE."

°°°°That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as well as for his daughter's sake.

°°°°"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera- dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me with you, will you not?"

°°°°"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

°°°°"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you! Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

°°°°"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to her this evening, will you not?"

°°°°"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

°°°°"Can I be of any use?"

°°°°"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening; it is a matter of life and death."

°°°°"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance; "are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were saying down below? . . . TONNERRE DE DIEU! you have no notion what a tap A LA GORIOT is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh! the thing is impossible!"

°°°°"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

°°°°"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

°°°°"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to- morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

°°°°"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

°°°°"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting in an appearance----"

°°°°Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing at the threshold of his door and singing:

°°°°"Oh! Richard, oh my king!   All the world abandons thee!   Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

°°°°The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a . . . tra la la."

°°°°"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is waiting for you."

°°°°"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my Bordeaux."

°°°°"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste, hasn't she? Eh?"

°°°°Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and, all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

°°°°Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with consternation.

°°°°"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as merry as a skylark."

°°°°"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

°°°°"Bargain?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on, seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.

°°°°"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules," said the young painter.

°°°°"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

°°°°"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

°°°°"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

°°°°"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and the cheese."

°°°°"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach besides."

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme. Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

°°°°"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

°°°°Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

°°°°"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this, Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right- hand side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

°°°°"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a hundred chestnuts."

°°°°"Oh! oh!"

°°°°"Booououh!"

°°°°"Prrr!"

°°°°These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a set firework.

°°°°"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called Vautrin.

°°°°"Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for it, I have some currant cordial."

°°°°"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered the medical student.

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for it," he added.

°°°°"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little cakes."

°°°°"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out the biscuits."

°°°°The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously struck up with the following variations:

°°°°"Scissors to grind!"

°°°°"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

°°°°"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

°°°°"China to mend!"

°°°°"Boat ahoy!"

°°°°"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

°°°°"Old clo'!"

°°°°"Cherries all ripe!"

°°°°But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

°°°°A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

°°°°"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs. When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer, telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the bread is ready for the oven; to- morrow we will eat it up and whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? . . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

°°°°Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

°°°°"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the widow.

°°°°These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

°°°°"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

°°°°"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two ladies----"

°°°°"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your young lady."

°°°°"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

°°°°"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

°°°°He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead, and began to sing:

°°°°"Sleep, little darlings;   I watch while you slumber."

°°°°"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

°°°°"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. " 'Tis your duty as a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "the young fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife-- there's your fortune for you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I go out and call a cab--all my own self."

°°°°And he started out, singing as he went:

°°°°"Oh! sun! divine sun!   Ripening the pumpkins every one."

°°°°"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over. HE never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't lose what he hadn't got-- Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

°°°°Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just as he was, like a package, across the bed.

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know what dissipation is."

°°°°"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

°°°°"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such things----"

°°°°"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

°°°°"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer. It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

°°°°"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

°°°°"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

°°°°"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

°°°°"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress as she spoke.

°°°°Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.

°°°°"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

°°°°The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face, so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet, austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught something of the golden glory of heaven.

°°°°"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing her fingers through Eugene's hair.

°°°°"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

°°°°There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

°°°°"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though you had nothing on."

°°°°"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

°°°°"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint- Pierre (good soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme. Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now, don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will idolize you."

°°°°The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady; "we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments with all the care of an antiquary."

°°°°"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine. "Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them."

°°°°"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M. Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

°°°°"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

°°°°"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two women were alone together.

°°°°"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady; "just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

°°°°"Oh! mamma."

°°°°"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in for."

°°°°"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life," said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

°°°°"MON DIEU! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

°°°°With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room, Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned, and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

°°°°That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

°°°°But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the scent.

°°°°"A delusion," he said. "Collin's sorbonne is the most dangerous that has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the Place de Greve."

°°°°As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible expressions borrowed from thieves' Latin, thieves, of all people, being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking-- his council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth after the axe has done its work.

°°°°"Collin is playing us off," he continued. "When we come across a man like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la- Mort's paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent crime than to punish it."

°°°°"And you do a service to our country," said Poiret.

°°°°"Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you are," said the head of the department. "Yes, of course, we are serving our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle. I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get it back for you."

°°°°"Well, now," Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, "there are idiots who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as saying 'Good-day.' "

°°°°The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like apparition of the sham Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her boarders so long as she lived.

°°°°In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till close upon eleven o'clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin's first bottle of wine), was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme. Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o'clock, and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested, therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup belonging to Vautrin--it was standing with the others in the bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business. The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen. It ran thus:--

°°°°"I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my friend. Till two o'clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity's sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line will be enough. Say, 'I will hasten to you,' or else, 'I am ill.' But if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have happened? . . ."

°°°°"Yes, indeed, what has happened?" exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any more. "What time is it?"

°°°°"Half-past eleven," said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his coffee.

°°°°The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M. Taillefer's servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," he cried, "your father is asking for you-- something terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious."

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" exclaimed Vautrin. "How can people brawl when they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people have bad manners, and that is a fact."

°°°°"Sir!" cried Eugene.

°°°°"Well, what then, you big baby!" said Vautrin, swallowing down his coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. "Are there not duels every morning in Paris?" added Vautrin.

°°°°"I will go with you, Victorine," said Mme. Couture, and the two women hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance that said--"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me tears!"

°°°°"Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"I am all sorts of things," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Queer, isn't it?" said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession of commonplaces suited to the occasion. "Death takes us off without asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have other complaints that men don't suffer from. We bear children, and it takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her father will have to acknowledge her now!"

°°°°"There!" said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, "yesterday she had not a penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune."

°°°°"I say, M. Eugene!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "you have landed on your feet!"

°°°°At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the crumpled letter still in his hand.

°°°°"You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to be like the rest of them?" he asked.

°°°°"Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine," said Eugene, turning to Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised the onlookers at this scene.

°°°°Father Goriot caught the student's hand and grasped it warmly. He could have kissed it.

°°°°"Oh, ho!" said Vautrin, "the Italians have a good proverb--Col tempo."

°°°°"Is there any answer?" said Mme. de Nucingen's messenger, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Say that I will come directly."

°°°°The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he could not be prudent.

°°°°"What is to be done?" he exclaimed aloud. "There are no proofs!"

°°°°Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, "Luck comes to us while we sleep, young man," and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck dead.

°°°°"So there is a Divine Justice!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?"

°°°°"A stroke!" cried Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor," called the widow. "Oh, M. Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel."

°°°°Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.

°°°°"Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist's and ask for something that's good for the apoplexy."

°°°°Christophe likewise went.

°°°°"Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs."

°°°°Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow staircase, and laid upon his bed.

°°°°"I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter," said M. Goriot.

°°°°"Selfish old thing!" cried Mme. Vauquer. "Yes, go; I wish you may die like a dog."

°°°°"Just go and see if you can find some ether," said Mlle. Michonneau to Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the sick man's clothes.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress of the situation.

°°°°"Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be of some use in sparing my modesty," she said to Poiret, "instead of standing there like a stock."

°°°°Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

°°°°"There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily," exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on the shirt again.--"Ouf! How heavy he is," he added, as he laid the convict down.

°°°°"Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!" said the old maid briskly; her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of the furniture with greedy eyes. "Could we find some excuse for opening that desk?"

°°°°"It mightn't be quite right," responded Poiret to this.

°°°°"Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it doesn't belong to any one now. But we haven't time, there is the Vauquer."

°°°°"Here is the ether," said that lady. "I must say that this is an eventful day. Lord! that man can't have had a stroke; he is as white as curds."

°°°°"White as curds?" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"And his pulse is steady," said the widow, laying her hand on his breast.

°°°°"Steady?" said the astonished Poiret.

°°°°"He is all right."

°°°°"Do you think so?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look, mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears a wig. They say that red- haired people are either the worst or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?"

°°°°"Good to hang," said Poiret.

°°°°"Round a pretty woman's neck, you mean," said Mlle Michonneau, hastily. "Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman's duty to nurse you men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take yourself off," she added. "Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of dear M. Vautrin.

°°°°Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the room by his master.

°°°°Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself might be implicated. Vautrin's coolness still further dismayed him.

°°°°"Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?" Rastignac asked himself.

°°°°He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

°°°°"Well?" shouted Bianchon, "you have seen the Pilote?"

°°°°The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local journals.

°°°°"There is a wonderful history in it," said the house student of the Hopital Cochin. "Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?"

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----"

°°°°"You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master Taillefer's money!"

°°°°"Are all the devils of hell at my heels?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand," said Bianchon, "and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish."

°°°°"Just go to Mother Vauquer's," said Rastignac; "that scoundrel Vautrin has dropped down like one dead."

°°°°"Aha!" said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, "you confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself."

°°°°The law student's long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot's confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue d'Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.

°°°°"Such a love is my anchor of safety," he said to himself. "How the old man's heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!"

°°°°He took out his watch and admired it.

°°°°"I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?"

°°°°Rastignac's battle with himself went on for a long while; and though the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison Vauquer through the gathering dusk.

°°°°Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau's officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer's duel. They were anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the probable change in Victorine's prospects. Father Goriot alone was absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the same look that had read his thoughts before--the look that had such power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.

°°°°"Well, dear boy," said the escaped convict, "I am likely to cheat death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors."

°°°°"A bull you might say," cried the widow.

°°°°"You really might be sorry to see me still alive," said Vautrin in Rastignac's ear, thinking that he guessed the student's thoughts. "You must be mighty sure of yourself."

°°°°"Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort," said Bianchon; "and, upon my word, that name would do very well for you."

°°°°Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle. Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature had dropped from the convict's face; from the unmistakable ferocity of that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the sitting-room.

°°°°"In the name of the King and the Law!" said an officer, but the words were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.

°°°°Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men, who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden, and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin's face was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair, the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines, his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor. Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.

°°°°"You are not in the politest of humors to-day," he remarked to the chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his head.

°°°°"Gentlemen," he said, "put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call on those present to witness that I make no resistance."

°°°°A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally sudden cessation.

°°°°"There's a sell for you, master crusher," the convict added, looking at the famous director of police.

°°°°"Come, strip!" said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.

°°°°"Why?" asked Collin. "There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and surrender."

°°°°He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to overwhelm his audience.

°°°°"Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle," he went on, addressing a little, white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table; and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to draw up a document. "I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin, otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years' penal servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my nickname.--If I had as much as raised my hand," he went on, addressing the other lodgers, "those three sneaking wretches yonder would have drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer's domestic hearth. The rogues have laid their heads together to set a trap for me."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.

°°°°"Good Lord!" she cried, "this does give one a turn; and me at the Gaite with him only last night!" she said to Sylvie.

°°°°"Summon your philosophy, mamma," Collin resumed. "Is it a misfortune to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me." His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his eyes.--"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept any time you like! Do you understand?" And he sang:

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity."

°°°°"Don't you trouble yourself," he went on; "I can get in my money. They are too much afraid of me to swindle me."

°°°°The convicts' prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur, its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the speaker's discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno, wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own evil thoughts.

°°°°"Who betrayed me?" said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"It was you, old cat!" he said. "That sham stroke of apoplexy was your doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs," he shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession of his effects. "The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here," he said tapping his forehead. "Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?" he said, turning to the chief. "It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?" he asked of the police officers. "A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money," he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. "These folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?" he asked proudly. "There is some good there," he said tapping his heart; "I have never betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut," he said to the old maid, "they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them sick. Rake in your gains."

°°°°He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers' faces.

°°°°"What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before? A convict of Collin's stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and I am a match for them all."

°°°°"Ye gods!" cried the painter, "what a magnificent sketch one might make of him!"

°°°°"Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master of ceremonies to the widow" (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given by prisoners to the guillotine), "be a good fellow, and tell me if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don't want him to suffer for some one else, that would not be fair."

°°°°But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Collin, addressing the lodgers, "they will take me away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me to send you figs from Provence."

°°°°He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at Rastignac.

°°°°"Good-bye, Eugene," he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange transition from his previous rough and stern manner. "If you should be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend," and, in spite of his shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, "One, two!" like a fencing-master, and lunged. "If anything goes wrong, apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service."

°°°°The strange speaker's manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the pantomime.

°°°°As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house, Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress' temples with vinegar, looked round at the bewildered lodgers.

°°°°"Well," said she, "he was a man, he was, for all that."

°°°°Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead- alive, mummy-like figure, crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, "If that creature is going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out."

°°°°In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save Poiret, was of the medical student's opinion, so that the latter, strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

°°°°"You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us," he said; "speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at once."

°°°°"At once!" echoed Poiret in amazement.

°°°°Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in her ear.

°°°°"I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here as any one else," she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

°°°°"Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Monsieur is taking Collin's part" she said, with a questioning, malignant glance at the law student; "it is not difficult to guess why."

°°°°Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

°°°°"Let her alone!" cried the boarders.

°°°°Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

°°°°"Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas," said the painter, turning to Mme. Vauquer. "If you don't show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are."

°°°°At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in them.

°°°°"Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness," she cried, interrupting herself, "I can't help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is moving----"

°°°°"Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux's in the Place Sorbonne," cried Bianchon.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Come, now," she said; "you would not be the ruin of my establishment, would you, eh? There's a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening."

°°°°"Never a bit of it!" cried the boarders. "She must go, and go this minute!"

°°°°"But the poor lady has had no dinner," said Poiret, with piteous entreaty.

°°°°"She can go and dine where she likes," shouted several voices.

°°°°"Turn her out, the spy!"

°°°°"Turn them both out! Spies!"

°°°°"Gentlemen," cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love gives to the ovine male, "respect the weaker sex."

°°°°"Spies are of no sex!" said the painter.

°°°°"A precious sexorama!"

°°°°"Turn her into the streetorama!"

°°°°"Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house, it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We have paid our money, and we are not going," said Poiret, putting on his cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer was remonstrating.

°°°°"Naughty boy!" said the painter, with a comical look; "run away, naughty little boy!"

°°°°"Look here," said Bianchon; "if you do not go, all the rest of us will," and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room- door.

°°°°"Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?" cried Mme. Vauquer. "I am a ruined woman. You can't stay here; they will go further, do something violent."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

°°°°"She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn't."

°°°°These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions, borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low voice in her hostess' ear, and then--"I shall go to Mme. Buneaud's," she said, with a threatening look.

°°°°"Go where you please, mademoiselle," said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. "Go and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the food is cheap and nasty."

°°°°The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out laughing at the sight of him.

°°°°"Hist!--st!--st! Poiret," shouted the painter. "Hallo! I say, Poiret, hallo!" The employe from the Museum began to sing:

°°°°"Partant pour la Syrie,   Le jeune et beau Dunois . . ."

°°°°"Get along with you; you must be dying to go, trahit sua quemque voluptas!" said Bianchon.

°°°°"Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil," said the tutor.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret's arm, with an appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together, the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause, followed by peals of laughter.

°°°°"Bravo, Poiret!"

°°°°"Who would have thought it of old Poiret!"

°°°°"Apollo Poiret!"

°°°°"Mars Poiret!"

°°°°"Intrepid Poiret!"

°°°°A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

°°°°"The house might as well be burned down at once," cried she, "if there are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three o'clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those ladies at that poor man's expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me to send their things, because they are going to live with her father. M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone! . . ."

°°°°She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

°°°°"Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think," she cried.

°°°°Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

°°°°"What! another windfall for somebody!" was Sylvie's comment.

°°°°But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

°°°°"Goriot in a cab!" cried the boarders; "the world is coming to an end."

°°°°The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man's arm.

°°°°"Come," he said, with gladness in his eyes.

°°°°"Then you haven't heard the news?" said Eugene. "Vautrin was an escaped convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead."

°°°°"Very well, but what business is it of ours?" replied Father Goriot. "I am going to dine with my daughter in YOUR HOUSE, do you understand? She is expecting you. Come!"

°°°°He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

°°°°"Now, let us have dinner," cried the painter, and every one drew his chair to the table.

°°°°"Well, I never," said the portly Sylvie. "Nothing goes right to- day! The haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it is, more's the pity!"

°°°°Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day's events; but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels, jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day. Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope was the portly Sylvie.

°°°°That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in the cab. The old man's voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears like words spoken in a dream.

°°°°"It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don't know what pretty ways she has; at table she will look after me, 'Here, papa, just try this, it is nice.' And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her."

°°°°"It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down."

°°°°"Upside down?" repeated Father Goriot. "Why, the world has never been so right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood would be as sweet as honey."

°°°°"I feel as if I were coming back to life again," said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, hurry up there!" cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in front. "Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the place I told you of in ten minutes time."

°°°°With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous celerity.

°°°°"How that fellow crawls!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"But where are you taking me?" Eugene asked him.

°°°°"To your own house," said Goriot.

°°°°The cab stopped in the Rue d'Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning to bachelor ways.

°°°°"Come along upstairs," he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard, and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen's maid. Eugene found himself in a charming set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description, the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

°°°°"So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to understand!"

°°°°Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just witnessed was too much for Rastignac's over- wrought nerves, after the day's strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was almost overcome by it.

°°°°"I felt sure myself that he loved you," murmured Father Goriot, while Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring about this final transformation scene.

°°°°"But you must see your rooms," said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed, down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of Delphine's apartment.

°°°°"There is no bed," said Rastignac.

°°°°"No, monsieur," she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene, looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

°°°°"You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for ever," he said in her ear. "Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret."

°°°°"Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose," growled the father.

°°°°"You know quite well that 'we' means you."

°°°°"Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a good idea of mine to say to you, 'There are some nice rooms to let in the Rue d'Artois; let us furnish them for him?' And she would not hear of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers else."

°°°°"Was that how it happened?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----"

°°°°Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low though the sound was.

°°°°The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was wanting there.

°°°°"Have we guessed your wishes rightly?" she asked, as they returned to the drawing-room for dinner.

°°°°"Yes," he said, "only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----"

°°°°"Ah! ah! you say me nay already," she said with arch imperiousness, and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman's way of laughing away scruples.

°°°°But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self- questioning, and Vautrin's arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into abandoning his high- minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled his mind.

°°°°"Do you really mean to refuse?" said Mme. de Nucingen. "And do you know what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying my affection? If you love me, if I-- love you, why should you shrink back from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment, you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this. . . . Ah!" she cried, as Eugene's passionate glance was turned on her, "and you are making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you. Speak!-- Father," she said after a pause, "make him listen to reason. Can he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?"

°°°°Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

°°°°"Child that you are!" she cried again, catching Eugene's hand. "You are just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man finds insurmountable; a woman's hand opens the way and you shrink back! Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to repay me my loan of today? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your garret must be if it is like papa's room! See, dinner is waiting all this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don't you answer?" she said, shaking his hand. "MON DIEU! papa, make up his mind for him, or I will go away and never see him any more."

°°°°"I will make up your mind," said Goriot, coming down from the clouds. "Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews, isn't it?"

°°°°"There is positively no help for it," said Eugene.

°°°°"All right, I will give you credit," said the other, drawing out a cheap leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. "I have turned Jew myself; I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you can return it some time or other."

°°°°Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot's warmly.

°°°°"Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?"

°°°°"Oh! my poor father," said Mme. de Nucingen, "how did you do it?"

°°°°"Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you, and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to myself, 'She will never be able to pay for them.' The attorney says that those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year, and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, 'How happy they are going to be!' and--well, now, are you not happy?"

°°°°"Oh papa! papa!" cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright and radiant.

°°°°"Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel for you now?"

°°°°"Why, children, why Delphinette!" cried Goriot, who had not felt his daughter's heart beat against his breast for ten years, "do you want me to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are quits already." And the old man strained her to his breast with such fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

°°°°"Oh! you are hurting me!" she said.

°°°°"I am hurting you!" He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men. Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his fingers had grasped too roughly.

°°°°"Oh! no, no," he cried. "I have not hurt you, have I?" and his smile seemed to repeat the question. "YOU have hurt me with that cry just now.--The things cost rather more than that," he said in her ear, with another gentle kiss, "but I had to deceive him about it, or he would have been angry."

°°°°Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration which shapes the beliefs of youth.

°°°°"I will be worthy of all this," he cried.

°°°°"Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said," and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law student on the forehead.

°°°°"He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you," said Father Goriot. "Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus."

°°°°"Oh! why did you tell her?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"Eugene," Delphine said in his ear, "I have one regret now this evening. Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!"

°°°°"This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!" cried Goriot. "God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer through you, and I can still say, 'In this short month of February I had more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.'--Look at me, Fifine!" he said to his daughter. "She is very beautiful, is she not? Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell instead. Come, let us have dinner," he added, scarcely knowing what he said, "everything is ours."

°°°°"Poor dear father!"

°°°°He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a kiss on the plaits of hair. "If you only knew, little one, how happy you can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me, say that you will!"

°°°°"Yes, dear father."

°°°°"Say it again."

°°°°"Yes, I will, my kind father."

°°°°"Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed my own wishes. Let us have dinner."

°°°°The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot's spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter's feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more tender.

°°°°"You see!" Delphine said with a look at Eugene, "so long as my father is with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes."

°°°°Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

°°°°"And when will the rooms be ready?" asked Eugene, looking round. "We must all leave them this evening, I suppose."

°°°°"Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me," she answered, with an eloquent glance. "It is our night at the Italiens."

°°°°"I shall go to the pit," said her father.

°°°°It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen's carriage was waiting for her, and Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing that the father's self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her father's adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future of love.

°°°°They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso's lamentations as recorded in Byron's poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force of truth they fall far short of the widow's cry from the depths.

°°°°"Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life, now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people! The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and Christophe will have to go!"

°°°°The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said, "Madame," questioningly.

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Sylvie, "he is like a dog."

°°°°"In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a little dog."

°°°°"Lord!" said Sylvie, flinging up her head, "those old maids are up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"There's that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict," the widow went on. "Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I can't bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny on the nail too."

°°°°"And open-handed he was!" said Christophe.

°°°°"There is some mistake," said Sylvie.

°°°°"Why, no there isn't! he said so himself!" said Mme. Vauquer. "And to think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it's like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap; we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again; there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred, will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that is just what it is!"

°°°°"And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear," cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Don't speak of her, she is a wicked woman!" said Mme. Vauquer. "She is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed and murdered people in her time. SHE ought to be put in jail for life instead of that poor dear----"

°°°°Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

°°°°"Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers," said the widow, sighing.

°°°°But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d'Antin.

°°°°"Sylvie!" cried the widow, "this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There's a weight on my chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow, Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen," and she went.

°°°°"What is the matter now?" Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

°°°°"Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a bit. It's the first time she has cried since I've been with her."

°°°°By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had "made up her mind to it." True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A lover's farewell glance at his lady-love's window is not more mournful than Mme. Vauquer's survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take his (Rastignac's) place; that the official from the Museum had often expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture's rooms; and that in a very few days her household would be on the old footing.

°°°°"God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here. There'll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you'll see," and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining- room. "Whose turn will it be, I wonder?"

°°°°"It is just as well that we are moving out," said Eugene to Father Goriot in a low voice.

°°°°"Madame," said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, "I have not seen Mistigris these three days."

°°°°"Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if HE has gone and left us, I----"

°°°°The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this dreadful portent.

°°°°By twelve o'clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse's great ball, which had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was slipped in with the card.

°°°°"I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to   interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the   card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make   the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud's sister. Pray introduce that   charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your   affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.   "VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT."

°°°°"Well," said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, "Mme. de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de Nucingen."

°°°°He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of Paris--will never have a rival.

°°°°Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country, it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love exist there without that wealth?

°°°°If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water, without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls, waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look with pity upon those of earth.

°°°°Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it. In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one man, but of a whole nation.

°°°°But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a brilliant future.

°°°°So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

°°°°"Madame is in her room," Therese came to tell him. The woman's voice made him start.

°°°°He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid the blossom.

°°°°"Well," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "here you are."

°°°°"Guess what I bring for you," said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He took possession of her arm to kiss her hand

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

°°°°"And I owe this happiness to you--to THEE" (she whispered the more intimate word in his ear); "but Therese is in my dressing- room, let us be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes to me through YOU--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint- Germain, it is because I shall meet you there."

°°°°"Mme. de Beauseant's note seems to say very plainly that she does not expect to see the BARON de Nucingen at her ball; don't you think so?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, yes," said the Baroness as she returned the letter. "Those women have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go. My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully dressed.--Eugene," she went on, lowering her voice, "she will go to dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a woman's character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband's mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant's ball in tissue of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I mean to be perfectly happy."

°°°°At one o'clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In the midst of their lovers' farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to come, she said in a troubled voice, "I am very fearful, superstitious. Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe."

°°°°"Child!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?" she asked, laughingly.

°°°°Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left its sweetness on the lips.

°°°°"Well?" cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene; "I will tell you everything to-morrow."

°°°°"Everything, will you not?" cried the old man. "Go to bed. To- morrow our happy life will begin."

°°°°Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging- house, and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it; but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran lightly upstairs.

°°°°It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d'Artois at four o'clock; but Rastignac's name had been called early on the list at the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this, Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin's signature lying in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot's room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him; but after the first few words, the conversation between the father and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his attention.

°°°°"Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe to talk?" she added.

°°°°"Yes, there is no one in the house," said her father faintly.

°°°°"What is the matter with you?" asked Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!" said the old man. "You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d'Artois."

°°°°"Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the subject with him. Wasn't that what you told me to tell him?"

°°°°"Yes, quite right," answered Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then," Delphine continued, "he told me all about his affairs. He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations; they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes, on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy (in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him."

°°°°"Do you really believe that silly rubbish?" . . . cried her father. "It was all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No, no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them, and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that's holiest in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked! and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers. If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don't give way, don't make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he can't do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once; I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know for certain that your fortune is secure."

°°°°"Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile, it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we drive him to despair, I am lost."

°°°°"Why, then, the man is a rogue?"

°°°°"Well, yes, father," she said, flinging herself into a chair, "I wanted to keep it from you to spare your feelings," and she burst into tears; "I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his stalking- horse."

°°°°"But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons- in-law of that sort," cried her father; "why, I would guillotine him myself if there was no headsman to do it."

°°°°"No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says, stripped of all his circumlocutions--'Take your choice, you and no one else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through myself.' Is that plain speaking? He MUST have my assistance. He is assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to be Eugene's wife in all but name. 'I connive at your errors, and you allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!' Is that sufficiently explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get possession of those bills?"

°°°°Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on his knees.

°°°°"Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child! forgive me!" cried the old man.

°°°°"Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame," said Delphine. "We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us! Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa," she said, kissing him.

°°°°"Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your husband's winding."

°°°°"No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me, well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters. No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant's ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene! . . . Come, let us see his room."

°°°°But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve, and the sound of Mme. de Restaud's voice came from the staircase. "Is my father in?" she asked of Sylvie.

°°°°This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

°°°°"Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?" said Delphine, when she heard her sister speak. "It looks as though some strange things had happened in that family."

°°°°"What sort of things?" asked Goriot. "This is like to be the death of me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune."

°°°°"Good-morning, father," said the Countess from the threshold. "Oh! Delphine, are you here?"

°°°°Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister's presence.

°°°°"Good-morning, Nasie," said the Baroness. "What is there so extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day."

°°°°"Since when?"

°°°°"If you came yourself you would know."

°°°°"Don't tease, Delphine," said the Countess fretfully. "I am very miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!"

°°°°"What is it, Nasie?" cried Goriot. "Tell us all about it, child! How white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will love you even better, if that were possible."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. "We are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see."

°°°°The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

°°°°"This will kill me!" said their father. "There," he went on, stirring the smouldering fire, "come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it, Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----"

°°°°"Well, then, my husband knows everything," said the Countess. "Just imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime's some time ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that. About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled. He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively. Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard; for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I had eaten up all that you had----"

°°°°"No," said Goriot; "I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet."

°°°°The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when the father's love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice, revealed the depths of his despair.

°°°°"I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell," and the Countess burst into tears.

°°°°Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister's shoulder, and cried too.

°°°°"Then it is all true," she said.

°°°°Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her, kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

°°°°"I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie," she said.

°°°°"My angels," murmured Goriot faintly. "Oh, why should it be trouble that draws you together?"

°°°°This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

°°°°"To save Maxime's life," she said, "to save all my own happiness, I went to the money-lender you know of, a man of iron forged in hell-fire; nothing can melt him; I took all the family diamonds that M. de Restaud is so proud of--his and mine too--and sold them to that M. Gobseck. SOLD THEM! Do you understand? I saved Maxime, but I am lost. Restaud found it all out."

°°°°"How? Who told him? I will kill him," cried Goriot.

°°°°"Yesterday he sent to tell me to come to his room. I went. . . . 'Anastasie,' he said in a voice--oh! such a voice; that was enough, it told me everything--'where are your diamonds?'--'In my room----'--'No,' he said, looking straight at me, 'there they are on that chest of drawers----' and he lifted his handkerchief and showed me the casket. 'Do you know where they came from?' he said. I fell at his feet. . . . I cried; I besought him to tell me the death he wished to see me die."

°°°°"You said that!" cried Goriot. "By God in heaven, whoever lays a hand on either of you so long as I am alive may reckon on being roasted by slow fires! Yes, I will cut him in pieces like . . ."

°°°°Goriot stopped; the words died away in his throat.

°°°°"And then, dear, he asked something worse than death of me. Oh! heaven preserve all other women from hearing such words as I heard then!"

°°°°"I will murder that man," said Goriot quietly. "But he has only one life, and he deserves to die twice.--And then, what next?" he added, looking at Anastasie.

°°°°"Then," the Countess resumed, "there was a pause, and he looked at me. 'Anastasie,' he said, 'I will bury this in silence; there shall be no separation; there are the children. I will not kill M. de Trailles. I might miss him if we fought, and as for other ways of getting rid of him, I should come into collision with the law. If I killed him in your arms, it would bring dishonor on THOSE children. But if you do not want to see your children perish, nor their father nor me, you must first of all submit to two conditions. Answer me. Have I a child of my own?' I answered, 'Yes,'--'Which?'--'Ernest, our eldest boy.'--'Very well,' he said, 'and now swear to obey me in this particular from this time forward.' I swore. 'You will make over your property to me when I require you to do so.' "

°°°°"Do nothing of the kind!" cried Goriot. "Aha! M. de Restaud, you could not make your wife happy; she has looked for happiness and found it elsewhere, and you make her suffer for your own ineptitude? He will have to reckon with me. Make yourself easy, Nasie. Aha! he cares about his heir! Good, very good. I will get hold of the boy; isn't he my grandson? What the blazes! I can surely go to see the brat! I will stow him away somewhere; I will take care of him, you may be quite easy. I will bring Restaud to terms, the monster! I shall say to him, 'A word or two with you! If you want your son back again, give my daughter her property, and leave her to do as she pleases.' "

°°°°"Father!"

°°°°"Yes. I am your father, Nasie, a father indeed! That rogue of a great lord had better not ill-treat my daughter. Tonnerre! What is it in my veins? There is the blood of a tiger in me; I could tear those two men to pieces! Oh! children, children! so this is what your lives are! Why, it is death! . . . What will become of you when I shall be here no longer? Fathers ought to live as long as their children. Ah! Lord God in heaven! how ill Thy world is ordered! Thou hast a Son, if what they tell us is true, and yet Thou leavest us to suffer so through our children. My darlings, my darlings! to think that trouble only should bring you to me, that I should only see you with tears on your faces! Ah! yes, yes, you love me, I see that you love me. Come to me and pour out your griefs to me; my heart is large enough to hold them all. Oh! you might rend my heart in pieces, and every fragment would make a father's heart. If only I could bear all your sorrows for you! . . . Ah! you were so happy when you were little and still with me. . . ."

°°°°"We have never been happy since," said Delphine. "Where are the old days when we slid down the sacks in the great granary?"

°°°°"That is not all, father," said Anastasie in Goriot's ear. The old man gave a startled shudder. "The diamonds only sold for a hundred thousand francs. Maxime is hard pressed. There are twelve thousand francs still to pay. He has given me his word that he will be steady and give up play in future. His love is all that I have left in the world. I have paid such a fearful price for it that I should die if I lose him now. I have sacrificed my fortune, my honor, my peace of mind, and my children for him. Oh! do something, so that at the least Maxime may be at large and live undisgraced in the world, where he will assuredly make a career for himself. Something more than my happiness is at stake; the children have nothing, and if he is sent to Sainte-Pelagie all his prospects will be ruined."

°°°°"I haven't the money, Nasie. I have NOTHING--nothing left. This is the end of everything. Yes, the world is crumbling into ruin, I am sure. Fly! Save yourselves! Ah!--I have still my silver buckles left, and half-a-dozen silver spoons and forks, the first I ever had in my life. But I have nothing else except my life annuity, twelve hundred francs . . ."

°°°°"Then what has become of your money in the funds?"

°°°°"I sold out, and only kept a trifle for my wants. I wanted twelve thousand francs to furnish some rooms for Delphine."

°°°°"In your own house?" asked Mme. de Restaud, looking at her sister.

°°°°"What does it matter where they were?" asked Goriot. "The money is spent now."

°°°°"I see how it is," said the Countess. "Rooms for M. de Rastignac. Poor Delphine, take warning by me!"

°°°°"M. de Rastignac is incapable of ruining the woman he loves, dear."

°°°°"Thanks! Delphine. I thought you would have been kinder to me in my troubles, but you never did love me."

°°°°"Yes, yes, she loves you, Nasie," cried Goriot; "she was saying so only just now. We were talking about you, and she insisted that you were beautiful, and that she herself was only pretty!"

°°°°"Pretty!" said the Countess. "She is as hard as a marble statue."

°°°°"And if I am?" cried Delphine, flushing up, "how have you treated me? You would not recognize me; you closed the doors of every house against me; you have never let an opportunity of mortifying me slip by. And when did I come, as you were always doing, to drain our poor father, a thousand francs at a time, till he is left as you see him now? That is all your doing, sister! I myself have seen my father as often as I could. I have not turned him out of the house, and then come and fawned upon him when I wanted money. I did not so much as know that he had spent those twelve thousand francs on me. I am economical, as you know; and when papa has made me presents, it has never been because I came and begged for them."

°°°°"You were better off than I. M. de Marsay was rich, as you have reason to know. You always were as slippery as gold. Good-bye; I have neither sister nor----"

°°°°"Oh! hush, hush, Nasie!" cried her father.

°°°°"Nobody else would repeat what everybody has ceased to believe. You are an unnatural sister!" cried Delphine.

°°°°"Oh, children, children! hush! hush! or I will kill myself before your eyes."

°°°°"There, Nasie, I forgive you," said Mme. de Nucingen; "you are very unhappy. But I am kinder than you are. How could you say THAT just when I was ready to do anything in the world to help you, even to be reconciled with my husband, which for my own sake I---- Oh! it is just like you; you have behaved cruelly to me all through these nine years."

°°°°"Children, children, kiss each other!" cried the father. "You are angels, both of you."

°°°°"No. Let me alone," cried the Countess shaking off the hand that her father had laid on her arm. "She is more merciless than my husband. Any one might think she was a model of all the virtues herself!"

°°°°"I would rather have people think that I owed money to M. de Marsay than own that M. de Trailles had cost me more than two hundred thousand francs," retorted Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"DELPHINE!" cried the Countess, stepping towards her sister.

°°°°"I shall tell you the truth about yourself if you begin to slander me," said the Baroness coldly.

°°°°"Delphine! you are a ----"

°°°°Father Goriot sprang between them, grasped the Countess' hand, and laid his own over her mouth.

°°°°"Good heavens, father! What have you been handling this morning?" said Anastasie.

°°°°"Ah! well, yes, I ought not to have touched you," said the poor father, wiping his hands on his trousers, "but I have been packing up my things; I did not know that you were coming to see me."

°°°°He was glad that he had drawn down her wrath upon himself.

°°°°"Ah!" he sighed, as he sat down, "you children have broken my heart between you. This is killing me. My head feels as if it were on fire. Be good to each other and love each other! This will be the death of me! Delphine! Nasie! come, be sensible; you are both in the wrong. Come, Dedel," he added, looking through his tears at the Baroness, "she must have twelve thousand francs, you see; let us see if we can find them for her. Oh, my girls, do not look at each other like that!" and he sank on his knees beside Delphine. "Ask her to forgive you--just to please me," he said in her ear. "She is more miserable than you are. Come now, Dedel."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Delphine, alarmed at the wild extravagant grief in her father's face, "I was in the wrong, kiss me----"

°°°°"Ah! that is like balm to my heart," cried Father Goriot. "But how are we to find twelve thousand francs? I might offer myself as a substitute in the army----"

°°°°"Oh! father dear!" they both cried, flinging their arms about him. "No, no!"

°°°°"God reward you for the thought. We are not worth it, are we, Nasie?" asked Delphine.

°°°°"And besides, father dear, it would only be a drop in the bucket," observed the Countess.

°°°°"But is flesh and blood worth nothing?" cried the old man in his despair. "I would give body and soul to save you, Nasie. I would do a murder for the man who would rescue you. I would do, as Vautrin did, go to the hulks, go----" he stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and put both hands to his head. "Nothing left!" he cried, tearing his hair. "If I only knew of a way to steal money, but it is so hard to do it, and then you can't set to work by yourself, and it takes time to rob a bank. Yes, it is time I was dead; there is nothing left me to do but to die. I am no good in the world; I am no longer a father! No. She has come to me in her extremity, and, wretch that I am, I have nothing to give her. Ah! you put your money into a life annuity, old scoundrel; and had you not daughters? You did not love them. Die, die in a ditch, like the dog that you are! Yes, I am worse than a dog; a beast would not have done as I have done! Oh! my head . . . it throbs as if it would burst."

°°°°"Papa!" cried both the young women at once, "do, pray, be reasonable!" and they clung to him to prevent him from dashing his head against the wall. There was a sound of sobbing.

°°°°Eugene, greatly alarmed, took the bill that bore Vautrin's signature, saw that the stamp would suffice for a larger sum, altered the figures, made it into a regular bill for twelve thousand francs, payable to Goriot's order, and went to his neighbor's room.

°°°°"Here is the money, madame," he said, handing the piece of paper to her. "I was asleep; your conversation awoke me, and by this means I learned all that I owed to M. Goriot. This bill can be discounted, and I shall meet it punctually at the due date."

°°°°The Countess stood motionless and speechless, but she held the bill in her fingers.

°°°°"Delphine," she said, with a white face, and her whole frame quivering with indignation, anger, and rage, "I forgave you everything; God is my witness that I forgave you, but I cannot forgive this! So this gentleman was there all the time, and you knew it! Your petty spite has let you to wreak your vengeance on me by betraying my secrets, my life, my children's lives, my shame, my honor! There, you are nothing to me any longer. I hate you. I will do all that I can to injure you. I will . . ."

°°°°Anger paralyzed her; the words died in her dry parched throat.

°°°°"Why, he is my son, my child; he is your brother, your preserver!" cried Goriot. "Kiss his hand, Nasie! Stay, I will embrace him myself," he said, straining Eugene to his breast in a frenzied clasp. "Oh my boy! I will be more than a father to you; if I had God's power, I would fling worlds at your feet. Why don't you kiss him, Nasie? He is not a man, but an angel, a angel out of heaven."

°°°°"Never mind her, father; she is mad just now."

°°°°"Mad! am I? And what are you?" cried Mme. de Restaud.

°°°°"Children, children, I shall die if you go on like this," cried the old man, and he staggered and fell on the bed as if a bullet had struck him.--"They are killing me between them," he said to himself.

°°°°The Countess fixed her eyes on Eugene, who stood stock still; all his faculties were numbed by this violent scene.

°°°°"Sir? . . ." she said, doubt and inquiry in her face, tone, and bearing; she took no notice now of her father nor of Delphine, who was hastily unfastening his waistcoat.

°°°°"Madame," said Eugene, answering the question before it was asked, "I will meet the bill, and keep silence about it."

°°°°"You have killed our father, Nasie!" said Delphine, pointing to Goriot, who lay unconscious on the bed. The Countess fled.

°°°°"I freely forgive her," said the old man, opening his eyes; "her position is horrible; it would turn an older head than hers. Comfort Nasie, and be nice to her, Delphine; promise it to your poor father before he dies," he asked, holding Delphine's hand in a convulsive clasp.

°°°°"Oh! what ails you, father?" she cried in real alarm.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing," said Goriot; "it will go off. There is something heavy pressing on my forehead, a little headache. . . . Ah! poor Nasie, what a life lies before her!"

°°°°Just as he spoke, the Countess came back again and flung herself on her knees before him. "Forgive me!" she cried.

°°°°"Come," said her father, "you are hurting me still more."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Countess said, turning to Rastignac, "misery made me unjust to you. You will be a brother to me, will you not?" and she held out her hand. Her eyes were full of tears as she spoke.

°°°°"Nasie," cried Delphine, flinging her arms round her sister, "my little Nasie, let us forget and forgive."

°°°°"No, no," cried Nasie; "I shall never forget!"

°°°°"Dear angels," cried Goriot, "it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won't it?"

°°°°"I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?"

°°°°"There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No, after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in future."

°°°°Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

°°°°"Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper," said Mme. de Nucingen, "but she has a good heart."

°°°°"She came back for the endorsement," said Eugene in Delphine's ear.

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her," he answered, raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did not venture to express.

°°°°"Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent."

°°°°"How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"I should like to go to sleep," he replied.

°°°°Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

°°°°"This evening at the Italiens," she said to Eugene, "and you can let me know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go into your room.--Oh! how frightful!" she cried on the threshold. "Why, you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps of gold."

°°°°A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot's bedside; to all appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, "They are not happy!" Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they were spoken went to his daughter's heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

°°°°"Ah! Delphine!" he said.

°°°°"How are you now?" she asked.

°°°°"Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently. Don't stay with me, children; go, go and be happy."

°°°°Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room, and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

°°°°"Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin," said Eugene.

°°°°Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him next to the old lodger.

°°°°"What is wrong with him?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning."

°°°°"Is there any cure for it?"

°°°°"None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on? There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way."

°°°°"Yes, there was," said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had struck blow on blow at their father's heart.

°°°°"But Delphine at any rate loves her father," he said to himself.

°°°°That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

°°°°"Do not be anxious about him," she said, however, as soon as Eugene began, "our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear. At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake. To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me; what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh! no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in life when everything turns to bitterness."

°°°°Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression on him.

°°°°Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love, they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme. de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

°°°°"What are you thinking about?" she asked.

°°°°"I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me."

°°°°She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more words, and she feared for her self- control.

°°°°"Eugene," she said, changing the conversation, "I wonder whether you know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant's to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d'Ajuda have agreed to keep the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be there. People are wondering what will happen?"

°°°°"The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill Mme. de Beauseant."

°°°°"Oh, no," said Delphine, smiling, "you do not know that kind of woman. Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for your sake."

°°°°"Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set in circulation here."

°°°°"We shall know the truth to-morrow."

°°°°Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d'Artois. Yesterday evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o'clock in the morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot's existence. The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four o'clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

°°°°"Aha!" said the painter as Eugene came in, "Father Goriot has broken down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of its brightest ornaments."

°°°°Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

°°°°"Hey! Monsieur Eugene!"

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you," shouted Sylvie.

°°°°"It is this, sir," said the widow. "You and M. Goriot should by rights have moved out on the 15th of February. That was three days ago; to-day is the 18th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied."

°°°°"Why can't you trust him?"

°°°°"Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died, those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won't fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and forks he has left, I don't know why. He had got himself up to look quite young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks; he looked quite young again."

°°°°"I will be responsible," said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he foresaw the end.

°°°°He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot's room. The old man was tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

°°°°"Good-evening, father," said Eugene.

°°°°The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

°°°°"How is SHE?"

°°°°"She is quite well. But how are you?"

°°°°"There is nothing much the matter."

°°°°"Don't tire him," said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the room.

°°°°"Well?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in; I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are acting."

°°°°"Is it possible to move him?"

°°°°"Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as quiet as possible----"

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," said Eugene, "we will nurse him between us."

°°°°"I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him."

°°°°"And what did he say?"

°°°°"He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went, and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his strength. One of his daughters has been here."

°°°°"Was it the Countess?" asked Eugene. "A tall, dark-haired woman, with large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Leave him to me for a bit," said Rastignac. "I will make him confess; he will tell me all about it."

°°°°"And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is still some hope left."

°°°°"All right."

°°°°"How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow," said Father Goriot when they were alone. "They are going to a grand ball."

°°°°"What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this evening that you have to stop in bed?"

°°°°"Nothing."

°°°°"Did not Anastasie come to see you?" demanded Rastignac.

°°°°"Yes," said Father Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then, don't keep anything from me. What more did she want of you?"

°°°°"Oh, she was very miserable," he answered, gathering up all his strength to speak. "It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds, Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie's waiting-woman advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie's maid saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair. She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that heartless scoundrel and say, 'I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker; pay her for me!' She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there too in a superb toilette, and Anastasie ought not to be outshone by her younger sister. And then--she was drowned in tears, poor girl! I felt so humbled yesterday when I had not the twelve thousand francs, that I would have given the rest of my miserable life to wipe out that wrong. You see, I could have borne anything once, but latterly this want of money has broken my heart. Oh! I did not do it by halves; I titivated myself up a bit, and went out and sold my spoons and forks and buckles for six hundred francs; then I went to old Daddy Gobseck, and sold a year's interest on my annuity for four hundred francs down. Pshaw! I can live on dry bread, as I did when I was a young man; if I have done it before, I can do it again. My Nasie shall have one happy evening, at any rate. She shall be smart. The banknote for a thousand francs is under my pillow; it warms me to have it lying there under my head, for it is going to make my poor Nasie happy. She can turn that bad girl Victoire out of the house. A servant that cannot trust her mistress, did any one ever hear the like! I shall be quite well to-morrow. Nasie is coming at ten o'clock. They must not think that I am ill, or they will not go to the ball; they will stop and take care of me. To-morrow Nasie will come and hold me in her arms as if I were one of her children; her kisses will make me well again. After all, I might have spent the thousand francs on physic; I would far rather give them to my little Nasie, who can charm all the pain away. At any rate, I am some comfort to her in her misery; and that makes up for my unkindness in buying an annuity. She is in the depths, and I cannot draw her out of them now. Oh! I will go into business again, I will buy wheat in Odessa; out there, wheat fetches a quarter of the price it sells for here. There is a law against the importation of grain, but the good folk who made the law forgot to prohibit the introduction of wheat products and food stuffs made from corn. Hey! hey! . . . That struck me this morning. There is a fine trade to be done in starch."

°°°°Eugene, watching the old man's face, thought that his friend was light-headed.

°°°°"Come," he said, "do not talk any more, you must rest----" Just then Bianchon came up, and Eugene went down to dinner.

°°°°The two students sat up with him that night, relieving each other in turn. Bianchon brought up his medical books and studied; Eugene wrote letters home to his mother and sisters. Next morning Bianchon thought the symptoms more hopeful, but the patient's condition demanded continual attention, which the two students alone were willing to give--a task impossible to describe in the squeamish phraseology of the epoch. Leeches must be applied to the wasted body, the poultices and hot foot-baths, and other details of the treatment required the physical strength and devotion of the two young men. Mme. de Restaud did not come; but she sent a messenger for the money.

°°°°"I expected she would come herself; but it would have been a pity for her to come, she would have been anxious about me," said the father, and to all appearances he was well content.

°°°°At seven o'clock that evening Therese came with a letter from Delphine.

°°°°"What are you doing, dear friend? I have been loved for a very   little while, and I am neglected already? In the confidences of   heart and heart, I have learned to know your soul--you are too   noble not to be faithful for ever, for you know that love with   all its infinite subtle changes of feeling is never the same.   Once you said, as we were listening to the Prayer in Mose in   Egitto, 'For some it is the monotony of a single note; for   others, it is the infinite of sound.' Remember that I am   expecting you this evening to take me to Mme. de Beauseant's   ball. Every one knows now that the King signed M. d'Ajuda's   marriage-contract this morning, and the poor Vicomtesse knew   nothing of it until two o'clock this afternoon. All Paris will   flock to her house, of course, just as a crowd fills the Place de   Greve to see an execution. It is horrible, is it not, to go out   of curiosity to see if she will hide her anguish, and whether she   will die courageously? I certainly should not go, my friend, if I   had been at her house before; but, of course, she will not   receive society any more after this, and all my efforts would be   in vain. My position is a very unusual one, and besides, I am   going there partly on your account. I am waiting for you. If you   are not beside me in less than two hours, I do not know whether I   could forgive such treason."

°°°°Rastignac took up a pen and wrote:

°°°°"I am waiting till the doctor comes to know if there is any hope   of your father's life. He is lying dangerously ill. I will come   and bring you the news, but I am afraid it may be a sentence of   death. When I come you can decide whether you can go to the   ball.--Yours a thousand times."

°°°°At half-past eight the doctor arrived. He did not take a very hopeful view of the case, but thought that there was no immediate danger. Improvements and relapses might be expected, and the good man's life and reason hung in the balance.

°°°°"It would be better for him to die at once," the doctor said as he took leave.

°°°°Eugene left Goriot to Bianchon's care, and went to carry the sad news to Mme. de Nucingen. Family feeling lingered in her, and this must put an end for the present to her plans of amusement.

°°°°"Tell her to enjoy her evening as if nothing had happened," cried Goriot. He had been lying in a sort of stupor, but he suddenly sat upright as Eugene went out.

°°°°Eugene, half heartbroken, entered Delphine's. Her hair had been dressed; she wore her dancing slippers; she had only to put on her ball-dress; but when the artist is giving the finishing stroke to his creation, the last touches require more time than the whole groundwork of the picture.

°°°°"Why, you are not dressed!" she cried.

°°°°"Madame, your father----"

°°°°"My father again!" she exclaimed, breaking in upon him. "You need not teach me what is due to my father, I have known my father this long while. Not a word, Eugene. I will hear what you have to say when you are dressed. My carriage is waiting, take it, go round to your rooms and dress, Therese has put out everything in readiness for you. Come back as soon as you can; we will talk about my father on the way to Mme. de Beauseant's. We must go early; if we have to wait our turn in a row of carriages, we shall be lucky if we get there by eleven o'clock."

°°°°"Madame----"

°°°°"Quick! not a word!" she cried, darting into her dressing-room for a necklace.

°°°°"Do go, Monsieur Eugene, or you will vex madame," said Therese, hurrying him away; and Eugene was too horror-stricken by this elegant parricide to resist.

°°°°He went to his rooms and dressed, sad, thoughtful, and dispirited. The world of Paris was like an ocean of mud for him just then; and it seemed that whoever set foot in that black mire must needs sink into it up to the chin.

°°°°"Their crimes are paltry," said Eugene to himself. "Vautrin was greater."

°°°°He had seen society in its three great phases--Obedience, Struggle, and Revolt; the Family, the World, and Vautrin; and he hesitated in his choice. Obedience was dull, Revolt impossible, Struggle hazardous. His thoughts wandered back to the home circle. He thought of the quiet uneventful life, the pure happiness of the days spent among those who loved him there. Those loving and beloved beings passed their lives in obedience to the natural laws of the hearth, and in that obedience found a deep and constant serenity, unvexed by torments such as these. Yet, for all his good impulses, he could not bring himself to make profession of the religion of pure souls to Delphine, nor to prescribe the duties of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was capable of stepping over her father's corpse to go to the ball; and within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the courage to leave her to go alone.

°°°°"She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it," he said to himself. Then he turned the doctor's dictum over in his mind; he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of traitorous excuses for Delphine's conduct. She did not know how ill her father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations; and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family life that excuse the apparent offence.

°°°°Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his, and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, "how is my father?"

°°°°"Very dangerously ill," he answered; "if you will grant me a proof of your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way."

°°°°"Very well," she said. "Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice, and don't preach to me. Come."

°°°°They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

°°°°"What is it now?" she asked.

°°°°"I can hear the death-rattle in your father's throat," he said almost angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of Mme. de Restaud's vanity and cruelty, of her father's final act of self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie's golden embroideries. Delphine cried.

°°°°"I shall look frightful," she thought. She dried her tears.

°°°°"I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside," she said aloud.

°°°°"Ah! now you are as I would have you," exclaimed Rastignac.

°°°°The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the Vicomtesse.

°°°°The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

°°°°Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a last audience of one of its sovereigns.

°°°°"I was afraid that you would not come," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°"Madame," he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a reproach, "I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here."

°°°°"Good," she said, and she took his hand. "You are perhaps the only one I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a woman."

°°°°She took Rastignac's arm, and went towards a sofa in the card- room.

°°°°"I want you to go to the Marquis," she said. "Jacques, my footman, will go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one shall bring me word."

°°°°She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

°°°°Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d'Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide, feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave a casket to the student, saying as he did so, "They are all there."

°°°°He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes, and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

°°°°"Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene." He grasped Rastignac's hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him. Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the Vicomtesse's room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey. He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

°°°°"Ah! my friend! . . ." said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid her hand on Rastignac's shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin's uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it in the fire, and watched it burn.

°°°°"They are dancing," she said. "They all came very early; but death will be long in coming. Hush! my friend," and she laid a finger on Rastignac's lips, seeing that he was about to speak. "I shall never see Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o'clock this morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my arrangements; since three o'clock this afternoon I have been busy signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I could send to . . ."

°°°°She broke off.

°°°°"He was sure to be . . ."

°°°°Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are impossible to utter.

°°°°"And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service this evening," she said. "I should like to give you some pledge of friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay," she said, glancing about her, "there is this box that has held my gloves. Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer. Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to you in the Rue d'Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my tears. One last look round first."

°°°°She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and took the student's arm.

°°°°"Let us go!" she said.

°°°°This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene's arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her husband's eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten Rastignac's sad thougths; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

°°°°"Come," she said, "I must not deprive you of a pleasure."

°°°°Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover's feet the homage she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move henceforth.

°°°°"What do you think of Nasie?" she asked him.

°°°°"She has discounted everything, even her own father's death," said Rastignac.

°°°°Towards four o'clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M. de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, "It is a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among us."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an exclamation broke from her.

°°°°"I saw how it was, Clara," said Mme. de Langeais. "You are going from among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you have heard me, until we have understood each other."

°°°°She took her friend's arm, and they went together into the next room. There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

°°°°"I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself. You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words. One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night; do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night, Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail, I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?"

°°°°"Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!" called the Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was waiting there.

°°°°The student knelt to kiss his cousin's hand.

°°°°"Good-bye, Antoinette!" said Mme. de Beauseant. "May you be happy."--She turned to the student. "You are young," she said; "you have some beliefs still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of this world."

°°°°It was nearly five o'clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

°°°°"There is no hope for poor Father Goriot," said Bianchon, as Rastignac came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then he turned to his friend. "Dear fellow, you are content with the modest career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world, nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden away under the covering of gems and gold."

°°°°At two o'clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

°°°°"Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours," he said; "but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result, nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he had not a farthing of his own. What have you?"

°°°°"I have twenty francs left," said Rastignac; "but I will take them to the roulette table, I shall be sure to win."

°°°°"And if you lose?"

°°°°"Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for money."

°°°°"And suppose they refuse?" Bianchon retorted. "The most pressing thing just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides, Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him till I come back."

°°°°The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying. Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot's face, so livid, distorted, and feeble.

°°°°"How are you, papa?" he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came into his eyes.

°°°°"Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?"

°°°°"No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the smell was something horrible.

°°°°"MON DIEU!" said Rastignac. "To think of those daughters of his."

°°°°"One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this," said the house student, pointing to a large white jar. "If he begins to groan, and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon, a pupil of Gall's came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised; whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here," said Bianchon, touching the back of the head, "very strange things have been known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives."

°°°°"Did they enjoy themselves?" It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had recognized Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters," said Bianchon. "Scores of times last night he said to me, 'They are dancing now! She has her dress.' He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take it, calling with that tone in his voice, for 'Delphine! my little Delphine! and Nasie!' Upon my word," said the medical student, "it was enough to make any one burst out crying."

°°°°"Delphine," said the old man, "she is there, isn't she? I knew she was there," and his eyes sought the door.

°°°°"I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready," said Bianchon. "They ought to go on at once."

°°°°Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was shocking to see.

°°°°"Noble natures cannot dwell in this world," he said; "Mme de Beauseant has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and feelings?"

°°°°Pictures of yesterday's ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

°°°°"I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to the base of the spine, and send round for us."

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," exclaimed Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view," said the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

°°°°"So!" said Eugene. "Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old man for his own sake?"

°°°°"You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning," returned Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. "Doctors who have seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my dear fellow, I can see the patient still."

°°°°He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

°°°°"Ah! dear boy, is that you?" said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

°°°°"Do you feel better?" asked the law student, taking his hand.

°°°°"Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man here, who has burned up all my bark fuel."

°°°°"I can hear Christophe coming upstairs," Eugene answered. "He is bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you."

°°°°"Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!) Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left now."

°°°°Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man's ear, "I will pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble."

°°°°"My daughters told you that they were coming, didn't they, Christophe? Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once again before I die. Tell them that, but don't alarm them more than you can help."

°°°°Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

°°°°"They will come before long," the old man went on. "I know them so well. My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die; and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning. 'Good-morning, papa!' they used to say, and I would take them on my knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they loved me with all their hearts. MON DIEU! why could they not always be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah! forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for you have used me to endure pain. MON DIEU! if only I held their hands in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. HE will see them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked. They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this is! what pain this is! . . . ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they MUST have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make millions. (Oh! this is agony!)"

°°°°Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength to endure the pain.

°°°°"If they were here, I should not complain," he said. "So why should I complain now?"

°°°°He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

°°°°"First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse," he said; "but she and her husband were so busy that I couldn't get to speak to her. When I insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and went on like this: 'M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important business, when it is all finished she can go.' The gentleman looked angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said, 'Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.' As for Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, 'Ah yes, but madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It will be time enough then to tell her bad news!' I begged and I prayed, but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was out."

°°°°"To think that neither of his daughters should come!" exclaimed Rastignac. "I will write to them both."

°°°°"Neither of them!" cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. "They are busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not. Not until you are dying do you know your children. . . . Oh! my friend, do not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it. No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it."

°°°°The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

°°°°"Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and THEY would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money? If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God! who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh! this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was 'My kind father' here, 'My dear father' there. There was always a place for me at their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought. How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening parties. In fact, they acknowleged me their father; publicly they owned that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see, and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence, but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law's ear, 'Who may that gentleman be?'--'The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very rich.'--'The devil, e is!' they would say, and look again at me with the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one thing I did learn thoroughly --I knew that I was not wanted here on earth.

°°°°"The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that was how they both turned me out of the house.

°°°°"Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured; Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to- day? Have I not more than expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

°°°°"Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see, my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! MON DIEU! These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie! Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to ruin if a father's rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see. The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them, my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know what it means to trample on a father's corpse? There is a God in heaven who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

°°°°"Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss; one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault. I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so. It is no one's affair but mine; man's justice and God's justice have nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly; I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch, I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through love.

°°°°"My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should be present at their father's deathbed; the law is on my side. It would only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit, as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine, mine!" and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak spoke of menace.

°°°°"There, there, dear father," said Eugene, "lie down again; I will write to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them myself, if they do not come before."

°°°°"If they do not come?" repeated the old man, sobbing. "Why, I shall be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life; they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one. . . . Go to them; just tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud as I do now, 'Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who has been so kind to you is lying ill!'--Not a sound; no one comes! Then am I do die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them. I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all, my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh? . . . What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister. . . . Eugene, you are my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me nothing but my heart."

°°°°"Christophe!" shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man moaned, and by his cries, "go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to you."

°°°°"Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military, anything and everything, but make them come!" He looked at Eugene, and a last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. "Go to the authorities, to the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!"

°°°°"But you have cursed them."

°°°°"Who said that!" said the old man in dull amazement. "You know quite well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I can see them. . . . Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay their hands there, I think I should get better. . . . MON DIEU! who will recover their money for them when I am gone? . . . I will manufacture vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes."

°°°°"Here is something to drink," said Eugene, supporting the dying man on his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot's lips.

°°°°"How you must love your own father and mother!" said the old man, and grasped the student's hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling grasp. "I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that has been my life for the last ten years. . . . I have no daughters, my sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl's mind and contaminates her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid them! . . . Kill them! . . . Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They have murdered me between them! . . . Death or my daughters! . . . Ah! it is too late, I am dying, and they are not here! . . . Dying without them! . . . Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----"

°°°°"Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest; don't worry yourself, don't think."

°°°°"I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!"

°°°°"You SHALL see them."

°°°°"Really?" cried the old man, still wandering. "Oh! shall I see them; I shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my fingers . . . their hair . . ."

°°°°His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his daughters' hair.

°°°°"My blessing on them . . ." he said, making an effort, "my blessing . . ."

°°°°His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

°°°°"I met Christophe," he said; "he is gone for your cab."

°°°°Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath had grown.

°°°°"He will not get over this, I am sure," said Bianchon. He felt the old man's pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

°°°°"The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be better for him to die."

°°°°"Ah! my word, it would!"

°°°°"What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death."

°°°°"Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard. . . . There is a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

°°°°"We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come from?"

°°°°Rastignac took out his watch.

°°°°"There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall have to pay the cabman when I get home again."

°°°°Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder. The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de Restaud's house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could see no one.

°°°°"But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying," Rastignac told the man.

°°°°"The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----"

°°°°"If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at once."

°°°°The man went out.

°°°°Eugene waited for a long while. "Perhaps her father is dying at this moment," he thought.

°°°°Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte," said Rastignac, "M. Goriot, your father-in- law, is lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter. He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----"

°°°°"I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are aware," the Count answered coolly. "His character has been compromised in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much more important matters to think about than the things that fools and chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a few seconds; it lies entirely with her----"

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct; you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her, and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I ask."

°°°°"You can tell her yourself," the Count answered, impressed by the thrill of indignation in Eugene's voice.

°°°°The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her. Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to speak.

°°°°"I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all he would forgive me. . . . I did not think there was such torture in the world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not give way as long as I live," she said, turning to her husband. "I am a mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of appearances!" she cried aloud in her despair.

°°°°Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess' life. M. de Restaud's manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in bed.

°°°°"Poor dear Eugene, I am ill," she said. "I caught cold after the ball, and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come."

°°°°"If you were at death's door," Eugene broke in, "you must be carried somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer."

°°°°"Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just as you wish. As for HIM, he would die of grief I know if I went out to see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as I have seen the doctor.--Ah!" she cried out, "you are not wearing your watch, how is that?"

°°°°Eugene reddened.

°°°°"Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it. . . . Oh! it would be very wrong of you!"

°°°°The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, "Do you want to know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch has been pawned, for I had nothing either."

°°°°Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

°°°°"I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why, I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before you.--Therese," she called to the waiting-woman, "ask M. de Nucingen to come upstairs at once and speak to me."

°°°°Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve; he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine's purse for money, so as to dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse. He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient's back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of science, and it was tried in vain.

°°°°"Can you feel them?" asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of Rastignac, and answered, "They are coming, are they not?"

°°°°"There is hope yet," said the surgeon; "he can speak."

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene, "Delphine is coming."

°°°°"Oh! that is nothing!" said Bianchon; "he has been talking about his daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for water, they say----"

°°°°"We may as well give up," said the physician, addressing the surgeon. "Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless."

°°°°Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his loathsome bed.

°°°°"But the sheets ought to be changed," added the physician. "Even if there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come back again, Bianchon," he said, turning to the medical student. "If he complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm."

°°°°He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

°°°°"Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy," said Bianchon, as soon as they were alone; "we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help us to make the bed."

°°°°Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a customer.

°°°°"My dear Monsieur Eugene," she said, when he had spoken, "you know quite as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes, you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you; altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make."

°°°°Eugene hurried up to Goriot's room.

°°°°"Bianchon," he cried, "the money or the watch?"

°°°°"There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money."

°°°°Rastignac hurried downstairs.

°°°°"Here, madame" he said in disgust, "let us square accounts. M. Goriot will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----"

°°°°"Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman," she said, counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

°°°°"Let us get this over," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen."

°°°°"You won't forget Sylvie," said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene's ear; "she has been sitting up these two nights."

°°°°As soon as Eugene's back was turned, the old woman hurried after her handmaid.

°°°°"Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number 7. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse," she said in Sylvie's ear.

°°°°Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear the elderly economist.

°°°°"Quick," said Bianchon, "let us change his shirt. Hold him upright."

°°°°Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

°°°°"Ah! yes!" cried Bianchon. "It is the little locket and the chain made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on the chimney-piece."

°°°°Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded golden hair--Mme. Goriot's hair, no doubt. He read the name on the little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other. It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes, the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students, that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a shrill cry of delight.

°°°°"Nasie! Fifine!"

°°°°"There is life in him yet," said Bianchon.

°°°°"What does he go on living for?" said Sylvie.

°°°°"To suffer," answered Rastignac.

°°°°Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the students' heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair, they heard a faint whisper:

°°°°"Ah! my angels!"

°°°°Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which fled forth with them as they left his lips.

°°°°"Poor dear!" cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most ghastly and involuntary of lies.

°°°°The father's last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

°°°°"He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last, that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the throat. The brain must be completely suffused."

°°°°As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman hastened up, panting for breath.

°°°°"She has come too late," said Rastignac.

°°°°But it was not Delphine; it was Therese, her waiting-woman, who stood in the doorway.

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene," she said, "monsieur and madame have had a terrible scene about some money that Madame (poor thing!) wanted for her father. She fainted, and the doctor came, and she had to be bled, calling out all the while, 'My father is dying; I want to see papa!' It was heartbreaking to hear her----"

°°°°"That will do, Therese. If she came now, it would be trouble thrown away. M. Goriot cannot recognize any one now."

°°°°"Poor, dear gentleman, is he as bad at that?" said Therese.

°°°°"You don't want me now, I must go and look after my dinner; it is half-past four," remarked Sylvie. The next instant she all but collided with Mme. de Restaud on the landing outside.

°°°°There was something awful and appalling in the sudden apparition of the Countess. She saw the bed of death by the dim light of the single candle, and her tears flowed at the sight of her father's passive features, from which the life had almost ebbed. Bianchon with thoughtful tact left the room.

°°°°"I could not escape soon enough," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°The student bowed sadly in reply. Mme. de Restaud took her father's hand and kissed it.

°°°°"Forgive me, father! You used to say that my voice would call you back from the grave; ah! come back for one moment to bless your penitent daughter. Do you hear me? Oh! this is fearful! No one on earth will ever bless me henceforth; every one hates me; no one loves me but you in all the world. My own children will hate me. Take me with you, father; I will love you, I will take care of you. He does not hear me . . . I am mad . . ."

°°°°She fell on her knees, and gazed wildly at the human wreck before her.

°°°°"My cup of misery is full," she said, turning her eyes upon Eugene. "M. de Trailles has fled, leaving enormous debts behind him, and I have found out that he was deceiving me. My husband will never forgive me, and I have left my fortune in his hands. I have lost all my illusions. Alas! I have forsaken the one heart that loved me (she pointed to her father as she spoke), and for whom? I have held his kindness cheap, and slighted his affection; many and many a time I have given him pain, ungrateful wretch that I am!"

°°°°"He knew it," said Rastignac.

°°°°Just then Goriot's eyelids unclosed; it was only a muscular contraction, but the Countess' sudden start of reviving hope was no less dreadful than the dying eyes.

°°°°"Is it possible that he can hear me?" cried the Countess. "No," she answered herself, and sat down beside the bed. As Mme. de Restaud seemed to wish to sit by her father, Eugene went down to take a little food. The boarders were already assembled.

°°°°"Well," remarked the painter, as he joined them, "it seems that there is to be a death-orama upstairs."

°°°°"Charles, I think you might find something less painful to joke about," said Eugene.

°°°°"So we may not laugh here?" returned the painter. "What harm does it do? Bianchon said that the old man was quite insensible."

°°°°"Well, then," said the employe from the Museum, "he will die as he has lived."

°°°°"My father is dead!" shrieked the Countess.

°°°°The terrible cry brought Sylvie, Rastignac, and Bianchon; Mme. de Restaud had fainted away. When she recovered they carried her downstairs, and put her into the cab that stood waiting at the door. Eugene sent Therese with her, and bade the maid take the Countess to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Bianchon came down to them.

°°°°"Yes, he is dead," he said.

°°°°"Come, sit down to dinner, gentlemen," said Mme. Vauquer, "or the soup will be cold."

°°°°The two students sat down together.

°°°°"What is the next thing to be done?" Eugene asked of Bianchon.

°°°°"I have closed his eyes and composed his limbs," said Bianchon. "When the certificate has been officially registered at the Mayor's office, we will sew him in his winding sheet and bury him somewhere. What do you think we ought to do?"

°°°°"He will not smell at his bread like this any more," said the painter, mimicking the old man's little trick.

°°°°"Oh, hang it all!" cried the tutor, "let Father Goriot drop, and let us have something else for a change. He is a standing dish, and we have had him with every sauce this hour or more. It is one of the privileges of the good city of Paris that anybody may be born, or live, or die there without attracting any attention whatsoever. Let us profit by the advantages of civilization. There are fifty or sixty deaths every day; if you have a mind to do it, you can sit down at any time and wail over whole hecatombs of dead in Paris. Father Goriot has gone off the hooks, has he? So much the better for him. If you venerate his memory, keep it to yourselves, and let the rest of us feed in peace."

°°°°"Oh, to be sure," said the widow, "it is all the better for him that he is dead. It looks as though he had had trouble enough, poor soul, while he was alive."

°°°°And this was all the funeral oration delivered over him who had been for Eugene the type and embodiment of Fatherhood.

°°°°The fifteen lodgers began to talk as usual. When Bianchon and Eugene had satisfied their hunger, the rattle of spoons and forks, the boisterous conversation, the expressions on the faces that bespoke various degrees of want of feeling, gluttony, or indifference, everything about them made them shiver with loathing. They went out to find a priest to watch that night with the dead. It was necessary to measure their last pious cares by the scanty sum of money that remained. Before nine o'clock that evening the body was laid out on the bare sacking of the bedstead in the desolate room; a lighted candle stood on either side, and the priest watched at the foot. Rastignac made inquiries of this latter as to the expenses of the funeral, and wrote to the Baron de Nucingen and the Comte de Restaud, entreating both gentlemen to authorize their man of business to defray the charges of laying their father-in-law in the grave. He sent Christophe with the letters; then he went to bed, tired out, and slept.

°°°°Next day Bianchon and Rastignac were obliged to take the certificate to the registrar themselves, and by twelve o'clock the formalities were completed. Two hours went by, no word came from the Count nor from the Baron; nobody appeared to act for them, and Rastignac had already been obliged to pay the priest. Sylvie asked ten francs for sewing the old man in his winding- sheet and making him ready for the grave, and Eugene and Bianchon calculated that they had scarcely sufficient to pay for the funeral, if nothing was forthcoming from the dead man's family. So it was the medical student who laid him in a pauper's coffin, despatched from Bianchon's hospital, whence he obtained it at a cheaper rate.

°°°°"Let us play those wretches a trick," said he. "Go to the cemetery, buy a grave for five years at Pere-Lachaise, and arrange with the Church and the undertaker to have a third-class funeral. If the daughters and their husbands decline to repay you, you can carve this on the headstone--'HERE LIES M. GORIOT, FATHER OF THE COMTESSE DE RESTAUD AND THE BARONNE DE NUCINGEN, INTERRED AT THE EXPENSE OF TWO STUDENTS.' "

°°°°Eugene took part of his friend's advice, but only after he had gone in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

°°°°"Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their father, and are in deep grief over their loss."

°°°°Eugene's Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was impossible to reach Delphine.

°°°°"Sell some of your ornaments," he wrote hastily in the porter's room, "so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place."

°°°°He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the lodging-house about three o'clock. In spite of himself, the tears came into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth, was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs. A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

°°°°Bianchon's duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he had made for the burial service. The house student's note told Rastignac that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading Bianchon's scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot's two daughters in Mme. Vauquer's hands.

°°°°"How dared you take it?" he asked.

°°°°"Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?" retorted Sylvie. "It is gold."

°°°°"Of course it shall!" Eugene answered indignantly; "he shall at any rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with him."

°°°°When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man's breast the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were innocent little maidens, before they began "to think for themselves," as he had moaned out in his agony.

°°°°Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker's men were the only followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. When the coffin had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked round in vain for Goriot's two daughters or their husbands. Christophe was his only fellow- mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe's hand. He could not utter a word just then.

°°°°"Yes, Monsieur Eugene," said Christophe, "he was a good and worthy man, who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any harm, and gave nobody any trouble."

°°°°The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

°°°°The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the Libera nos and the De profundis. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with Eugene and Christophe.

°°°°"There is no one else to follow us," remarked the priest, "so we may as well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five."

°°°°But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen, arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o'clock Goriot's coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters' servants standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that fell on Father Goriot's grave, Eugene Rastignac's youth ended. He folded his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

°°°°He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste of its honey, and said magniloquently:

°°°°"Henceforth there is war between us."

°°°°And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine with Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°ADDENDUM

°°°°The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

°°°°Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d'   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Secrets of a Princess   Beatrix

°°°°Beauseant, Marquis   An Episode under the Terror

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomte de   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomtesse de   The Deserted Woman   Albert Savarus

°°°°Bianchon, Horace   The Atheist's Mass   Cesar Birotteau   The Commission in Lunacy   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   A Bachelor's Establishment   The Secrets of a Princess   The Government Clerks   Pierrette   A Study of Woman   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Honorine   The Seamy Side of History   The Magic Skin   A Second Home   A Prince of Bohemia   Letters of Two Brides   The Muse of the Department   The Imaginary Mistress   The Middle Classes   Cousin Betty   The Country Parson In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:   Another Study of Woman   La Grande Breteche

°°°°Bibi-Lupin (chief of secret police, called himself Gondureau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de   Sarrasine

°°°°Collin, Jacques   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Derville   Gobseck   A Start in Life   The Gondreville Mystery   Colonel Chabert   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Franchessini, Colonel   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Galathionne, Princess   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van   Gobseck   Cesar Birotteau   The Government Clerks   The Unconscious Humoriists

°°°°Jacques (M. de Beauseant's butler)   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Langeais, Duchesse Antoinette de   The Thirteen

°°°°Marsay, Henri de   The Thirteen   The Unconscious Humorists   Another Study of Woman   The Lily of the Valley   Jealousies of a Country Town   Ursule Mirouet   A Marriage Settlement   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Letters of Two Brides   The Ball at Sceaux   Modest Mignon   The Secrets of a Princess   The Gondreville Mystery   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Maurice (de Restaud's valet)   Gobseck

°°°°Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de   The Thirteen   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Another Study of Woman   Pierrette   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Nucingen, Baron Frederic de   The Firm of Nucingen   Pierrette   Cesar Birotteau   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Another Study of Woman   The Secrets of a Princess   A Man of Business   Cousin Betty   The Muse of the Department   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de   The Thirteen   Eugenie Grandet   Cesar Birotteau   Melmoth Reconciled   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   The Commission in Lunacy   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Modeste Mignon   The Firm of Nucingen   Another Study of Woman   A Daughter of Eve   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Poiret   The Government Clerks   A Start in Life   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Poiret, Madame (nee Christine-Michelle Michonneau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de (Eugene's parents)   Lost Illusions

°°°°Rastignac, Eugene de   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Ball at Sceaux   The Interdiction   A Study of Woman   Another Study of Woman   The Magic Skin   The Secrets of a Princess   A Daughter of Eve   The Gondreville Mystery   The Firm of Nucingen   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Rastignac, Laure-Rose and Agathe de   Lost Illusions   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Rastignac, Monseigneur Gabriel de   The Country Parson   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Restaud, Comte de   Gobseck

°°°°Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de   Gobseck

°°°°Selerier   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Taillefer, Jean-Frederic   The Firm of Nucingen   The Magic Skin   The Red Inn

°°°°Taillefer, Victorine   The Red Inn

°°°°Therese   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Tissot, Pierre-Francois   A Prince of Bohemia

°°°°Trailles, Comte Maxime de   Cesar Birotteau   Gobseck   Ursule Mirouet   A Man of Business   The Member for Arcis   The Secrets of a Princess   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   Beatrix   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°End

°°°°Eugenie Grandet

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Maria.

°°°°May your name, that of one whose portrait is the noblest ornament

°°°°of this work, lie on its opening pages like a branch of sacred

°°°°box, taken from an unknown tree, but sanctified by religion, and

°°°°kept ever fresh and green by pious hands to bless the house.De Balzac.

°°°°EUGENIE GRANDET

°°°°I

°°°°There are houses in certain provincial towns whose aspect inspiresmelancholy, akin to that called forth by sombre cloisters, drearymoorlands, or the desolation of ruins. Within these houses there is,perhaps, the silence of the cloister, the barrenness of moors, theskeleton of ruins; life and movement are so stagnant there that astranger might think them uninhabited, were it not that he encounterssuddenly the pale, cold glance of a motionless person, whose half-monastic face peers beyond the window-casing at the sound of anunaccustomed step.

°°°°Such elements of sadness formed the physiognomy, as it were, of adwelling-house in Saumur which stands at the end of the steep streetleading to the chateau in the upper part of the town. This street--nowlittle frequented, hot in summer, cold in winter, dark in certainsections--is remarkable for the resonance of its little pebblypavement, always clean and dry, for the narrowness of its tortuousroad-way, for the peaceful stillness of its houses, which belong tothe Old town and are over-topped by the ramparts. Houses threecenturies old are still solid, though built of wood, and their diversaspects add to the originality which commends this portion of Saumurto the attention of artists and antiquaries.

°°°°It is difficult to pass these houses without admiring the enormousoaken beams, their ends carved into fantastic figures, which crownwith a black bas-relief the lower floor of most of them. In one placethese transverse timbers are covered with slate and mark a bluish linealong the frail wall of a dwelling covered by a roof /en colombage/which bends beneath the weight of years, and whose rotting shinglesare twisted by the alternate action of sun and rain. In another placeblackened, worn-out window-sills, with delicate sculptures nowscarcely discernible, seem too weak to bear the brown clay pots fromwhich springs the heart's-ease or the rose-bush of some poor working-woman. Farther on are doors studded with enormous nails, where thegenius of our forefathers has traced domestic hieroglyphics, of whichthe meaning is now lost forever. Here a Protestant attested hisbelief; there a Leaguer cursed Henry IV.; elsewhere some bourgeois hascarved the insignia of his /noblesse de cloches/, symbols of his long-forgotten magisterial glory. The whole history of France is there.Next to a tottering house with roughly plastered walls, where anartisan enshrines his tools, rises the mansion of a country gentleman,on the stone arch of which above the door vestiges of armorialbearings may still be seen, battered by the many revolutions that haveshaken France since 1789. In this hilly street the ground-floors ofthe merchants are neither shops nor warehouses; lovers of the MiddleAges will here find the /ouvrouere/ of our forefathers in all itsnaive simplicity. These low rooms, which have no shop-frontage, noshow-windows, in fact no glass at all, are deep and dark and withoutinterior or exterior decoration. Their doors open in two parts, eachroughly iron-bound; the upper half is fastened back within the room,the lower half, fitted with a spring-bell, swings continually to andfro. Air and light reach the damp den within, either through the upperhalf of the door, or through an open space between the ceiling and alow front wall, breast-high, which is closed by solid shutters thatare taken down every morning, put up every evening, and held in placeby heavy iron bars.

°°°°This wall serves as a counter for the merchandise. No delusive displayis there; only samples of the business, whatever it may chance to be,--such, for instance, as three or four tubs full of codfish and salt,a few bundles of sail-cloth, cordage, copper wire hanging from thejoists above, iron hoops for casks ranged along the wall, or a fewpieces of cloth upon the shelves. Enter. A neat girl, glowing withyouth, wearing a white kerchief, her arms red and bare, drops herknitting and calls her father or her mother, one of whom comes forwardand sells you what you want, phlegmatically, civilly, or arrogantly,according to his or her individual character, whether it be a matterof two sous' or twenty thousand francs' worth of merchandise. You maysee a cooper, for instance, sitting in his doorway and twirling histhumbs as he talks with a neighbor. To all appearance he owns nothingmore than a few miserable boat-ribs and two or three bundles of laths;but below in the port his teeming wood-yard supplies all the cooperagetrade of Anjou. He knows to a plank how many casks are needed if thevintage is good. A hot season makes him rich, a rainy season ruinshim; in a single morning puncheons worth eleven francs have been knownto drop to six. In this country, as in Touraine, atmosphericvicissitudes control commercial life. Wine-growers, proprietors, wood-merchants, coopers, inn-keepers, mariners, all keep watch of the sun.They tremble when they go to bed lest they should hear in the morningof a frost in the night; they dread rain, wind, drought, and wantwater, heat, and clouds to suit their fancy. A perpetual duel goes onbetween the heavens and their terrestrial interests. The barometersmooths, saddens, or makes merry their countenances, turn and turnabout. From end to end of this street, formerly the Grand'Rue deSaumur, the words: "Here's golden weather," are passed from door todoor; or each man calls to his neighbor: "It rains louis," knowingwell what a sunbeam or the opportune rainfall is bringing him.On Saturdays after midday, in the fine season, not one sou's worth ofmerchandise can be bought from these worthy traders. Each has hisvineyard, his enclosure of fields, and all spend two days in thecountry. This being foreseen, and purchases, sales, and profitsprovided for, the merchants have ten or twelve hours to spend inparties of pleasure, in making observations, in criticisms, and incontinual spying. A housewife cannot buy a partridge without theneighbors asking the husband if it were cooked to a turn. A young girlnever puts her head near a window that she is not seen by idlinggroups in the street. Consciences are held in the light; and thehouses, dark, silent, impenetrable as they seem, hide no mysteries.Life is almost wholly in the open air; every household sits at its ownthreshold, breakfasts, dines, and quarrels there. No one can passalong the street without being examined; in fact formerly, when astranger entered a provincial town he was bantered and made game offrom door to door. From this came many good stories, and the nickname/copieux/, which was applied to the inhabitants of Angers, whoexcelled in such urban sarcasms.

°°°°The ancient mansions of the old town of Saumur are at the top of thishilly street, and were formerly occupied by the nobility of theneighborhood. The melancholy dwelling where the events of thefollowing history took place is one of these mansions,--venerablerelics of a century in which men and things bore the characteristicsof simplicity which French manners and customs are losing day by day.Follow the windings of the picturesque thoroughfare, whoseirregularities awaken recollections that plunge the mind mechanicallyinto reverie, and you will see a somewhat dark recess, in the centreof which is hidden the door of the house of Monsieur Grandet. It isimpossible to understand the force of this provincial expression--thehouse of Monsieur Grandet--without giving the biography of MonsieurGrandet himself.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet enjoyed a reputation in Saumur whose causes andeffects can never be fully understood by those who have not, at onetime or another, lived in the provinces. In 1789 Monsieur Grandet--still called by certain persons le Pere Grandet, though the number ofsuch old persons has perceptibly diminished--was a master-cooper, ableto read, write, and cipher. At the period when the French Republicoffered for sale the church property in the arrondissement of Saumur,the cooper, then forty years of age, had just married the daughter ofa rich wood-merchant. Supplied with the ready money of his own fortuneand his wife's /dot/, in all about two thousand louis-d'or, Grandetwent to the newly established "district," where, with the help of twohundred double louis given by his father-in-law to the surlyrepublican who presided over the sales of the national domain, heobtained for a song, legally if not legitimately, one of the finestvineyards in the arrondissement, an old abbey, and several farms. Theinhabitants of Saumur were so little revolutionary that they thoughtPere Grandet a bold man, a republican, and a patriot with a mind opento all the new ideas; though in point of fact it was open only tovineyards. He was appointed a member of the administration of Saumur,and his pacific influence made itself felt politically andcommercially. Politically, he protected the ci-devant nobles, andprevented, to the extent of his power, the sale of the lands andproperty of the /emigres/; commercially, he furnished the Republicanarmies with two or three thousand puncheons of white wine, and tookhis pay in splendid fields belonging to a community of women whoselands had been reserved for the last lot.

°°°°Under the Consulate Grandet became mayor, governed wisely, andharvested still better pickings. Under the Empire he was calledMonsieur Grandet. Napoleon, however, did not like republicans, andsuperseded Monsieur Grandet (who was supposed to have worn thePhrygian cap) by a man of his own surroundings, a future baron of theEmpire. Monsieur Grandet quitted office without regret. He hadconstructed in the interests of the town certain fine roads which ledto his own property; his house and lands, very advantageouslyassessed, paid moderate taxes; and since the registration of hisvarious estates, the vineyards, thanks to his constant care, hadbecome the "head of the country,"--a local term used to denote thosethat produced the finest quality of wine. He might have asked for thecross of the Legion of honor.

°°°°This event occurred in 1806. Monsieur Grandet was then fifty-sevenyears of age, his wife thirty-six, and an only daughter, the fruit oftheir legitimate love, was ten years old. Monsieur Grandet, whomProvidence no doubt desired to compensate for the loss of hismunicipal honors, inherited three fortunes in the course of this year,--that of Madame de la Gaudiniere, born de la Bertelliere, the motherof Madame Grandet; that of old Monsieur de la Bertelliere, hergrandfather; and, lastly, that of Madame Gentillet, her grandmother onthe mother's side: three inheritances, whose amount was not known toany one. The avarice of the deceased persons was so keen that for along time they had hoarded their money for the pleasure of secretlylooking at it. Old Monsieur de la Bertelliere called an investment anextravagance, and thought he got better interest from the sight of hisgold than from the profits of usury. The inhabitants of Saumurconsequently estimated his savings according to "the revenues of thesun's wealth," as they said.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet thus obtained that modern title of nobility which ourmania for equality can never rub out. He became the most imposingpersonage in the arrondissement. He worked a hundred acres ofvineyard, which in fruitful years yielded seven or eight hundredhogsheads of wine. He owned thirteen farms, an old abbey, whosewindows and arches he had walled up for the sake of economy,--ameasure which preserved them,--also a hundred and twenty-seven acresof meadow-land, where three thousand poplars, planted in 1793, grewand flourished; and finally, the house in which he lived. Such was hisvisible estate; as to his other property, only two persons could giveeven a vague guess at its value: one was Monsieur Cruchot, a notaryemployed in the usurious investments of Monsieur Grandet; the otherwas Monsieur des Grassins, the richest banker in Saumur, in whoseprofits Grandet had a certain covenanted and secret share.Although old Cruchot and Monsieur des Grassins were both gifted withthe deep discretion which wealth and trust beget in the provinces,they publicly testified so much respect to Monsieur Grandet thatobservers estimated the amount of his property by the obsequiousattention which they bestowed upon him. In all Saumur there was no onenot persuaded that Monsieur Grandet had a private treasure, somehiding-place full of louis, where he nightly took ineffable delight ingazing upon great masses of gold. Avaricious people gathered proof ofthis when they looked at the eyes of the good man, to which the yellowmetal seemed to have conveyed its tints. The glance of a manaccustomed to draw enormous interest from his capital acquires, likethat of the libertine, the gambler, or the sycophant, certainindefinable habits,--furtive, eager, mysterious movements, which neverescape the notice of his co-religionists. This secret language is in acertain way the freemasonry of the passions. Monsieur Grandet inspiredthe respectful esteem due to one who owed no man anything, who,skilful cooper and experienced wine-grower that he was, guessed withthe precision of an astronomer whether he ought to manufacture athousand puncheons for his vintage, or only five hundred, who neverfailed in any speculation, and always had casks for sale when caskswere worth more than the commodity that filled them, who could storehis whole vintage in his cellars and bide his time to put thepuncheons on the market at two hundred francs, when the littleproprietors had been forced to sell theirs for five louis. His famousvintage of 1811, judiciously stored and slowly disposed of, broughthim in more than two hundred and forty thousand francs.

°°°°Financially speaking, Monsieur Grandet was something between a tigerand a boa-constrictor. He could crouch and lie low, watch his prey along while, spring upon it, open his jaws, swallow a mass of louis,and then rest tranquilly like a snake in process of digestion,impassible, methodical, and cold. No one saw him pass without afeeling of admiration mingled with respect and fear; had not every manin Saumur felt the rending of those polished steel claws? For thisone, Maitre Cruchot had procured the money required for the purchaseof a domain, but at eleven per cent. For that one, Monsieur desGrassins discounted bills of exchange, but at a frightful deduction ofinterest. Few days ever passed that Monsieur Grandet's name was notmentioned either in the markets or in social conversations at theevening gatherings. To some the fortune of the old wine-grower was anobject of patriotic pride. More than one merchant, more than oneinnkeeper, said to strangers with a certain complacency: "Monsieur, wehave two or three millionaire establishments; but as for MonsieurGrandet, he does not himself know how much he is worth."

°°°°In 1816 the best reckoners in Saumur estimated the landed property ofthe worthy man at nearly four millions; but as, on an average, he hadmade yearly, from 1793 to 1817, a hundred thousand francs out of thatproperty, it was fair to presume that he possessed in actual money asum nearly equal to the value of his estate. So that when, after agame of boston or an evening discussion on the matter of vines, thetalk fell upon Monsieur Grandet, knowing people said: "Le PereGrandet? le Pere Grandet must have at least five or six millions.""You are cleverer than I am; I have never been able to find out theamount," answered Monsieur Cruchot or Monsieur des Grassins, wheneither chanced to overhear the remark.

°°°°If some Parisian mentioned Rothschild or Monsieur Lafitte, the peopleof Saumur asked if he were as rich as Monsieur Grandet. When theParisian, with a smile, tossed them a disdainful affirmative, theylooked at each other and shook their heads with an incredulous air. Solarge a fortune covered with a golden mantle all the actions of thisman. If in early days some peculiarities of his life gave occasion forlaughter or ridicule, laughter and ridicule had long since died away.His least important actions had the authority of results repeatedlyshown. His speech, his clothing, his gestures, the blinking of hiseyes, were law to the country-side, where every one, after studyinghim as a naturalist studies the result of instinct in the loweranimals, had come to understand the deep mute wisdom of his slightestactions.

°°°°"It will be a hard winter," said one; "Pere Grandet has put on his furgloves."

°°°°"Pere Grandet is buying quantities of staves; there will be plenty ofwine this year."

°°°°Monsieur Grandet never bought either bread or meat. His farmerssupplied him weekly with a sufficiency of capons, chickens, eggs,butter, and his tithe of wheat. He owned a mill; and the tenant wasbound, over and above his rent, to take a certain quantity of grainand return him the flour and bran. La Grande Nanon, his only servant,though she was no longer young, baked the bread of the householdherself every Saturday. Monsieur Grandet arranged with kitchen-gardeners who were his tenants to supply him with vegetables. As tofruits, he gathered such quantities that he sold the greater part inthe market. His fire-wood was cut from his own hedgerows or taken fromthe half-rotten old sheds which he built at the corners of his fields,and whose planks the farmers carted into town for him, all cut up, andobligingly stacked in his wood-house, receiving in return his thanks.His only known expenditures were for the consecrated bread, theclothing of his wife and daughter, the hire of their chairs in church,the wages of la Grand Nanon, the tinning of the saucepans, lights,taxes, repairs on his buildings, and the costs of his variousindustries. He had six hundred acres of woodland, lately purchased,which he induced a neighbor's keeper to watch, under the promise of anindemnity. After the acquisition of this property he ate game for thefirst time.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet's manners were very simple. He spoke little. Heusually expressed his meaning by short sententious phrases uttered ina soft voice. After the Revolution, the epoch at which he first cameinto notice, the good man stuttered in a wearisome way as soon as hewas required to speak at length or to maintain an argument. Thisstammering, the incoherence of his language, the flux of words inwhich he drowned his thought, his apparent lack of logic, attributedto defects of education, were in reality assumed, and will besufficiently explained by certain events in the following history.Four sentences, precise as algebraic formulas, sufficed him usually tograsp and solve all difficulties of life and commerce: "I don't know;I cannot; I will not; I will see about it." He never said yes, or no,and never committed himself to writing. If people talked to him helistened coldly, holding his chin in his right hand and resting hisright elbow in the back of his left hand, forming in his own mindopinions on all matters, from which he never receded. He reflectedlong before making any business agreement. When his opponent, aftercareful conversation, avowed the secret of his own purposes, confidentthat he had secured his listener's assent, Grandet answered: "I candecide nothing without consulting my wife." His wife, whom he hadreduced to a state of helpless slavery, was a useful screen to him inbusiness. He went nowhere among friends; he neither gave nor accepteddinners; he made no stir or noise, seeming to economize in everything,even movement. He never disturbed or disarranged the things of otherpeople, out of respect for the rights of property. Nevertheless, inspite of his soft voice, in spite of his circumspect bearing, thelanguage and habits of a coarse nature came to the surface, especiallyin his own home, where he controlled himself less than elsewhere.Physically, Grandet was a man five feet high, thick-set, square-built,with calves twelve inches in circumference, knotted knee-joints, andbroad shoulders; his face was round, tanned, and pitted by the small-pox; his chin was straight, his lips had no curves, his teeth werewhite; his eyes had that calm, devouring expression which peopleattribute to the basilisk; his forehead, full of transverse wrinkles,was not without certain significant protuberances; his yellow-grayishhair was said to be silver and gold by certain young people who didnot realize the impropriety of making a jest about Monsieur Grandet.His nose, thick at the end, bore a veined wen, which the common peoplesaid, not without reason, was full of malice. The whole countenanceshowed a dangerous cunning, an integrity without warmth, the egotismof a man long used to concentrate every feeling upon the enjoyments ofavarice and upon the only human being who was anything whatever tohim,--his daughter and sole heiress, Eugenie. Attitude, manners,bearing, everything about him, in short, testified to that belief inhimself which the habit of succeeding in all enterprises never failsto give to a man.

°°°°Thus, though his manners were unctuous and soft outwardly, MonsieurGrandet's nature was of iron. His dress never varied; and those whosaw him to-day saw him such as he had been since 1791. His stout shoeswere tied with leathern thongs; he wore, in all weathers, thickwoollen stockings, short breeches of coarse maroon cloth with silverbuckles, a velvet waistcoat, in alternate stripes of yellow and puce,buttoned squarely, a large maroon coat with wide flaps, a blackcravat, and a quaker's hat. His gloves, thick as those of a gendarme,lasted him twenty months; to preserve them, he always laid themmethodically on the brim of his hat in one particular spot. Saumurknew nothing further about this personage.

°°°°Only six individuals had a right of entrance to Monsieur Grandet'shouse. The most important of the first three was a nephew of MonsieurCruchot. Since his appointment as president of the Civil courts ofSaumur this young man had added the name of Bonfons to that ofCruchot. He now signed himself C. de Bonfons. Any litigant so ill-advised as to call him Monsieur Cruchot would soon be made to feel hisfolly in court. The magistrate protected those who called him Monsieurle president, but he favored with gracious smiles those who addressedhim as Monsieur de Bonfons. Monsieur le president was thirty-threeyears old, and possessed the estate of Bonfons (Boni Fontis), worthseven thousand francs a year; he expected to inherit the property ofhis uncle the notary and that of another uncle, the Abbe Cruchot, adignitary of the chapter of Saint-Martin de Tours, both of whom werethought to be very rich. These three Cruchots, backed by a goodlynumber of cousins, and allied to twenty families in the town, formed aparty, like the Medici in Florence; like the Medici, the Cruchots hadtheir Pazzi.

°°°°Madame des Grassins, mother of a son twenty-three years of age, cameassiduously to play cards with Madame Grandet, hoping to marry herdear Adolphe to Mademoiselle Eugenie. Monsieur des Grassins, thebanker, vigorously promoted the schemes of his wife by means of secretservices constantly rendered to the old miser, and always arrived intime upon the field of battle. The three des Grassins likewise hadtheir adherents, their cousins, their faithful allies. On the Cruchotside the abbe, the Talleyrand of the family, well backed-up by hisbrother the notary, sharply contested every inch of ground with hisfemale adversary, and tried to obtain the rich heiress for his nephewthe president.

°°°°This secret warfare between the Cruchots and des Grassins, the prizethereof being the hand in marriage of Eugenie Grandet, kept thevarious social circles of Saumur in violent agitation. WouldMademoiselle Grandet marry Monsieur le president or Monsieur Adolphedes Grassins? To this problem some replied that Monsieur Grandet wouldnever give his daughter to the one or to the other. The old cooper,eaten up with ambition, was looking, they said, for a peer of France,to whom an income of three hundred thousand francs would make all thepast, present, and future casks of the Grandets acceptable. Othersreplied that Monsieur and Madame des Grassins were nobles, andexceedingly rich; that Adolphe was a personable young fellow; and thatunless the old man had a nephew of the pope at his beck and call, sucha suitable alliance ought to satisfy a man who came from nothing,--aman whom Saumur remembered with an adze in his hand, and who had,moreover, worn the /bonnet rouge/. Certain wise heads called attentionto the fact that Monsieur Cruchot de Bonfons had the right of entry tothe house at all times, whereas his rival was received only onSundays. Others, however, maintained that Madame des Grassins was moreintimate with the women of the house of Grandet than the Cruchotswere, and could put into their minds certain ideas which would lead,sooner or later, to success. To this the former retorted that the AbbeCruchot was the most insinuating man in the world: pit a woman againsta monk, and the struggle was even. "It is diamond cut diamond," said aSaumur wit.

°°°°The oldest inhabitants, wiser than their fellows, declared that theGrandets knew better than to let the property go out of the family,and that Mademoiselle Eugenie Grandet of Saumur would be married tothe son of Monsieur Grandet of Paris, a wealthy wholesale wine-merchant. To this the Cruchotines and the Grassinists replied: "In thefirst place, the two brothers have seen each other only twice inthirty years; and next, Monsieur Grandet of Paris has ambitiousdesigns for his son. He is mayor of an arrondissement, a deputy,colonel of the National Guard, judge in the commercial courts; hedisowns the Grandets of Saumur, and means to ally himself with someducal family,--ducal under favor of Napoleon." In short, was thereanything not said of an heiress who was talked of through acircumference of fifty miles, and even in the public conveyances fromAngers to Blois, inclusively!

°°°°At the beginning of 1811, the Cruchotines won a signal advantage overthe Grassinists. The estate of Froidfond, remarkable for its park, itsmansion, its farms, streams, ponds, forests, and worth about threemillions, was put up for sale by the young Marquis de Froidfond, whowas obliged to liquidate his possessions. Maitre Cruchot, thepresident, and the abbe, aided by their adherents, were able toprevent the sale of the estate in little lots. The notary concluded abargain with the young man for the whole property, payable in gold,persuading him that suits without number would have to be broughtagainst the purchasers of small lots before he could get the money forthem; it was better, therefore, to sell the whole to Monsieur Grandet,who was solvent and able to pay for the estate in ready money. Thefine marquisate of Froidfond was accordingly conveyed down the gulletof Monsieur Grandet, who, to the great astonishment of Saumur, paidfor it, under proper discount, with the usual formalities.This affair echoed from Nantes to Orleans. Monsieur Grandet tookadvantage of a cart returning by way of Froidfond to go and see hischateau. Having cast a master's eye over the whole property, hereturned to Saumur, satisfied that he had invested his money at fiveper cent, and seized by the stupendous thought of extending andincreasing the marquisate of Froidfond by concentrating all hisproperty there. Then, to fill up his coffers, now nearly empty, heresolved to thin out his woods and his forests, and to sell off thepoplars in the meadows.

°°°°II

°°°°It is now easy to understand the full meaning of the term, "the houseof Monsieur Grandet,"--that cold, silent, pallid dwelling, standingabove the town and sheltered by the ruins of the ramparts. The twopillars and the arch, which made the porte-cochere on which the dooropened, were built, like the house itself, of tufa,--a white stonepeculiar to the shores of the Loire, and so soft that it lasts hardlymore than two centuries. Numberless irregular holes, capriciouslybored or eaten out by the inclemency of the weather, gave anappearance of the vermiculated stonework of French architecture to thearch and the side walls of this entrance, which bore some resemblanceto the gateway of a jail. Above the arch was a long bas-relief, inhard stone, representing the four seasons, the faces already crumblingaway and blackened. This bas-relief was surmounted by a projectingplinth, upon which a variety of chance growths had sprung up,--yellowpellitory, bindweed, convolvuli, nettles, plantain, and even a littlecherry-tree, already grown to some height.

°°°°The door of the archway was made of solid oak, brown, shrunken, andsplit in many places; though frail in appearance, it was firmly heldin place by a system of iron bolts arranged in symmetrical patterns. Asmall square grating, with close bars red with rust, filled up themiddle panel and made, as it were, a motive for the knocker, fastenedto it by a ring, which struck upon the grinning head of a huge nail.This knocker, of the oblong shape and kind which our ancestors called/jaquemart/, looked like a huge note of exclamation; an antiquary whoexamined it attentively might have found indications of the figure,essentially burlesque, which it once represented, and which long usagehad now effaced. Through this little grating--intended in olden timesfor the recognition of friends in times of civil war--inquisitivepersons could perceive, at the farther end of the dark and slimyvault, a few broken steps which led to a garden, picturesquely shut inby walls that were thick and damp, and through which oozed a moisturethat nourished tufts of sickly herbage. These walls were the ruins ofthe ramparts, under which ranged the gardens of several neighboringhouses.

°°°°The most important room on the ground-floor of the house was a largehall, entered directly from beneath the vault of the porte-cochere.Few people know the importance of a hall in the little towns of Anjou,Touraine, and Berry. The hall is at one and the same time antechamber,salon, office, boudoir, and dining-room; it is the theatre of domesticlife, the common living-room. There the barber of the neighborhoodcame, twice a year, to cut Monsieur Grandet's hair; there the farmers,the cure, the under-prefect, and the miller's boy came on business.This room, with two windows looking on the street, was entirely ofwood. Gray panels with ancient mouldings covered the walls from top tobottom; the ceiling showed all its beams, which were likewise paintedgray, while the space between them had been washed over in white, nowyellow with age. An old brass clock, inlaid with arabesques, adornedthe mantel of the ill-cut white stone chimney-piece, above which was agreenish mirror, whose edges, bevelled to show the thickness of theglass, reflected a thread of light the whole length of a gothic framein damascened steel-work. The two copper-gilt candelabra whichdecorated the corners of the chimney-piece served a double purpose: bytaking off the side-branches, each of which held a socket, the mainstem--which was fastened to a pedestal of bluish marble tipped withcopper--made a candlestick for one candle, which was sufficient forordinary occasions. The chairs, antique in shape, were covered withtapestry representing the fables of La Fontaine; it was necessary,however, to know that writer well to guess at the subjects, for thefaded colors and the figures, blurred by much darning, were difficultto distinguish.

°°°°At the four corners of the hall were closets, or rather buffets,surmounted by dirty shelves. An old card-table in marquetry, of whichthe upper part was a chess-board, stood in the space between the twowindows. Above this table was an oval barometer with a black borderenlivened with gilt bands, on which the flies had so licentiouslydisported themselves that the gilding had become problematical. On thepanel opposite to the chimney-piece were two portraits in pastel,supposed to represent the grandfather of Madame Grandet, old Monsieurde la Bertelliere, as a lieutenant in the French guard, and thedeceased Madame Gentillet in the guise of a shepherdess. The windowswere draped with curtains of red /gros de Tours/ held back by silkencords with ecclesiastical tassels. This luxurious decoration, littlein keeping with the habits of Monsieur Grandet, had been, togetherwith the steel pier-glass, the tapestries, and the buffets, which wereof rose-wood, included in the purchase of the house.

°°°°By the window nearest to the door stood a straw chair, whose legs wereraised on castors to lift its occupant, Madame Grandet, to a heightfrom which she could see the passers-by. A work-table of stainedcherry-wood filled up the embrasure, and the little armchair ofEugenie Grandet stood beside it. In this spot the lives had flowedpeacefully onward for fifteen years, in a round of constant work fromthe month of April to the month of November. On the first day of thelatter month they took their winter station by the chimney. Not untilthat day did Grandet permit a fire to be lighted; and on the thirty-first of March it was extinguished, without regard either to thechills of the early spring or to those of a wintry autumn. A foot-warmer, filled with embers from the kitchen fire, which la GrandeNanon contrived to save for them, enabled Madame and MademoiselleGrandet to bear the chilly mornings and evenings of April and October.Mother and daughter took charge of the family linen, and spent theirdays so conscientiously upon a labor properly that of working-women,that if Eugenie wished to embroider a collar for her mother she wasforced to take the time from sleep, and deceive her father to obtainthe necessary light. For a long time the miser had given out thetallow candle to his daughter and la Grande Nanon just as he gave outevery morning the bread and other necessaries for the dailyconsumption.

°°°°La Grande Nanon was perhaps the only human being capable of acceptingwillingly the despotism of her master. The whole town envied Monsieurand Madame Grandet the possession of her. La Grande Nanon, so calledon account of her height, which was five feet eight inches, had livedwith Monsieur Grandet for thirty-five years. Though she received onlysixty francs a year in wages, she was supposed to be one of therichest serving-women in Saumur. Those sixty francs, accumulatingthrough thirty-five years, had recently enabled her to invest fourthousand francs in an annuity with Maitre Cruchot. This result of herlong and persistent economy seemed gigantic. Every servant in thetown, seeing that the poor sexagenarian was sure of bread for her oldage, was jealous of her, and never thought of the hard slavery throughwhich it had been won.

°°°°At twenty-two years of age the poor girl had been unable to find asituation, so repulsive was her face to almost every one. Yet thefeeling was certainly unjust: the face would have been much admired onthe shoulders of a grenadier of the guard; but all things, so theysay, should be in keeping. Forced to leave a farm where she kept thecows, because the dwelling-house was burned down, she came to Saumurto find a place, full of the robust courage that shrinks from nolabor. Le Pere Grandet was at that time thinking of marriage and aboutto set up his household. He espied the girl, rejected as she was fromdoor to door. A good judge of corporeal strength in his trade as acooper, he guessed the work that might be got out of a female creatureshaped like a Hercules, as firm on her feet as an oak sixty years oldon its roots, strong in the hips, square in the back, with the handsof a cartman and an honesty as sound as her unblemished virtue.Neither the warts which adorned her martial visage, nor the red-bricktints of her skin, nor the sinewy arms, nor the ragged garments of laGrande Nanon, dismayed the cooper, who was at that time still of anage when the heart shudders. He fed, shod, and clothed the poor girl,gave her wages, and put her to work without treating her too roughly.Seeing herself thus welcomed, la Grande Nanon wept secretly tears ofjoy, and attached herself in all sincerity to her master, who fromthat day ruled her and worked her with feudal authority. Nanon dideverything. She cooked, she made the lye, she washed the linen in theLoire and brought it home on her shoulders; she got up early, she wentto bed late; she prepared the food of the vine-dressers during theharvest, kept watch upon the market-people, protected the property ofher master like a faithful dog, and even, full of blind confidence,obeyed without a murmur his most absurd exactions.

°°°°In the famous year of 1811, when the grapes were gathered withunheard-of difficulty, Grandet resolved to give Nanon his old watch,--the first present he had made her during twenty years of service.Though he turned over to her his old shoes (which fitted her), it isimpossible to consider that quarterly benefit as a gift, for the shoeswere always thoroughly worn-out. Necessity had made the poor girl soniggardly that Grandet had grown to love her as we love a dog, andNanon had let him fasten a spiked collar round her throat, whosespikes no longer pricked her. If Grandet cut the bread with rather toomuch parsimony, she made no complaint; she gaily shared the hygienicbenefits derived from the severe regime of the household, in which noone was ever ill. Nanon was, in fact, one of the family; she laughedwhen Grandet laughed, felt gloomy or chilly, warmed herself, andtoiled as he did. What pleasant compensations there were in suchequality! Never did the master have occasion to find fault with theservant for pilfering the grapes, nor for the plums and nectarineseaten under the trees. "Come, fall-to, Nanon!" he would say in yearswhen the branches bent under the fruit and the farmers were obliged togive it to the pigs.

°°°°To the poor peasant who in her youth had earned nothing but harshtreatment, to the pauper girl picked up by charity, Grandet'sambiguous laugh was like a sunbeam. Moreover, Nanon's simple heart andnarrow head could hold only one feeling and one idea. For thirty-fiveyears she had never ceased to see herself standing before the wood-yard of Monsieur Grandet, ragged and barefooted, and to hear him say:"What do you want, young one?" Her gratitude was ever new. SometimesGrandet, reflecting that the poor creature had never heard aflattering word, that she was ignorant of all the tender sentimentsinspired by women, that she might some day appear before the throne ofGod even more chaste than the Virgin Mary herself,--Grandet, struckwith pity, would say as he looked at her, "Poor Nanon!" Theexclamation was always followed by an undefinable look cast upon himin return by the old servant. The words, uttered from time to time,formed a chain of friendship that nothing ever parted, and to whicheach exclamation added a link. Such compassion arising in the heart ofthe miser, and accepted gratefully by the old spinster, had somethinginconceivably horrible about it. This cruel pity, recalling, as itdid, a thousand pleasures to the heart of the old cooper, was forNanon the sum total of happiness. Who does not likewise say, "PoorNanon!" God will recognize his angels by the inflexions of theirvoices and by their secret sighs.

°°°°There were very many households in Saumur where the servants werebetter treated, but where the masters received far less satisfactionin return. Thus it was often said: "What have the Grandets ever doneto make their Grande Nanon so attached to them? She would go throughfire and water for their sake!" Her kitchen, whose barred windowslooked into the court, was always clean, neat, cold,--a true miser'skitchen, where nothing went to waste. When Nanon had washed herdishes, locked up the remains of the dinner, and put out her fire, sheleft the kitchen, which was separated by a passage from the living-room, and went to spin hemp beside her masters. One tallow candlesufficed the family for the evening. The servant slept at the end ofthe passage in a species of closet lighted only by a fan-light. Herrobust health enabled her to live in this hole with impunity; thereshe could hear the slightest noise through the deep silence whichreigned night and day in that dreary house. Like a watch-dog, sheslept with one ear open, and took her rest with a mind alert.A description of the other parts of the dwelling will be foundconnected with the events of this history, though the foregoing sketchof the hall, where the whole luxury of the household appears, mayenable the reader to surmise the nakedness of the upper floors.In 1819, at the beginning of an evening in the middle of November, laGrande Nanon lighted the fire for the first time. The autumn had beenvery fine. This particular day was a fete-day well known to theCruchotines and the Grassinists. The six antagonists, armed at allpoints, were making ready to meet at the Grandets and surpass eachother in testimonials of friendship. That morning all Saumur had seenMadame and Mademoiselle Grandet, accompanied by Nanon, on their way tohear Mass at the parish church, and every one remembered that the daywas the anniversary of Mademoiselle Eugenie's birth. Calculating thehour at which the family dinner would be over, Maitre Cruchot, theAbbe Cruchot, and Monsieur C. de Bonfons hastened to arrive before thedes Grassins, and be the first to pay their compliments toMademoiselle Eugenie. All three brought enormous bouquets, gathered intheir little green-houses. The stalks of the flowers which thepresident intended to present were ingeniously wound round with awhite satin ribbon adorned with gold fringe. In the morning MonsieurGrandet, following his usual custom on the days that commemorated thebirth and the fete of Eugenie, went to her bedside and solemnlypresented her with his paternal gift,--which for the last thirteenyears had consisted regularly of a curious gold-piece. Madame Grandetgave her daughter a winter dress or a summer dress, as the case mightbe. These two dresses and the gold-pieces, of which she received twoothers on New Year's day and on her father's fete-day, gave Eugenie alittle revenue of a hundred crowns or thereabouts, which Grandet lovedto see her amass. Was it not putting his money from one strong-box toanother, and, as it were, training the parsimony of his heiress? fromwhom he sometimes demanded an account of her treasure (formerlyincreased by the gifts of the Bertellieres), saying: "It is to be yourmarriage dozen."

°°°°The "marriage dozen" is an old custom sacredly preserved and still inforce in many parts of central France. In Berry and in Anjou, when ayoung girl marries, her family, or that of the husband, must give hera purse, in which they place, according to their means, twelve pieces,or twelve dozen pieces, or twelve hundred pieces of gold. The poorestshepherd-girl never marries without her dozen, be it only a dozencoppers. They still tell in Issoudun of a certain "dozen" presented toa rich heiress, which contained a hundred and forty-four /portugaisesd'or/. Pope Clement VII., uncle of Catherine de' Medici, gave her whenhe married her to Henri II. a dozen antique gold medals of pricelessvalue.

°°°°During dinner the father, delighted to see his Eugenie looking well ina new gown, exclaimed: "As it is Eugenie's birthday let us have afire; it will be a good omen."

°°°°"Mademoiselle will be married this year, that's certain," said laGrande Nanon, carrying away the remains of the goose,--the pheasant oftradesmen.

°°°°"I don't see any one suitable for her in Saumur," said Madame Grandet,glancing at her husband with a timid look which, considering heryears, revealed the conjugal slavery under which the poor womanlanguished.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter and exclaimed gaily,--

°°°°"She is twenty-three years old to-day, the child; we must soon beginto think of it."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother silently exchanged a glance of intelligence.Madame Grandet was a dry, thin woman, as yellow as a quince, awkward,slow, one of those women who are born to be down-trodden. She had bigbones, a big nose, a big forehead, big eyes, and presented at firstsight a vague resemblance to those mealy fruits that have neithersavor nor succulence. Her teeth were black and few in number, hermouth was wrinkled, her chin long and pointed. She was an excellentwoman, a true la Bertelliere. L'abbe Cruchot found occasionalopportunity to tell her that she had not done ill; and she believedhim. Angelic sweetness, the resignation of an insect tortured bychildren, a rare piety, a good heart, an unalterable equanimity ofsoul, made her universally pitied and respected. Her husband nevergave her more than six francs at a time for her personal expenses.Ridiculous as it may seem, this woman, who by her own fortune and hervarious inheritances brought Pere Grandet more than three hundredthousand francs, had always felt so profoundly humiliated by herdependence and the slavery in which she lived, against which thegentleness of her spirit prevented her from revolting, that she hadnever asked for one penny or made a single remark on the deeds whichMaitre Cruchot brought for her signature. This foolish secret pride,this nobility of soul perpetually misunderstood and wounded byGrandet, ruled the whole conduct of the wife.

°°°°Madame Grandet was attired habitually in a gown of greenish levantinesilk, endeavoring to make it last nearly a year; with it she wore alarge kerchief of white cotton cloth, a bonnet made of plaited strawssewn together, and almost always a black-silk apron. As she seldomleft the house she wore out very few shoes. She never asked anythingfor herself. Grandet, seized with occasional remorse when heremembered how long a time had elapsed since he gave her the last sixfrancs, always stipulated for the "wife's pin-money" when he sold hisyearly vintage. The four or five louis presented by the Belgian or theDutchman who purchased the wine were the chief visible signs of MadameGrandet's annual revenues. But after she had received the five louis,her husband would often say to her, as though their purse were held incommon: "Can you lend me a few sous?" and the poor woman, glad to beable to do something for a man whom her confessor held up to her asher lord and master, returned him in the course of the winter severalcrowns out of the "pin-money." When Grandet drew from his pocket thefive-franc piece which he allowed monthly for the minor expenses,--thread, needles, and toilet,--of his daughter, he never failed to sayas he buttoned his breeches' pocket: "And you, mother, do you wantanything?"

°°°°"My friend," Madame Grandet would answer, moved by a sense of maternaldignity, "we will see about that later."

°°°°Wasted dignity! Grandet thought himself very generous to his wife.Philosophers who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, ofEugenie, have surely a right to say that irony is at the bottom of theways of Providence.

°°°°After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made toEugenie's marriage, Nanon went to fetch a bottle of black-currantratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly fell as shecame down the stairs.

°°°°"You great stupid!" said her master; "are you going to tumble aboutlike other people, hey?"

°°°°"Monsieur, it was that step on your staircase which has given way.""She is right," said Madame Grandet; "it ought to have been mendedlong ago. Yesterday Eugenie nearly twisted her ankle."

°°°°"Here," said Grandet to Nanon, seeing that she looked quite pale, "asit is Eugenie's birthday, and you came near falling, take a littleglass of ratafia to set you right."

°°°°"Faith! I've earned it," said Nanon; "most people would have brokenthe bottle; but I'd sooner have broken my elbow holding it up high.""Poor Nanon!" said Grandet, filling a glass.

°°°°"Did you hurt yourself?" asked Eugenie, looking kindly at her."No, I didn't fall; I threw myself back on my haunches."

°°°°"Well! as it is Eugenie's birthday," said Grandet, "I'll have the stepmended. You people don't know how to set your foot in the corner wherethe wood is still firm."

°°°°Grandet took the candle, leaving his wife, daughter, and servantwithout any other light than that from the hearth, where the flameswere lively, and went into the bakehouse to fetch planks, nails, andtools.

°°°°"Can I help you?" cried Nanon, hearing him hammer on the stairs."No, no! I'm an old hand at it," answered the former cooper.At the moment when Grandet was mending his worm-eaten staircase andwhistling with all his might, in remembrance of the days of his youth,the three Cruchots knocked at the door.

°°°°"Is it you, Monsieur Cruchot?" asked Nanon, peeping through the littlegrating.

°°°°"Yes," answered the president.

°°°°Nanon opened the door, and the light from the hearth, reflected on theceiling, enabled the three Cruchots to find their way into the room."Ha! you've come a-greeting," said Nanon, smelling the flowers."Excuse me, messieurs," cried Grandet, recognizing their voices; "I'llbe with you in a moment. I'm not proud; I am patching up a step on mystaircase."

°°°°"Go on, go on, Monsieur Grandet; a man's house is his castle," saidthe president sententiously.

°°°°Madame and Mademoiselle Grandet rose. The president, profiting by thedarkness, said to Eugenie:

°°°°"Will you permit me, mademoiselle, to wish you, on this the day ofyour birth, a series of happy years and the continuance of the healthwhich you now enjoy?"

°°°°He offered her a huge bouquet of choice flowers which were rare inSaumur; then, taking the heiress by the elbows, he kissed her on eachside of her neck with a complacency that made her blush. Thepresident, who looked like a rusty iron nail, felt that his courtshipwas progressing.

°°°°"Don't stand on ceremony," said Grandet, entering. "How well you dothings on fete-days, Monsieur le president!"

°°°°"When it concerns mademoiselle," said the abbe, armed with his ownbouquet, "every day is a fete-day for my nephew."

°°°°The abbe kissed Eugenie's hand. As for Maitre Cruchot, he boldlykissed her on both cheeks, remarking: "How we sprout up, to be sure!Every year is twelve months."

°°°°As he replaced the candlestick beside the clock, Grandet, who neverforgot his own jokes, and repeated them to satiety when he thoughtthem funny, said,--

°°°°"As this is Eugenie's birthday let us illuminate."

°°°°He carefully took off the branches of the candelabra, put a socket oneach pedestal, took from Nanon a new tallow candle with paper twistedround the end of it, put it into the hollow, made it firm, lit it, andthen sat down beside his wife, looking alternately at his friends, hisdaughter, and the two candles. The Abbe Cruchot, a plump, puffy littleman, with a red wig plastered down and a face like an old femalegambler, said as he stretched out his feet, well shod in stout shoeswith silver buckles: "The des Grassins have not come?"

°°°°"Not yet," said Grandet.

°°°°"But are they coming?" asked the old notary, twisting his face, whichhad as many holes as a collander, into a queer grimace.

°°°°"I think so," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Are your vintages all finished?" said Monsieur de Bonfons to Grandet."Yes, all of them," said the old man, rising to walk up and down theroom, his chest swelling with pride as he said the words, "all ofthem." Through the door of the passage which led to the kitchen he sawla Grande Nanon sitting beside her fire with a candle and preparing tospin there, so as not to intrude among the guests.

°°°°"Nanon," he said, going into the passage, "put out that fire and thatcandle, and come and sit with us. Pardieu! the hall is big enough forall."

°°°°"But monsieur, you are to have the great people."

°°°°"Are not you as good as they? They are descended from Adam, and so areyou."

°°°°Grandet came back to the president and said,--

°°°°"Have you sold your vintage?"

°°°°"No, not I; I shall keep it. If the wine is good this year, it will bebetter two years hence. The proprietors, you know, have made anagreement to keep up the price; and this year the Belgians won't getthe better of us. Suppose they are sent off empty-handed for once,faith! they'll come back."

°°°°"Yes, but let us mind what we are about," said Grandet in a tone whichmade the president tremble.

°°°°"Is he driving some bargain?" thought Cruchot.

°°°°At this moment the knocker announced the des Grassins family, andtheir arrival interrupted a conversation which had begun betweenMadame Grandet and the abbe.

°°°°Madame des Grassins was one of those lively, plump little women, withpink-and-white skins, who, thanks to the claustral calm of theprovinces and the habits of a virtuous life, keep their youth untilthey are past forty. She was like the last rose of autumn,--pleasantto the eye, though the petals have a certain frostiness, and theirperfume is slight. She dressed well, got her fashions from Paris, setthe tone to Saumur, and gave parties. Her husband, formerly aquartermaster in the Imperial guard, who had been desperately woundedat Austerlitz, and had since retired, still retained, in spite of hisrespect for Grandet, the seeming frankness of an old soldier."Good evening, Grandet," he said, holding out his hand and affecting asort of superiority, with which he always crushed the Cruchots."Mademoiselle," he added, turning to Eugenie, after bowing to MadameGrandet, "you are always beautiful and good, and truly I do not knowwhat to wish you." So saying, he offered her a little box which hisservant had brought and which contained a Cape heather,--a flowerlately imported into Europe and very rare.

°°°°Madame des Grassins kissed Eugenie very affectionately, pressed herhand, and said: "Adolphe wishes to make you my little offering."A tall, blond young man, pale and slight, with tolerable manners andseemingly rather shy, although he had just spent eight or ten thousandfrancs over his allowance in Paris, where he had been sent to studylaw, now came forward and kissed Eugenie on both cheeks, offering hera workbox with utensils in silver-gilt,--mere show-case trumpery, inspite of the monogram E.G. in gothic letters rather well engraved,which belonged properly to something in better taste. As she openedit, Eugenie experienced one of those unexpected and perfect delightswhich make a young girl blush and quiver and tremble with pleasure.She turned her eyes to her father as if to ask permission to acceptit, and Monsieur Grandet replied: "Take it, my daughter," in a tonewhich would have made an actor illustrious.

°°°°The three Cruchots felt crushed as they saw the joyous, animated lookcast upon Adolphe des Grassins by the heiress, to whom such richeswere unheard-of. Monsieur des Grassins offered Grandet a pinch ofsnuff, took one himself, shook off the grains as they fell on theribbon of the Legion of honor which was attached to the button-hole ofhis blue surtout; then he looked at the Cruchots with an air thatseemed to say, "Parry that thrust if you can!" Madame des Grassinscast her eyes on the blue vases which held the Cruchot bouquets,looking at the enemy's gifts with the pretended interest of asatirical woman. At this delicate juncture the Abbe Cruchot left thecompany seated in a circle round the fire and joined Grandet at thelower end of the hall. As the two men reached the embrasure of thefarthest window the priest said in the miser's ear: "Those peoplethrow money out of the windows."

°°°°"What does that matter if it gets into my cellar?" retorted the oldwine-grower.

°°°°"If you want to give gilt scissors to your daughter, you have themeans," said the abbe.

°°°°"I give her something better than scissors," answered Grandet."My nephew is a blockhead," thought the abbe as he looked at thepresident, whose rumpled hair added to the ill grace of his browncountenance. "Couldn't he have found some little trifle which costmoney?"

°°°°"We will join you at cards, Madame Grandet," said Madame des Grassins."We might have two tables, as we are all here."

°°°°"As it is Eugenie's birthday you had better play loto all together,"said Pere Grandet: "the two young ones can join"; and the old cooper,who never played any game, motioned to his daughter and Adolphe."Come, Nanon, set the tables."

°°°°"We will help you, Mademoiselle Nanon," said Madame des Grassinsgaily, quite joyous at the joy she had given Eugenie.

°°°°"I have never in my life been so pleased," the heiress said to her; "Ihave never seen anything so pretty."

°°°°"Adolphe brought it from Paris, and he chose it," Madame des Grassinswhispered in her ear.

°°°°"Go on! go on! damned intriguing thing!" thought the president. "Ifyou ever have a suit in court, you or your husband, it shall go hardwith you."

°°°°The notary, sitting in his corner, looked calmly at the abbe, sayingto himself: "The des Grassins may do what they like; my property andmy brother's and that of my nephew amount in all to eleven hundredthousand francs. The des Grassins, at the most, have not half that;besides, they have a daughter. They may give what presents they like;heiress and presents too will be ours one of these days."At half-past eight in the evening the two card-tables were set out.Madame des Grassins succeeded in putting her son beside Eugenie. Theactors in this scene, so full of interest, commonplace as it seems,were provided with bits of pasteboard striped in many colors andnumbered, and with counters of blue glass, and they appeared to belistening to the jokes of the notary, who never drew a number withoutmaking a remark, while in fact they were all thinking of MonsieurGrandet's millions. The old cooper, with inward self-conceit, wascontemplating the pink feathers and the fresh toilet of Madame desGrassins, the martial head of the banker, the faces of Adolphe, thepresident, the abbe, and the notary, saying to himself:--"They are all after my money. Hey! neither the one nor the other shallhave my daughter; but they are useful--useful as harpoons to fishwith."

°°°°This family gaiety in the old gray room dimly lighted by two tallowcandles; this laughter, accompanied by the whirr of Nanon's spinning-wheel, sincere only upon the lips of Eugenie or her mother; thistriviality mingled with important interests; this young girl, who,like certain birds made victims of the price put upon them, was nowlured and trapped by proofs of friendship of which she was the dupe,--all these things contributed to make the scene a melancholy comedy. Isit not, moreover, a drama of all times and all places, though herebrought down to its simplest expression? The figure of Grandet,playing his own game with the false friendship of the two families andgetting enormous profits from it, dominates the scene and throws lightupon it. The modern god,--the only god in whom faith is preserved,--money, is here, in all its power, manifested in a single countenance.The tender sentiments of life hold here but a secondary place; onlythe three pure, simple hearts of Nanon, of Eugenie, and of her motherwere inspired by them. And how much of ignorance there was in thesimplicity of these poor women! Eugenie and her mother knew nothing ofGrandet's wealth; they could only estimate the things of life by theglimmer of their pale ideas, and they neither valued nor despisedmoney, because they were accustomed to do without it. Their feelings,bruised, though they did not know it, but ever-living, were the secretspring of their existence, and made them curious exceptions in themidst of these other people whose lives were purely material.Frightful condition of the human race! there is no one of its joysthat does not come from some species of ignorance.

°°°°At the moment when Madame Grandet had won a loto of sixteen sous,--thelargest ever pooled in that house,--and while la Grande Nanon waslaughing with delight as she watched madame pocketing her riches, theknocker resounded on the house-door with such a noise that the womenall jumped in their chairs.

°°°°"There is no man in Saumur who would knock like that," said thenotary.

°°°°"How can they bang in that way!" exclaimed Nanon; "do they want tobreak in the door?"

°°°°"Who the devil is it?" cried Grandet.

°°°°III

°°°°Nanon took one of the candles and went to open the door, followed byher master.

°°°°"Grandet! Grandet!" cried his wife, moved by a sudden impulse of fear,and running to the door of the room.

°°°°All the players looked at each other.

°°°°"Suppose we all go?" said Monsieur des Grassins; "that knock strikesme as evil-intentioned."

°°°°Hardly was Monsieur des Grassins allowed to see the figure of a youngman, accompanied by a porter from the coach-office carrying two largetrunks and dragging a carpet-bag after him, than Monsieur Grandetturned roughly on his wife and said,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, go back to your loto; leave me to speak withmonsieur."

°°°°Then he pulled the door quickly to, and the excited players returnedto their seats, but did not continue the game.

°°°°"Is it any one belonging to Saumur, Monsieur des Grassins?" asked hiswife.

°°°°"No, it is a traveller."

°°°°"He must have come from Paris."

°°°°"Just so," said the notary, pulling out his watch, which was twoinches thick and looked like a Dutch man-of-war; "it's nine o'clock;the diligence of the Grand Bureau is never late."

°°°°"Is the gentleman young?" inquired the Abbe Cruchot.

°°°°"Yes," answered Monsieur des Grassins, "and he has brought luggagewhich must weigh nearly three tons."

°°°°"Nanon does not come back," said Eugenie.

°°°°"It must be one of your relations," remarked the president."Let us go on with our game," said Madame Grandet gently. "I know fromMonsieur Grandet's tone of voice that he is annoyed; perhaps he wouldnot like to find us talking of his affairs."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said Adolphe to his neighbor, "it is no doubt yourcousin Grandet,--a very good-looking young man; I met him at the ballof Monsieur de Nucingen." Adolphe did not go on, for his mother trodon his toes; and then, asking him aloud for two sous to put on herstake, she whispered: "Will you hold your tongue, you great goose!"At this moment Grandet returned, without la Grande Nanon, whose steps,together with those of the porter, echoed up the staircase; and he wasfollowed by the traveller who had excited such curiosity and so filledthe lively imaginations of those present that his arrival at thisdwelling, and his sudden fall into the midst of this assembly, canonly be likened to that of a snail into a beehive, or the introductionof a peacock into some village poultry-yard.

°°°°"Sit down near the fire," said Grandet.

°°°°Before seating himself, the young stranger saluted the assembledcompany very gracefully. The men rose to answer by a courteousinclination, and the women made a ceremonious bow.

°°°°"You are cold, no doubt, monsieur," said Madame Grandet; "you have,perhaps, travelled from--"

°°°°"Just like all women!" said the old wine-grower, looking up from aletter he was reading. "Do let monsieur rest himself!"

°°°°"But, father, perhaps monsieur would like to take something," saidEugenie.

°°°°"He has got a tongue," said the old man sternly.

°°°°The stranger was the only person surprised by this scene; all theothers were well-used to the despotic ways of the master. However,after the two questions and the two replies had been exchanged, thenewcomer rose, turned his back towards the fire, lifted one foot so asto warm the sole of its boot, and said to Eugenie,--

°°°°"Thank you, my cousin, but I dined at Tours. And," he added, lookingat Grandet, "I need nothing; I am not even tired."

°°°°"Monsieur has come from the capital?" asked Madame des Grassins.Monsieur Charles,--such was the name of the son of Monsieur Grandet ofParis,--hearing himself addressed, took a little eye-glass, suspendedby a chain from his neck, applied it to his right eye to examine whatwas on the table, and also the persons sitting round it. He ogledMadame des Grassins with much impertinence, and said to her, after hehad observed all he wished,--

°°°°"Yes, madame. You are playing at loto, aunt," he added. "Do not let meinterrupt you, I beg; go on with your game: it is too amusing toleave."

°°°°"I was certain it was the cousin," thought Madame des Grassins,casting repeated glances at him.

°°°°"Forty-seven!" cried the old abbe. "Mark it down, Madame des Grassins.Isn't that your number?"

°°°°Monsieur des Grassins put a counter on his wife's card, who satwatching first the cousin from Paris and then Eugenie, withoutthinking of her loto, a prey to mournful presentiments. From time totime the young the heiress glanced furtively at her cousin, and thebanker's wife easily detected a /crescendo/ of surprise and curiosityin her mind.

°°°°Monsieur Charles Grandet, a handsome young man of twenty-two,presented at this moment a singular contrast to the worthyprovincials, who, considerably disgusted by his aristocratic manners,were all studying him with sarcastic intent. This needs anexplanation. At twenty-two, young people are still so near childhoodthat they often conduct themselves childishly. In all probability, outof every hundred of them fully ninety-nine would have behavedprecisely as Monsieur Charles Grandet was now behaving.

°°°°Some days earlier than this his father had told him to go and spendseveral months with his uncle at Saumur. Perhaps Monsieur Grandet wasthinking of Eugenie. Charles, sent for the first time in his life intothe provinces, took a fancy to make his appearance with thesuperiority of a man of fashion, to reduce the whole arrondissement todespair by his luxury, and to make his visit an epoch, importing intothose country regions all the refinements of Parisian life. In short,to explain it in one word, he mean to pass more time at Saumur inbrushing his nails than he ever thought of doing in Paris, and toassume the extra nicety and elegance of dress which a young man offashion often lays aside for a certain negligence which in itself isnot devoid of grace. Charles therefore brought with him a completehunting-costume, the finest gun, the best hunting-knife in theprettiest sheath to be found in all Paris. He brought his wholecollection of waistcoats. They were of all kinds,--gray, black, white,scarabaeus-colored: some were shot with gold, some spangled, some/chined/; some were double-breasted and crossed like a shawl, otherswere straight in the collar; some had turned-over collars, somebuttoned up to the top with gilt buttons. He brought every variety ofcollar and cravat in fashion at that epoch. He brought two ofBuisson's coats and all his finest linen He brought his pretty goldtoilet-set,--a present from his mother. He brought all his dandyknick-knacks, not forgetting a ravishing little desk presented to himby the most amiable of women,--amiable for him, at least,--a fine ladywhom he called Annette and who at this moment was travelling,matrimonially and wearily, in Scotland, a victim to certain suspicionswhich required a passing sacrifice of happiness; in the desk was muchpretty note-paper on which to write to her once a fortnight.In short, it was as complete a cargo of Parisian frivolities as it waspossible for him to get together,--a collection of all the implementsof husbandry with which the youth of leisure tills his life, from thelittle whip which helps to begin a duel, to the handsomely chasedpistols which end it. His father having told him to travel alone andmodestly, he had taken the coupe of the diligence all to himself,rather pleased at not having to damage a delightful travelling-carriage ordered for a journey on which he was to meet his Annette,the great lady who, etc.,--whom he intended to rejoin at Baden in thefollowing June. Charles expected to meet scores of people at hisuncle's house, to hunt in his uncle's forests,--to live, in short, theusual chateau life; he did not know that his uncle was in Saumur, andhad only inquired about him incidentally when asking the way toFroidfond. Hearing that he was in town, he supposed that he shouldfind him in a suitable mansion.

°°°°In order that he might make a becoming first appearance before hisuncle either at Saumur or at Froidfond, he had put on his most eleganttravelling attire, simple yet exquisite,--"adorable," to use the wordwhich in those days summed up the special perfections of a man or athing. At Tours a hairdresser had re-curled his beautiful chestnutlocks; there he changed his linen and put on a black satin cravat,which, combined with a round shirt-collar, framed his fair and smilingcountenance agreeably. A travelling great-coat, only half buttoned up,nipped in his waist and disclosed a cashmere waistcoat crossed infront, beneath which was another waistcoat of white material. Hiswatch, negligently slipped into a pocket, was fastened by a short goldchain to a buttonhole. His gray trousers, buttoned up at the sides,were set off at the seams with patterns of black silk embroidery. Hegracefully twirled a cane, whose chased gold knob did not mar thefreshness of his gray gloves. And to complete all, his cap was inexcellent taste. None but a Parisian, and a Parisian of the upperspheres, could thus array himself without appearing ridiculous; noneother could give the harmony of self-conceit to all these fopperies,which were carried off, however, with a dashing air,--the air of ayoung man who has fine pistols, a sure aim, and Annette.

°°°°Now if you wish to understand the mutual amazement of the provincialparty and the young Parisian; if you would clearly see the brilliancewhich the traveller's elegance cast among the gray shadows of the roomand upon the faces of this family group,--endeavor to picture to yourminds the Cruchots. All three took snuff, and had long ceased torepress the habit of snivelling or to remove the brown blotches whichstrewed the frills of their dingy shirts and the yellowing creases oftheir crumpled collars. Their flabby cravats were twisted into ropesas soon as they wound them about their throats. The enormous quantityof linen which allowed these people to have their clothing washed onlyonce in six months, and to keep it during that time in the depths oftheir closets, also enabled time to lay its grimy and decaying stainsupon it. There was perfect unison of ill-grace and senility aboutthem; their faces, as faded as their threadbare coats, as creased astheir trousers, were worn-out, shrivelled-up, and puckered. As for theothers, the general negligence of their dress, which was incompleteand wanting in freshness,--like the toilet of all country places,where insensibly people cease to dress for others and come to thinkseriously of the price of a pair of gloves,--was in keeping with thenegligence of the Cruchots. A horror of fashion was the only point onwhich the Grassinists and the Cruchotines agreed.

°°°°When the Parisian took up his eye-glass to examine the strangeaccessories of this dwelling,--the joists of the ceiling, the color ofthe woodwork, and the specks which the flies had left there insufficient number to punctuate the "Moniteur" and the "Encyclopaediaof Sciences,"--the loto-players lifted their noses and looked at himwith as much curiosity as they might have felt about a giraffe.Monsieur des Grassins and his son, to whom the appearance of a man offashion was not wholly unknown, were nevertheless as much astonishedas their neighbors, whether it was that they fell under theindefinable influence of the general feeling, or that they reallyshared it as with satirical glances they seemed to say to theircompatriots,--

°°°°"That is what you see in Paris!"

°°°°They were able to examine Charles at their leisure without fearing todisplease the master of the house. Grandet was absorbed in the longletter which he held in his hand; and to read it he had taken the onlycandle upon the card-table, paying no heed to his guests or theirpleasure. Eugenie, to whom such a type of perfection, whether of dressor of person, was absolutely unknown, thought she beheld in her cousina being descended from seraphic spheres. She inhaled with delight thefragrance wafted from the graceful curls of that brilliant head. Shewould have liked to touch the soft kid of the delicate gloves. Sheenvied Charles his small hands, his complexion, the freshness andrefinement of his features. In short,--if it is possible to sum up theeffect this elegant being produced upon an ignorant young girlperpetually employed in darning stockings or in mending her father'sclothes, and whose life flowed on beneath these unclean rafters,seeing none but occasional passers along the silent street,--thisvision of her cousin roused in her soul an emotion of delicate desirelike that inspired in a young man by the fanciful pictures of womendrawn by Westall for the English "Keepsakes," and that engraved by theFindens with so clever a tool that we fear, as we breathe upon thepaper, that the celestial apparitions may be wafted away. Charles drewfrom his pocket a handkerchief embroidered by the great lady nowtravelling in Scotland. As Eugenie saw this pretty piece of work, donein the vacant hours which were lost to love, she looked at her cousinto see if it were possible that he meant to make use of it. Themanners of the young man, his gestures, the way in which he took uphis eye-glass, his affected superciliousness, his contemptuous glanceat the coffer which had just given so much pleasure to the richheiress, and which he evidently regarded as without value, or even asridiculous,--all these things, which shocked the Cruchots and the desGrassins, pleased Eugenie so deeply that before she slept she dreamedlong dreams of her phoenix cousin.

°°°°The loto-numbers were drawn very slowly, and presently the game camesuddenly to an end. La Grand Nanon entered and said aloud: "Madame, Iwant the sheets for monsieur's bed."

°°°°Madame Grandet followed her out. Madame des Grassins said in a lowvoice: "Let us keep our sous and stop playing." Each took his or hertwo sous from the chipped saucer in which they had been put; then theparty moved in a body toward the fire.

°°°°"Have you finished your game?" said Grandet, without looking up fromhis letter.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" replied Madame des Grassins, taking a seat near Charles.Eugenie, prompted by a thought often born in the heart of a young girlwhen sentiment enters it for the first time, left the room to go andhelp her mother and Nanon. Had an able confessor then questioned hershe would, no doubt, have avowed to him that she thought neither ofher mother nor of Nanon, but was pricked by a poignant desire to lookafter her cousin's room and concern herself with her cousin; to supplywhat might be needed, to remedy any forgetfulness, to see that all wasdone to make it, as far as possible, suitable and elegant; and, infact, she arrived in time to prove to her mother and Nanon thateverything still remained to be done. She put into Nanon's head thenotion of passing a warming-pan between the sheets. She herselfcovered the old table with a cloth and requested Nanon to change itevery morning; she convinced her mother that it was necessary to lighta good fire, and persuaded Nanon to bring up a great pile of wood intothe corridor without saying anything to her father. She ran to get,from one of the corner-shelves of the hall, a tray of old lacquerwhich was part of the inheritance of the late Monsieur de laBertelliere, catching up at the same time a six-sided crystal goblet,a little tarnished gilt spoon, an antique flask engraved with cupids,all of which she put triumphantly on the corner of her cousin'schimney-piece. More ideas surged through her head in one quarter of anhour than she had ever had since she came into the world."Mamma," she said, "my cousin will never bear the smell of a tallowcandle; suppose we buy a wax one?" And she darted, swift as a bird, toget the five-franc piece which she had just received for her monthlyexpenses. "Here, Nanon," she cried, "quick!"

°°°°"What will your father say?" This terrible remonstrance was uttered byMadame Grandet as she beheld her daughter armed with an old Sevressugar-basin which Grandet had brought home from the chateau ofFroidfond. "And where will you get the sugar? Are you crazy?""Mamma, Nanon can buy some sugar as well as the candle."

°°°°"But your father?"

°°°°"Surely his nephew ought not to go without a glass of /eau sucree/?Besides, he will not notice it."

°°°°"Your father sees everything," said Madame Grandet, shaking her head.Nanon hesitated; she knew her master.

°°°°"Come, Nanon, go,--because it is my birthday."

°°°°Nanon gave a loud laugh as she heard the first little jest her youngmistress had ever made, and then obeyed her.

°°°°While Eugenie and her mother were trying to embellish the bedroomassigned by Monsieur Grandet for his nephew, Charles himself was theobject of Madame des Grassins' attentions; to all appearances she wassetting her cap at him.

°°°°"You are very courageous, monsieur," she said to the young dandy, "toleave the pleasures of the capital at this season and take up yourabode in Saumur. But if we do not frighten you away, you will findthere are some amusements even here."

°°°°She threw him the ogling glance of the provinces, where women put somuch prudence and reserve into their eyes that they impart to them theprudish concupiscence peculiar to certain ecclesiastics to whom allpleasure is either a theft or an error. Charles was so completely outof his element in this abode, and so far from the vast chateau and thesumptuous life with which his fancy had endowed his uncle, that as helooked at Madame des Grassins he perceived a dim likeness to Parisianfaces. He gracefully responded to the species of invitation addressedto him, and began very naturally a conversation, in which Madame desGrassins gradually lowered her voice so as to bring it into harmonywith the nature of the confidences she was making. With her, as withCharles, there was the need of conference; so after a few momentsspent in coquettish phrases and a little serious jesting, the cleverprovincial said, thinking herself unheard by the others, who werediscussing the sale of wines which at that season filled the heads ofevery one in Saumur,--

°°°°"Monsieur if you will do us the honor to come and see us, you willgive as much pleasure to my husband as to myself. Our salon is theonly one in Saumur where you will find the higher business circlesmingling with the nobility. We belong to both societies, who meet atour house simply because they find it amusing. My husband--I say itwith pride--is as much valued by the one class as by the other. Wewill try to relieve the monotony of your visit here. If you stay allthe time with Monsieur Grandet, good heavens! what will become of you?Your uncle is a sordid miser who thinks of nothing but his vines; youraunt is a pious soul who can't put two ideas together; and your cousinis a little fool, without education, perfectly common, no fortune, whowill spend her life in darning towels."

°°°°"She is really very nice, this woman," thought Charles Grandet as heduly responded to Madame des Grassins' coquetries.

°°°°"It seems to me, wife, that you are taking possession of monsieur,"said the stout banker, laughing.

°°°°On this remark the notary and the president said a few words that weremore or less significant; but the abbe, looking at them slyly, broughttheir thoughts to a focus by taking a pinch of snuff and saying as hehanded round his snuff-box: "Who can do the honors of Saumur formonsieur so well as madame?"

°°°°"Ah! what do you mean by that, monsieur l'abbe?" demanded Monsieur desGrassins.

°°°°"I mean it in the best possible sense for you, for madame, for thetown of Saumur, and for monsieur," said the wily old man, turning toCharles.

°°°°The Abbe Cruchot had guessed the conversation between Charles andMadame des Grassins without seeming to pay attention to it."Monsieur," said Adolphe to Charles with an air which he tried to makefree and easy, "I don't know whether you remember me, but I had thehonor of dancing as your /vis-a-vis/ at a ball given by the Baron deNucingen, and--"

°°°°"Perfectly; I remember perfectly, monsieur," answered Charles, pleasedto find himself the object of general attention.

°°°°"Monsieur is your son?" he said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°The abbe looked at her maliciously.

°°°°"Yes, monsieur," she answered.

°°°°"Then you were very young when you were in Paris?" said Charles,addressing Adolphe.

°°°°"You must know, monsieur," said the abbe, "that we send them toBabylon as soon as they are weaned."

°°°°Madame des Grassins examined the abbe with a glance of extremepenetration.

°°°°"It is only in the provinces," he continued, "that you will find womenof thirty and more years as fresh as madame, here, with a son about totake his degree. I almost fancy myself back in the days when the youngmen stood on chairs in the ball-room to see you dance, madame," saidthe abbe, turning to his female adversary. "To me, your triumphs arebut of yesterday--"

°°°°"The old rogue!" thought Madame Grassins; "can he have guessed myintentions?"

°°°°"It seems that I shall have a good deal of success in Saumur," thoughtCharles as he unbuttoned his great-coat, put a hand into hiswaistcoat, and cast a glance into the far distance, to imitate theattitude which Chantrey has given to Lord Byron.

°°°°The inattention of Pere Grandet, or, to speak more truly, thepreoccupation of mind into which the reading of the letter had plungedhim, did not escape the vigilance of the notary and the president, whotried to guess the contents of the letter by the almost imperceptiblemotions of the miser's face, which was then under the full light ofthe candle. He maintained the habitual calm of his features withevident difficulty; we may, in fact, picture to ourselves thecountenance such a man endeavored to preserve as he read the fatalletter which here follows:--

°°°°My Brother,--It is almost twenty-three years since we have seen

°°°°each other. My marriage was the occasion of our last interview,

°°°°after which we parted, and both of us were happy. Assuredly I

°°°°could not then foresee that you would one day be the prop of the

°°°°family whose prosperity you then predicted.

°°°°When you hold this letter within your hands I shall be no longer

°°°°living. In the position I now hold I cannot survive the disgrace

°°°°of bankruptcy. I have waited on the edge of the gulf until the

°°°°last moment, hoping to save myself. The end has come, I must sink

°°°°into it. The double bankruptcies of my broker and of Roguin, my

°°°°notary, have carried off my last resources and left me nothing. I

°°°°have the bitterness of owing nearly four millions, with assets not

°°°°more than twenty-five per cent in value to pay them. The wines in

°°°°my warehouses suffer from the fall in prices caused by the

°°°°abundance and quality of your vintage. In three days Paris will

°°°°cry out: "Monsieur Grandet was a knave!" and I, an honest man,

°°°°shall be lying in my winding-sheet of infamy. I deprive my son of

°°°°a good name, which I have stained, and the fortune of his mother,

°°°°which I have lost. He knows nothing of all this,--my unfortunate

°°°°child whom I idolize! We parted tenderly. He was ignorant,

°°°°happily, that the last beatings of my heart were spent in that

°°°°farewell. Will he not some day curse me? My brother, my brother!

°°°°the curses of our children are horrible; they can appeal against

°°°°ours, but theirs are irrevocable. Grandet, you are my elder

°°°°brother, you owe me your protection; act for me so that Charles

°°°°may cast no bitter words upon my grave! My brother, if I were

°°°°writing with my blood, with my tears, no greater anguish could I

°°°°put into this letter,--nor as great, for then I should weep, I

°°°°should bleed, I should die, I should suffer no more, but now I

°°°°suffer and look at death with dry eyes.

°°°°From henceforth you are my son's father; he has no relations, as

°°°°you well know, on his mother's side. Why did I not consider social

°°°°prejudices? Why did I yield to love? Why did I marry the natural

°°°°daughter of a great lord? Charles has no family. Oh, my unhappy

°°°°son! my son! Listen, Grandet! I implore nothing for myself,--

°°°°besides, your property may not be large enough to carry a mortgage

°°°°of three millions,--but for my son! Brother, my suppliant hands

°°°°are clasped as I think of you; behold them! Grandet, I confide my

°°°°son to you in dying, and I look at the means of death with less

°°°°pain as I think that you will be to him a father. He loved me

°°°°well, my Charles; I was good to him, I never thwarted him; he will

°°°°not curse me. Ah, you see! he is gentle, he is like his mother, he

°°°°will cause you no grief. Poor boy! accustomed to all the

°°°°enjoyments of luxury, he knows nothing of the privations to which

°°°°you and I were condemned by the poverty of our youth. And I leave

°°°°him ruined! alone! Yes, all my friends will avoid him, and it is I

°°°°who have brought this humiliation upon him! Would that I had the

°°°°force to send him with one thrust into the heavens to his mother's

°°°°side! Madness! I come back to my disaster--to his. I send him to

°°°°you that you may tell him in some fitting way of my death, of his

°°°°future fate. Be a father to him, but a good father. Do not tear

°°°°him all at once from his idle life, it would kill him. I beg him

°°°°on my knees to renounce all rights that, as his mother's heir, he

°°°°may have on my estate. But the prayer is superfluous; he is

°°°°honorable, and he will feel that he must not appear among my

°°°°creditors. Bring him to see this at the right time; reveal to him

°°°°the hard conditions of the life I have made for him: and if he

°°°°still has tender thoughts of me, tell him in my name that all is

°°°°not lost for him. Yes, work, labor, which saved us both, may give

°°°°him back the fortune of which I have deprived him; and if he

°°°°listens to his father's voice as it reaches him from the grave, he

°°°°will go the Indies. My brother, Charles is an upright and

°°°°courageous young man; give him the wherewithal to make his

°°°°venture; he will die sooner than not repay you the funds which you

°°°°may lend him. Grandet! if you will not do this, you will lay up

°°°°for yourself remorse. Ah, should my child find neither tenderness

°°°°nor succor in you, I would call down the vengeance of God upon

°°°°your cruelty!

°°°°If I had been able to save something from the wreck, I might have

°°°°had the right to leave him at least a portion of his mother's

°°°°property; but my last monthly payments have absorbed everything. I

°°°°did not wish to die uncertain of my child's fate; I hoped to feel

°°°°a sacred promise in a clasp of your hand which might have warmed

°°°°my heart: but time fails me. While Charles is journeying to you I

°°°°shall be preparing my assignment. I shall endeavor to show by the

°°°°order and good faith of my accounts that my disaster comes neither

°°°°from a faulty life nor from dishonesty. It is for my son's sake

°°°°that I strive to do this.

°°°°Farewell, my brother! May the blessing of God be yours for the

°°°°generous guardianship I lay upon you, and which, I doubt not, you

°°°°will accept. A voice will henceforth and forever pray for you in

°°°°that world where we must all go, and where I am now as you read

°°°°these lines.

°°°°Victor-Ange-Guillaume Grandet.

°°°°"So you are talking?" said Pere Grandet as he carefully folded theletter in its original creases and put it into his waistcoat-pocket.He looked at his nephew with a humble, timid air, beneath which he hidhis feelings and his calculations. "Have you warmed yourself?" he saidto him.

°°°°"Thoroughly, my dear uncle."

°°°°"Well, where are the women?" said his uncle, already forgetting thathis nephew was to sleep at the house. At this moment Eugenie andMadame Grandet returned.

°°°°"Is the room all ready?" said Grandet, recovering his composure."Yes, father."

°°°°"Well then, my nephew, if you are tired, Nanon shall show you yourroom. It isn't a dandy's room; but you will excuse a poor wine-growerwho never has a penny to spare. Taxes swallow up everything.""We do not wish to intrude, Grandet," said the banker; "you may wantto talk to your nephew, and therefore we will bid you good-night."At these words the assembly rose, and each made a parting bow inkeeping with his or her own character. The old notary went to the doorto fetch his lantern and came back to light it, offering to accompanythe des Grassins on their way. Madame des Grassins had not foreseenthe incident which brought the evening prematurely to an end, herservant therefore had not arrived.

°°°°"Will you do me the honor to take my arm, madame?" said the abbe."Thank you, monsieur l'abbe, but I have my son," she answered dryly."Ladies cannot compromise themselves with me," said the abbe."Take Monsieur Cruchot's arm," said her husband.

°°°°The abbe walked off with the pretty lady so quickly that they weresoon some distance in advance of the caravan.

°°°°"That is a good-looking young man, madame," he said, pressing her arm."Good-by to the grapes, the vintage is done. It is all over with us.We may as well say adieu to Mademoiselle Grandet. Eugenie will belongto the dandy. Unless this cousin is enamoured of some Parisian woman,your son Adolphe will find another rival in--"

°°°°"Not at all, monsieur l'abbe. This young man cannot fail to see thatEugenie is a little fool,--a girl without the least freshness. Did younotice her to-night? She was as yellow as a quince."

°°°°"Perhaps you made the cousin notice it?"

°°°°"I did not take the trouble--"

°°°°"Place yourself always beside Eugenie, madame, and you need never takethe trouble to say anything to the young man against his cousin; hewill make his own comparisons, which--"

°°°°"Well, he has promised to dine with me the day after to-morrow.""Ah! if you only /would/, madame--" said the abbe.

°°°°"What is it that you wish me to do, monsieur l'abbe? Do you mean tooffer me bad advice? I have not reached the age of thirty-nine,without a stain upon my reputation, thank God! to compromise myselfnow, even for the empire of the Great Mogul. You and I are of an agewhen we both know the meaning of words. For an ecclesiastic, youcertainly have ideas that are very incongruous. Fie! it is worthy ofFaublas!"

°°°°"You have read Faublas?"

°°°°"No, monsieur l'abbe; I meant to say the /Liaisons dangereuses/.""Ah! that book is infinitely more moral," said the abbe, laughing."But you make me out as wicked as a young man of the present day; Ionly meant--"

°°°°"Do you dare to tell me you were not thinking of putting wicked thingsinto my head? Isn't it perfectly clear? If this young man--who I admitis very good-looking--were to make love to me, he would not think ofhis cousin. In Paris, I know, good mothers do devote themselves inthis way to the happiness and welfare of their children; but we livein the provinces, monsieur l'abbe."

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"And," she continued, "I do not want, and Adolphe himself would notwant, a hundred millions brought at such a price."

°°°°"Madame, I said nothing about a hundred millions; that temptationmight be too great for either of us to withstand. Only, I do thinkthat an honest woman may permit herself, in all honor, certainharmless little coquetries, which are, in fact, part of her socialduty and which--"

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"Are we not bound, madame, to make ourselves agreeable to each other?--Permit me to blow my nose.--I assure you, madame," he resumed, "thatthe young gentleman ogled you through his glass in a more flatteringmanner than he put on when he looked at me; but I forgive him fordoing homage to beauty in preference to old age--"

°°°°"It is quite apparent," said the president in his loud voice, "thatMonsieur Grandet of Paris has sent his son to Saumur with extremelymatrimonial intentions."

°°°°"But in that case the cousin wouldn't have fallen among us like acannon-ball," answered the notary.

°°°°"That doesn't prove anything," said Monsieur des Grassins; "the oldmiser is always making mysteries."

°°°°"Des Grassins, my friend, I have invited the young man to dinner. Youmust go and ask Monsieur and Madame de Larsonniere and the du Hautoys,with the beautiful demoiselle du Hautoy, of course. I hope she will beproperly dressed; that jealous mother of hers does make such a frightof her! Gentlemen, I trust that you will all do us the honor to come,"she added, stopping the procession to address the two Cruchots."Here you are at home, madame," said the notary.

°°°°After bowing to the three des Grassins, the three Cruchots returnedhome, applying their provincial genius for analysis to studying, underall its aspects, the great event of the evening, which undoubtedlychanged the respective positions of Grassinists and Cruchotines. Theadmirable common-sense which guided all the actions of these greatmachinators made each side feel the necessity of a momentary allianceagainst a common enemy. Must they not mutually hinder Eugenie fromloving her cousin, and the cousin from thinking of Eugenie? Could theParisian resist the influence of treacherous insinuations, soft-spokencalumnies, slanders full of faint praise and artless denials, whichshould be made to circle incessantly about him and deceive him?IV

°°°°When the four relations were left alone, Monsieur Grandet said to hisnephew,--

°°°°"We must go to bed. It is too late to talk about the matters whichhave brought you here; to-morrow we will take a suitable moment. Webreakfast at eight o'clock; at midday we eat a little fruit or a bitof bread, and drink a glass of white wine; and we dine, like theParisians, at five o'clock. That's the order of the day. If you liketo go and see the town and the environs you are free to do so. Youwill excuse me if my occupations do not permit me to accompany you.You may perhaps hear people say that I am rich,--Monsieur Grandetthis, Monsieur Grandet that. I let them talk; their gossip does nothurt my credit. But I have not a penny; I work in my old age like anapprentice whose worldly goods are a bad plane and two good arms.Perhaps you'll soon know yourself what a franc costs when you have gotto sweat for it. Nanon, where are the candles?"

°°°°"I trust, my nephew, that you will find all you want," said MadameGrandet; "but if you should need anything else, you can call Nanon.""My dear aunt, I shall need nothing; I have, I believe, broughteverything with me. Permit me to bid you good-night, and my youngcousin also."

°°°°Charles took a lighted wax candle from Nanon's hand,--an Anjou candle,very yellow in color, and so shopworn that it looked like tallow anddeceived Monsieur Grandet, who, incapable of suspecting its presenceunder his roof, did not perceive this magnificence.

°°°°"I will show you the way," he said.

°°°°Instead of leaving the hall by the door which opened under thearchway, Grandet ceremoniously went through the passage which dividedthe hall from the kitchen. A swing-door, furnished with a large ovalpane of glass, shut this passage from the staircase, so as to fend offthe cold air which rushed through it. But the north wind whistled nonethe less keenly in winter, and, in spite of the sand-bags at thebottom of the doors of the living-room, the temperature within couldscarcely be kept at a proper height. Nanon went to bolt the outerdoor; then she closed the hall and let loose a wolf-dog, whose barkwas so strangled that he seemed to have laryngitis. This animal, notedfor his ferocity, recognized no one but Nanon; the two untutoredchildren of the fields understood each other.

°°°°When Charles saw the yellow, smoke-stained walls of the well of thestaircase, where each worm-eaten step shook under the heavy foot-fallof his uncle, his expectations began to sober more and more. Hefancied himself in a hen-roost. His aunt and cousin, to whom he turnedan inquiring look, were so used to the staircase that they did notguess the cause of his amazement, and took the glance for anexpression of friendliness, which they answered by a smile that madehim desperate.

°°°°"Why the devil did my father send me to such a place?" he said tohimself.

°°°°When they reached the first landing he saw three doors painted inEtruscan red and without casings,--doors sunk in the dusty walls andprovided with iron bars, which in fact were bolts, each ending withthe pattern of a flame, as did both ends of the long sheath of thelock. The first door at the top of the staircase, which opened into aroom directly above the kitchen, was evidently walled up. In fact, theonly entrance to that room was through Grandet's bedchamber; the roomitself was his office. The single window which lighted it, on the sideof the court, was protected by a lattice of strong iron bars. No one,not even Madame Grandet, had permission to enter it. The old man choseto be alone, like an alchemist in his laboratory. There, no doubt,some hiding-place had been ingeniously constructed; there the title-deeds of property were stored; there hung the scales on which to weighthe louis; there were devised, by night and secretly, the estimates,the profits, the receipts, so that business men, finding Grandetprepared at all points, imagined that he got his cue from fairies ordemons; there, no doubt, while Nanon's loud snoring shook the rafters,while the wolf-dog watched and yawned in the courtyard, while Madameand Mademoiselle Grandet were quietly sleeping, came the old cooper tocuddle, to con over, to caress and clutch and clasp his gold. Thewalls were thick, the screens sure. He alone had the key of thislaboratory, where--so people declared--he studied the maps on whichhis fruit-trees were marked, and calculated his profits to a vine, andalmost to a twig.

°°°°The door of Eugenie's chamber was opposite to the walled-up entranceto this room. At the other end of the landing were the appartements ofthe married pair, which occupied the whole front of the house. MadameGrandet had a room next to that of Eugenie, which was entered througha glass door. The master's chamber was separated from that of his wifeby a partition, and from the mysterious strong-room by a thick wall.Pere Grandet lodged his nephew on the second floor, in the highmansarde attic which was above his own bedroom, so that he might hearhim if the young man took it into his head to go and come. WhenEugenie and her mother reached the middle of the landing they kissedeach other for good-night; then with a few words of adieu to Charles,cold upon the lips, but certainly very warm in the heart of the younggirl, they withdrew into their own chambers.

°°°°"Here you are in your room, my nephew," said Pere Grandet as he openedthe door. "If you need to go out, call Nanon; without her, beware! thedog would eat you up without a word. Sleep well. Good-night. Ha! why,they have made you a fire!" he cried.

°°°°At this moment Nanon appeared with the warming pan.

°°°°"Here's something more!" said Monsieur Grandet. "Do you take my nephewfor a lying-in woman? Carry off your brazier, Nanon!"

°°°°"But, monsieur, the sheets are damp, and this gentleman is as delicateas a woman."

°°°°"Well, go on, as you've taken it into your head," said Grandet,pushing her by the shoulders; "but don't set things on fire." Sosaying, the miser went down-stairs, grumbling indistinct sentences.Charles stood aghast in the midst of his trunks. After casting hiseyes on the attic-walls covered with that yellow paper sprinkled withbouquets so well known in dance-houses, on the fireplace of ribbedstone whose very look was chilling, on the chairs of yellow wood withvarnished cane seats that seemed to have more than the usual fourangles, on the open night-table capacious enough to hold a smallsergeant-at-arms, on the meagre bit of rag-carpet beside the bed, onthe tester whose cloth valance shook as if, devoured by moths, it wasabout to fall, he turned gravely to la Grande Nanon and said,--"Look here! my dear woman, just tell me, am I in the house of MonsieurGrandet, formerly mayor of Saumur, and brother to Monsieur Grandet ofParis?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur; and a very good, a very kind, a very perfectgentleman. Shall I help you to unpack your trunks?"

°°°°"Faith! yes, if you will, my old trooper. Didn't you serve in themarines of the Imperial Guard?"

°°°°"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Nanon. "What's that,--the marines of the guard?Is it salt? Does it go in the water?"

°°°°"Here, get me my dressing-gown out of that valise; there's the key."Nanon was wonder-struck by the sight of a dressing-gown made of greensilk, brocaded with gold flowers of an antique design.

°°°°"Are you going to put that on to go to bed with?" she asked."Yes."

°°°°"Holy Virgin! what a beautiful altar-cloth it would make for theparish church! My dear darling monsieur, give it to the church, andyou'll save your soul; if you don't, you'll lose it. Oh, how nice youlook in it! I must call mademoiselle to see you."

°°°°"Come, Nanon, if Nanon you are, hold your tongue; let me go to bed.I'll arrange my things to-morrow. If my dressing-gown pleases you somuch, you shall save your soul. I'm too good a Christian not to giveit to you when I go away, and you can do what you like with it."Nanon stood rooted to the ground, gazing at Charles and unable to putfaith into his words.

°°°°"Good night, Nanon."

°°°°"What in the world have I come here for?" thought Charles as he wentto sleep. "My father is not a fool; my journey must have some object.Pshaw! put off serious thought till the morrow, as some Greek idiotsaid."

°°°°"Blessed Virgin! how charming he is, my cousin!" Eugenie was saying,interrupting her prayers, which that night at least were neverfinished.

°°°°Madame Grandet had no thoughts at all as she went to bed. She heardthe miser walking up and down his room through the door ofcommunication which was in the middle of the partition. Like all timidwomen, she had studied the character of her lord. Just as the petrelforesees the storm, she knew by imperceptible signs when an inwardtempest shook her husband; and at such times, to use an expression ofher own, she "feigned dead."

°°°°Grandet gazed at the door lined with sheet-iron which he lately put tohis sanctum, and said to himself,--

°°°°"What a crazy idea of my brother to bequeath his son to me! A finelegacy! I have not fifty francs to give him. What are fifty francs toa dandy who looked at my barometer as if he meant to make firewood ofit!"

°°°°In thinking over the consequences of that legacy of anguish Grandetwas perhaps more agitated than his brother had been at the moment ofwriting it.

°°°°"I shall have that golden robe," thought Nanon, who went to sleeptricked out in her altar-cloth, dreaming for the first time in herlife of flowers, embroidery, and damask, just as Eugenie was dreamingof love.

°°°°*****

°°°°In the pure and monotonous life of young girls there comes a delicioushour when the sun sheds its rays into their soul, when the flowersexpress their thoughts, when the throbbings of the heart send upwardto the brain their fertilizing warmth and melt all thoughts into avague desire,--day of innocent melancholy and of dulcet joys! Whenbabes begin to see, they smile; when a young girl first perceives thesentiment of nature, she smiles as she smiled when an infant. If lightis the first love of life, is not love a light to the heart? Themoment to see within the veil of earthly things had come for Eugenie.An early riser, like all provincial girls, she was up betimes and saidher prayers, and then began the business of dressing,--a businesswhich henceforth was to have a meaning. First she brushed and smoothedher chestnut hair and twisted its heavy masses to the top of her headwith the utmost care, preventing the loose tresses from straying, andgiving to her head a symmetry which heightened the timid candor of herface; for the simplicity of these accessories accorded well with theinnocent sincerity of its lines. As she washed her hands again andagain in the cold water which hardened and reddened the skin, shelooked at her handsome round arms and asked herself what her cousindid to make his hands so softly white, his nails so delicately curved.She put on new stockings and her prettiest shoes. She laced her corsetstraight, without skipping a single eyelet. And then, wishing for thefirst time in her life to appear to advantage, she felt the joy ofhaving a new gown, well made, which rendered her attractive.As she finished her toilet the clock of the parish church struck thehour; to her astonishment, it was only seven. The desire of havingplenty of time for dressing carefully had led her to get up too early.Ignorant of the art of retouching every curl and studying everyeffect, Eugenie simply crossed her arms, sat down by the window, andlooked at the court-yard, the narrow garden, and the high terracedwalls that over-topped it: a dismal, hedged-in prospect, yet notwholly devoid of those mysterious beauties which belong to solitary oruncultivated nature. Near the kitchen was a well surrounded by a curb,with a pulley fastened to a bent iron rod clasped by a vine whoseleaves were withered, reddened, and shrivelled by the season. Fromthence the tortuous shoots straggled to the wall, clutched it, and ranthe whole length of the house, ending near the wood-pile, where thelogs were ranged with as much precision as the books in a library. Thepavement of the court-yard showed the black stains produced in time bylichens, herbage, and the absence of all movement or friction. Thethick walls wore a coating of green moss streaked with waving brownlines, and the eight stone steps at the bottom of the court-yard whichled up to the gate of the garden were disjointed and hidden beneathtall plants, like the tomb of a knight buried by his widow in the daysof the Crusades. Above a foundation of moss-grown, crumbling stoneswas a trellis of rotten wood, half fallen from decay; over themclambered and intertwined at will a mass of clustering creepers. Oneach side of the latticed gate stretched the crooked arms of twostunted apple-trees. Three parallel walks, gravelled and separatedfrom each other by square beds, where the earth was held in by box-borders, made the garden, which terminated, beneath a terrace of theold walls, in a group of lindens. At the farther end were raspberry-bushes; at the other, near the house, an immense walnut-tree droopedits branches almost into the window of the miser's sanctum.A clear day and the beautiful autumnal sun common to the banks of theLoire was beginning to melt the hoar-frost which the night had laid onthese picturesque objects, on the walls, and on the plants whichswathed the court-yard. Eugenie found a novel charm in the aspect ofthings lately so insignificant to her. A thousand confused thoughtscame to birth in her mind and grew there, as the sunbeams grew withoutalong the wall. She felt that impulse of delight, vague, inexplicable,which wraps the moral being as a cloud wraps the physical body. Herthoughts were all in keeping with the details of this strangelandscape, and the harmonies of her heart blended with the harmoniesof nature. When the sun reached an angle of the wall where the "Venus-hair" of southern climes drooped its thick leaves, lit with thechanging colors of a pigeon's breast, celestial rays of hope illuminedthe future to her eyes, and thenceforth she loved to gaze upon thatpiece of wall, on its pale flowers, its blue harebells, its wiltingherbage, with which she mingled memories as tender as those ofchildhood. The noise made by each leaf as it fell from its twig in thevoid of that echoing court gave answer to the secret questionings ofthe young girl, who could have stayed there the livelong day withoutperceiving the flight of time. Then came tumultuous heavings of thesoul. She rose often, went to her glass, and looked at herself, as anauthor in good faith looks at his work to criticise it and blame it inhis own mind.

°°°°"I am not beautiful enough for him!" Such was Eugenie's thought,--ahumble thought, fertile in suffering. The poor girl did not do herselfjustice; but modesty, or rather fear, is among the first of love'svirtues. Eugenie belonged to the type of children with sturdyconstitutions, such as we see among the lesser bourgeoisie, whosebeauties always seem a little vulgar; and yet, though she resembledthe Venus of Milo, the lines of her figure were ennobled by the softerChristian sentiment which purifies womanhood and gives it adistinction unknown to the sculptors of antiquity. She had an enormoushead, with the masculine yet delicate forehead of the Jupiter ofPhidias, and gray eyes, to which her chaste life, penetrating fullyinto them, carried a flood of light. The features of her round face,formerly fresh and rosy, were at one time swollen by the small-pox,which destroyed the velvet texture of the skin, though it kindly leftno other traces, and her cheek was still so soft and delicate that hermother's kiss made a momentary red mark upon it. Her nose was somewhattoo thick, but it harmonized well with the vermilion mouth, whoselips, creased in many lines, were full of love and kindness. Thethroat was exquisitely round. The bust, well curved and carefullycovered, attracted the eye and inspired reverie. It lacked, no doubt,the grace which a fitting dress can bestow; but to a connoisseur thenon-flexibility of her figure had its own charm. Eugenie, tall andstrongly made, had none of the prettiness which pleases the masses;but she was beautiful with a beauty which the spirit recognizes, andnone but artists truly love. A painter seeking here below for a typeof Mary's celestial purity, searching womankind for those proud modesteyes which Raphael divined, for those virgin lines, often due tochances of conception, which the modesty of Christian life alone canbestow or keep unchanged,--such a painter, in love with his ideal,would have found in the face of Eugenie the innate nobleness that isignorant of itself; he would have seen beneath the calmness of thatbrow a world of love; he would have felt, in the shape of the eyes, inthe fall of the eyelids, the presence of the nameless something thatwe call divine. Her features, the contour of her head, which noexpression of pleasure had ever altered or wearied, were like thelines of the horizon softly traced in the far distance across thetranquil lakes. That calm and rosy countenance, margined with lightlike a lovely full-blown flower, rested the mind, held the eye, andimparted the charm of the conscience that was there reflected. Eugeniewas standing on the shore of life where young illusions flower, wheredaisies are gathered with delights ere long to be unknown; and thusshe said, looking at her image in the glass, unconscious as yet oflove: "I am too ugly; he will not notice me."

°°°°Then she opened the door of her chamber which led to the staircase,and stretched out her neck to listen for the household noises. "He isnot up," she thought, hearing Nanon's morning cough as the good soulwent and came, sweeping out the halls, lighting her fire, chaining thedog, and speaking to the beasts in the stable. Eugenie at once wentdown and ran to Nanon, who was milking the cow.

°°°°"Nanon, my good Nanon, make a little cream for my cousin's breakfast.""Why, mademoiselle, you should have thought of that yesterday," saidNanon, bursting into a loud peal of laughter. "I can't make cream.Your cousin is a darling, a darling! oh, that he is! You should haveseen him in his dressing-gown, all silk and gold! I saw him, I did! Hewears linen as fine as the surplice of monsieur le cure.""Nanon, please make us a /galette/."

°°°°"And who'll give me wood for the oven, and flour and butter for thecakes?" said Nanon, who in her function of prime-minister to Grandetassumed at times enormous importance in the eyes of Eugenie and hermother. "Mustn't rob the master to feast the cousin. You ask him forbutter and flour and wood: he's your father, perhaps he'll give yousome. See! there he is now, coming to give out the provisions."Eugenie escaped into the garden, quite frightened as she heard thestaircase shaking under her father's step. Already she felt theeffects of that virgin modesty and that special consciousness ofhappiness which lead us to fancy, not perhaps without reason, that ourthoughts are graven on our foreheads and are open to the eyes of all.Perceiving for the first time the cold nakedness of her father'shouse, the poor girl felt a sort of rage that she could not put it inharmony with her cousin's elegance. She felt the need of doingsomething for him,--what, she did not know. Ingenuous and truthful,she followed her angelic nature without mistrusting her impressions orher feelings. The mere sight of her cousin had wakened within her thenatural yearnings of a woman,--yearnings that were the more likely todevelop ardently because, having reached her twenty-third year, shewas in the plenitude of her intelligence and her desires. For thefirst time in her life her heart was full of terror at the sight ofher father; in him she saw the master of the fate, and she fanciedherself guilty of wrong-doing in hiding from his knowledge certainthoughts. She walked with hasty steps, surprised to breathe a purerair, to feel the sun's rays quickening her pulses, to absorb fromtheir heat a moral warmth and a new life. As she turned over in hermind some stratagem by which to get the cake, a quarrel--an event asrare as the sight of swallows in winter--broke out between la GrandeNanon and Grandet. Armed with his keys, the master had come to doleout provisions for the day's consumption.

°°°°"Is there any bread left from yesterday?" he said to Nanon."Not a crumb, monsieur."

°°°°Grandet took a large round loaf, well floured and moulded in one ofthe flat baskets which they use for baking in Anjou, and was about tocut it, when Nanon said to him,--

°°°°"We are five, to-day, monsieur."

°°°°"That's true," said Grandet, "but your loaves weigh six pounds;there'll be some left. Besides, these young fellows from Paris don'teat bread, you'll see."

°°°°"Then they must eat /frippe/?" said Nanon.

°°°°/Frippe/ is a word of the local lexicon of Anjou, and means anyaccompaniment of bread, from butter which is spread upon it, thecommonest kind of /frippe/, to peach preserve, the most distinguishedof all the /frippes/; those who in their childhood have licked the/frippe/ and left the bread, will comprehend the meaning of Nanon'sspeech.

°°°°"No," answered Grandet, "they eat neither bread nor /frippe/; they aresomething like marriageable girls."

°°°°After ordering the meals for the day with his usual parsimony, thegoodman, having locked the closets containing the supplies, was aboutto go towards the fruit-garden, when Nanon stopped him to say,--"Monsieur, give me a little flour and some butter, and I'll make a/galette/ for the young ones."

°°°°"Are you going to pillage the house on account of my nephew?""I wasn't thinking any more of your nephew than I was of your dog,--not more than you think yourself; for, look here, you've only forkedout six bits of sugar. I want eight."

°°°°"What's all this, Nanon? I have never seen you like this before. Whathave you got in your head? Are you the mistress here? You sha'n't havemore than six pieces of sugar."

°°°°"Well, then, how is your nephew to sweeten his coffee?"

°°°°"With two pieces; I'll go without myself."

°°°°"Go without sugar at your age! I'd rather buy you some out of my ownpocket."

°°°°"Mind your own business."

°°°°In spite of the recent fall in prices, sugar was still in Grandet'seyes the most valuable of all the colonial products; to him it wasalways six francs a pound. The necessity of economizing it, acquiredunder the Empire, had grown to be the most inveterate of his habits.All women, even the greatest ninnies, know how to dodge and dodge toget their ends; Nanon abandoned the sugar for the sake of getting the/galette/.

°°°°"Mademoiselle!" she called through the window, "do you want some/galette/?"

°°°°"No, no," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Come, Nanon," said Grandet, hearing his daughter's voice. "See here."He opened the cupboard where the flour was kept, gave her a cupful,and added a few ounces of butter to the piece he had already cut off."I shall want wood for the oven," said the implacable Nanon."Well, take what you want," he answered sadly; "but in that case youmust make us a fruit-tart, and you'll cook the whole dinner in theoven. In that way you won't need two fires."

°°°°"Goodness!" cried Nanon, "you needn't tell me that."

°°°°Grandet cast a look that was well-nigh paternal upon his faithfuldeputy.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she cried, when his back was turned, "we shall havethe /galette/."

°°°°Pere Grandet returned from the garden with the fruit and arranged aplateful on the kitchen-table.

°°°°"Just see, monsieur," said Nanon, "what pretty boots your nephew has.What leather! why it smells good! What does he clean it with, Iwonder? Am I to put your egg-polish on it?"

°°°°"Nanon, I think eggs would injure that kind of leather. Tell him youdon't know how to black morocco; yes, that's morocco. He will get yousomething himself in Saumur to polish those boots with. I have heardthat they put sugar into the blacking to make it shine."

°°°°"They look good to eat," said the cook, putting the boots to her nose."Bless me! if they don't smell like madame's eau-de-cologne. Ah! howfunny!"

°°°°"Funny!" said her master. "Do you call it funny to put more money intoboots than the man who stands in them is worth?"

°°°°"Monsieur," she said, when Grandet returned the second time, afterlocking the fruit-garden, "won't you have the /pot-au-feu/ put on onceor twice a week on account of your nephew?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Am I to go to the butcher's?"

°°°°"Certainly not. We will make the broth of fowls; the farmers willbring them. I shall tell Cornoiller to shoot some crows; they make thebest soup in the world."

°°°°"Isn't it true, monsieur, that crows eat the dead?"

°°°°"You are a fool, Nanon. They eat what they can get, like the rest ofthe world. Don't we all live on the dead? What are legacies?"Monsieur Grandet, having no further orders to give, drew out hiswatch, and seeing that he had half an hour to dispose of beforebreakfast, he took his hat, went and kissed his daughter, and said toher:

°°°°"Do you want to come for a walk in the fields, down by the Loire? Ihave something to do there."

°°°°Eugenie fetched her straw bonnet, lined with pink taffeta; then thefather and daughter went down the winding street to the shore."Where are you going at this early hour?" said Cruchot, the notary,meeting them.

°°°°"To see something," answered Grandet, not duped by the matutinalappearance of his friend.

°°°°When Pere Grandet went to "see something," the notary knew byexperience there was something to be got by going with him; so hewent.

°°°°"Come, Cruchot," said Grandet, "you are one of my friends. I'll showyou what folly it is to plant poplar-trees on good ground.""Do you call the sixty thousand francs that you pocketed for thosethat were in your fields down by the Loire, folly?" said MaitreCruchot, opening his eyes with amazement. "What luck you have had! Tocut down your trees at the very time they ran short of white-wood atNantes, and to sell them at thirty francs!"

°°°°Eugenie listened, without knowing that she approached the most solemnmoment of her whole life, and that the notary was about to bring downupon her head a paternal and supreme sentence. Grandet had now reachedthe magnificent fields which he owned on the banks of the Loire, wherethirty workmen were employed in clearing away, filling up, andlevelling the spots formerly occupied by the poplars.

°°°°"Maitre Cruchot, see how much ground this tree once took up! Jean," hecried to a laborer, "m-m-measure with your r-r-rule, b-both ways.""Four times eight feet," said the man.

°°°°"Thirty-two feet lost," said Grandet to Cruchot. "I had three hundredpoplars in this one line, isn't that so? Well, then, three h-h-hundredtimes thir-thirty-two lost m-m-me five hundred in h-h-hay; add twiceas much for the side rows,--fifteen hundred; the middle rows as muchmore. So we may c-c-call it a th-thousand b-b-bales of h-h-hay--""Very good," said Cruchot, to help out his friend; "a thousand balesare worth about six hundred francs."

°°°°"Say t-t-twelve hundred, be-c-cause there's three or four hundredfrancs on the second crop. Well, then, c-c-calculate that t-twelvethousand francs a year for f-f-forty years with interest c-c-comesto--"

°°°°"Say sixty thousand francs," said the notary.

°°°°"I am willing; c-c-comes t-t-to sixty th-th-thousand. Very good,"continued Grandet, without stuttering: "two thousand poplars fortyyears old will only yield me fifty thousand francs. There's a loss. Ihave found that myself," said Grandet, getting on his high horse."Jean, fill up all the holes except those at the bank of the river;there you are to plant the poplars I have bought. Plant 'em there, andthey'll get nourishment from the government," he said, turning toCruchot, and giving a slight motion to the wen on his nose, whichexpressed more than the most ironical of smiles.

°°°°"True enough; poplars should only be planted on poor soil," saidCruchot, amazed at Grandet's calculations.

°°°°"Y-y-yes, monsieur," answered the old man satirically.

°°°°Eugenie, who was gazing at the sublime scenery of the Loire, andpaying no attention to her father's reckonings, presently turned anear to the remarks of Cruchot when she heard him say,--

°°°°"So you have brought a son-in-law from Paris. All Saumur is talkingabout your nephew. I shall soon have the marriage-contract to draw up,hey! Pere Grandet?"

°°°°"You g-g-got up very early to t-t-tell me that," said Grandet,accompanying the remark with a motion of his wen. "Well, oldc-c-comrade, I'll be frank, and t-t-tell you what you want t-t-toknow. I would rather, do you see, f-f-fling my daughter into the Loirethan g-g-give her to her c-c-cousin. You may t-t-tell that everywhere,--no, never mind; let the world t-t-talk."

°°°°This answer dazzled and blinded the young girl with sudden light. Thedistant hopes upspringing in her heart bloomed suddenly, became real,tangible, like a cluster of flowers, and she saw them cut down andwilting on the earth. Since the previous evening she had attachedherself to Charles by those links of happiness which bind soul tosoul; from henceforth suffering was to rivet them. Is it not the nobledestiny of women to be more moved by the dark solemnities of griefthan by the splendors of fortune? How was it that fatherly feeling haddied out of her father's heart? Of what crime had Charles been guilty?Mysterious questions! Already her dawning love, a mystery so profound,was wrapping itself in mystery. She walked back trembling in all herlimbs; and when she reached the gloomy street, lately so joyous toher, she felt its sadness, she breathed the melancholy which time andevents had printed there. None of love's lessons lacked. A few stepsfrom their own door she went on before her father and waited at thethreshold. But Grandet, who saw a newspaper in the notary's hand,stopped short and asked,--

°°°°"How are the Funds?"

°°°°"You never listen to my advice, Grandet," answered Cruchot. "Buy soon;you will still make twenty per cent in two years, besides getting anexcellent rate of interest,--five thousand a year for eighty thousandfrancs fifty centimes."

°°°°"We'll see about that," answered Grandet, rubbing his chin."Good God!" exclaimed the notary.

°°°°"Well, what?" cried Grandet; and at the same moment Cruchot put thenewspaper under his eyes and said:

°°°°"Read that!"

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, one of the most respected merchants in Paris,

°°°°blew his brains out yesterday, after making his usual appearance

°°°°at the Bourse. He had sent his resignation to the president of the

°°°°Chamber of Deputies, and had also resigned his functions as a

°°°°judge of the commercial courts. The failures of Monsieur Roguin

°°°°and Monsieur Souchet, his broker and his notary, had ruined him.

°°°°The esteem felt for Monsieur Grandet and the credit he enjoyed

°°°°were nevertheless such that he might have obtained the necessary

°°°°assistance from other business houses. It is much to be regretted

°°°°that so honorable a man should have yielded to momentary despair,"

°°°°etc.

°°°°"I knew it," said the old wine-grower to the notary.

°°°°The words sent a chill of horror through Maitre Cruchot, who,notwithstanding his impassibility as a notary, felt the cold runningdown his spine as he thought that Grandet of Paris had possiblyimplored in vain the millions of Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"And his son, so joyous yesterday--"

°°°°"He knows nothing as yet," answered Grandet, with the same composure."Adieu! Monsieur Grandet," said Cruchot, who now understood the stateof the case, and went off to reassure Monsieur de Bonfons.On entering, Grandet found breakfast ready. Madame Grandet, roundwhose neck Eugenie had flung her arms, kissing her with the quickeffusion of feeling often caused by secret grief, was already seatedin her chair on castors, knitting sleeves for the coming winter."You can begin to eat," said Nanon, coming downstairs four steps at atime; "the young one is sleeping like a cherub. Isn't he a darlingwith his eyes shut? I went in and I called him: no answer.""Let him sleep," said Grandet; "he'll wake soon enough to hear ill-tidings."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Eugenie, putting into her coffee the two littlebits of sugar weighing less than half an ounce which the old miseramused himself by cutting up in his leisure hours. Madame Grandet, whodid not dare to put the question, gazed at her husband.

°°°°"His father has blown his brains out."

°°°°"My uncle?" said Eugenie.

°°°°"Poor young man!" exclaimed Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Poor indeed!" said Grandet; "he isn't worth a sou!"

°°°°"Eh! poor boy, and he's sleeping like the king of the world!" saidNanon in a gentle voice.

°°°°Eugenie stopped eating. Her heart was wrung, as the young heart iswrung when pity for the suffering of one she loves overflows, for thefirst time, the whole being of a woman. The poor girl wept."What are you crying about? You didn't know your uncle," said herfather, giving her one of those hungry tigerish looks he doubtlessthrew upon his piles of gold.

°°°°"But, monsieur," said Nanon, "who wouldn't feel pity for the pooryoung man, sleeping there like a wooden shoe, without knowing what'scoming?"

°°°°"I didn't speak to you, Nanon. Hold your tongue!"

°°°°Eugenie learned at that moment that the woman who loves must be ableto hide her feelings. She did not answer.

°°°°"You will say nothing to him about it, Ma'ame Grandet, till I return,"said the old man. "I have to go and straighten the line of my hedgealong the high-road. I shall be back at noon, in time for the secondbreakfast, and then I will talk with my nephew about his affairs. Asfor you, Mademoiselle Eugenie, if it is for that dandy you are crying,that's enough, child. He's going off like a shot to the Indies. Youwill never see him again."

°°°°The father took his gloves from the brim of his hat, put them on withhis usual composure, pushed them in place by shoving the fingers ofboth hands together, and went out.

°°°°"Mamma, I am suffocating!" cried Eugenie when she was alone with hermother; "I have never suffered like this."

°°°°Madame Grandet, seeing that she turned pale, opened the window and lether breathe fresh air.

°°°°"I feel better!" said Eugenie after a moment.

°°°°This nervous excitement in a nature hitherto, to all appearance, calmand cold, reacted on Madame Grandet; she looked at her daughter withthe sympathetic intuition with which mothers are gifted for theobjects of their tenderness, and guessed all. In truth the life of theHungarian sisters, bound together by a freak of nature, could scarcelyhave been more intimate than that of Eugenie and her mother,--alwaystogether in the embrasure of that window, and sleeping together in thesame atmosphere.

°°°°"My poor child!" said Madame Grandet, taking Eugenie's head and layingit upon her bosom.

°°°°At these words the young girl raised her head, questioned her motherby a look, and seemed to search out her inmost thought.

°°°°"Why send him to the Indies?" she said. "If he is unhappy, ought henot to stay with us? Is he not our nearest relation?"

°°°°"Yes, my child, it seems natural; but your father has his reasons: wemust respect them."

°°°°The mother and daughter sat down in silence, the former upon herraised seat, the latter in her little armchair, and both took up theirwork. Swelling with gratitude for the full heart-understanding hermother had given her, Eugenie kissed the dear hand, saying,--"How good you are, my kind mamma!"

°°°°The words sent a glow of light into the motherly face, worn andblighted as it was by many sorrows.

°°°°"You like him?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°Madame Grandet only smiled in reply. Then, after a moment's silence,she said in a low voice: "Do you love him already? That is wrong.""Wrong?" said Eugenie. "Why is it wrong? You are pleased with him,Nanon is pleased with him; why should he not please me? Come, mamma,let us set the table for his breakfast."

°°°°She threw down her work, and her mother did the same, saying, "Foolishchild!" But she sanctioned the child's folly by sharing it. Eugeniecalled Nanon.

°°°°"What do you want now, mademoiselle?"

°°°°"Nanon, can we have cream by midday?"

°°°°"Ah! midday, to be sure you can," answered the old servant."Well, let him have his coffee very strong; I heard Monsieur desGrassins say that they make the coffee very strong in Paris. Put in agreat deal."

°°°°"Where am I to get it?"

°°°°"Buy some."

°°°°"Suppose monsieur meets me?"

°°°°"He has gone to his fields."

°°°°"I'll run, then. But Monsieur Fessard asked me yesterday if the Magihad come to stay with us when I bought the wax candle. All the townwill know our goings-on."

°°°°"If your father finds it out," said Madame Grandet, "he is capable ofbeating us."

°°°°"Well, let him beat us; we will take his blows on our knees."Madame Grandet for all answer raised her eyes to heaven. Nanon put onher hood and went off. Eugenie got out some clean table-linen, andwent to fetch a few bunches of grapes which she had amused herself byhanging on a string across the attic; she walked softly along thecorridor, so as not to waken her cousin, and she could not helplistening at the door to his quiet breathing.

°°°°"Sorrow is watching while he sleeps," she thought.

°°°°She took the freshest vine-leaves and arranged her dish of grapes ascoquettishly as a practised house-keeper might have done, and placedit triumphantly on the table. She laid hands on the pears counted outby her father, and piled them in a pyramid mixed with leaves. She wentand came, and skipped and ran. She would have liked to lay undercontribution everything in her father's house; but the keys were inhis pocket. Nanon came back with two fresh eggs. At sight of themEugenie almost hugged her round the neck.

°°°°"The farmer from Lande had them in his basket. I asked him for them,and he gave them to me, the darling, for nothing, as an attention!"VAfter two hours' thought and care, during which Eugenie jumped uptwenty times from her work to see if the coffee were boiling, or to goand listen to the noise her cousin made in dressing, she succeeded inpreparing a simple little breakfast, very inexpensive, but which,nevertheless, departed alarmingly from the inveterate customs of thehouse. The midday breakfast was always taken standing. Each took aslice of bread, a little fruit or some butter, and a glass of wine. AsEugenie looked at the table drawn up near the fire with an arm-chairplaced before her cousin's plate, at the two dishes of fruit, the egg-cup, the bottle of white wine, the bread, and the sugar heaped up in asaucer, she trembled in all her limbs at the mere thought of the lookher father would give her if he should come in at that moment. Sheglanced often at the clock to see if her cousin could breakfast beforethe master's return.

°°°°"Don't be troubled, Eugenie; if your father comes in, I will take itall upon myself," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Eugenie could not repress a tear.

°°°°"Oh, my good mother!" she cried, "I have never loved you enough."Charles, who had been tramping about his room for some time, singingto himself, now came down. Happily, it was only eleven o'clock. Thetrue Parisian! he had put as much dandyism into his dress as if hewere in the chateau of the noble lady then travelling in Scotland. Hecame into the room with the smiling, courteous manner so becoming toyouth, which made Eugenie's heart beat with mournful joy. He had takenthe destruction of his castles in Anjou as a joke, and came up to hisaunt gaily.

°°°°"Have you slept well, dear aunt? and you, too, my cousin?""Very well, monsieur; did you?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"I? perfectly."

°°°°"You must be hungry, cousin," said Eugenie; "will you take your seat?""I never breakfast before midday; I never get up till then. However, Ifared so badly on the journey that I am glad to eat something at once.Besides--" here he pulled out the prettiest watch Breguet ever made."Dear me! I am early, it is only eleven o'clock!"

°°°°"Early?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Yes; but I wanted to put my things in order. Well, I shall be glad tohave anything to eat,--anything, it doesn't matter what, a chicken, apartridge."

°°°°"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Nanon, overhearing the words.

°°°°"A partridge!" whispered Eugenie to herself; she would gladly havegiven the whole of her little hoard for a partridge.

°°°°"Come and sit down," said his aunt.

°°°°The young dandy let himself drop into an easy-chair, just as a prettywoman falls gracefully upon a sofa. Eugenie and her mother tookordinary chairs and sat beside him, near the fire.

°°°°"Do you always live here?" said Charles, thinking the room uglier bydaylight than it had seemed the night before.

°°°°"Always," answered Eugenie, looking at him, "except during thevintage. Then we go and help Nanon, and live at the Abbaye desNoyers."

°°°°"Don't you ever take walks?"

°°°°"Sometimes on Sunday after vespers, when the weather is fine," saidMadame Grandet, "we walk on the bridge, or we go and watch thehaymakers."

°°°°"Have you a theatre?"

°°°°"Go to the theatre!" exclaimed Madame Grandet, "see a play! Why,monsieur, don't you know it is a mortal sin?"

°°°°"See here, monsieur," said Nanon, bringing in the eggs, "here are yourchickens,--in the shell."

°°°°"Oh! fresh eggs," said Charles, who, like all people accustomed toluxury, had already forgotten about his partridge, "that is delicious:now, if you will give me the butter, my good girl."

°°°°"Butter! then you can't have the /galette/."

°°°°"Nanon, bring the butter," cried Eugenie.

°°°°The young girl watched her cousin as he cut his sippets, with as muchpleasure as a grisette takes in a melodrama where innocence and virtuetriumph. Charles, brought up by a charming mother, improved, andtrained by a woman of fashion, had the elegant, dainty, foppishmovements of a coxcomb. The compassionate sympathy and tenderness of ayoung girl possess a power that is actually magnetic; so that Charles,finding himself the object of the attentions of his aunt and cousin,could not escape the influence of feelings which flowed towards him,as it were, and inundated him. He gave Eugenie a bright, caressinglook full of kindness,--a look which seemed itself a smile. Heperceived, as his eyes lingered upon her, the exquisite harmony offeatures in the pure face, the grace of her innocent attitude, themagic clearness of the eyes, where young love sparkled and desireshone unconsciously.

°°°°"Ah! my dear cousin, if you were in full dress at the Opera, I assureyou my aunt's words would come true,--you would make the men committhe mortal sin of envy, and the women the sin of jealousy."The compliment went to Eugenie's heart and set it beating, though shedid not understand its meaning.

°°°°"Oh! cousin," she said, "you are laughing at a poor little countrygirl."

°°°°"If you knew me, my cousin, you would know that I abhor ridicule; itwithers the heart and jars upon all my feelings." Here he swallowedhis buttered sippet very gracefully. "No, I really have not enoughmind to make fun of others; and doubtless it is a great defect. InParis, when they want to disparage a man, they say: 'He has a goodheart.' The phrase means: 'The poor fellow is as stupid as arhinoceros.' But as I am rich, and known to hit the bull's-eye atthirty paces with any kind of pistol, and even in the open fields,ridicule respects me."

°°°°"My dear nephew, that bespeaks a good heart."

°°°°"You have a very pretty ring," said Eugenie; "is there any harm inasking to see it?"

°°°°Charles held out his hand after loosening the ring, and Eugenieblushed as she touched the pink nails of her cousin with the tips ofher fingers.

°°°°"See, mamma, what beautiful workmanship."

°°°°"My! there's a lot of gold!" said Nanon, bringing in the coffee."What is that?" exclaimed Charles, laughing, as he pointed to anoblong pot of brown earthenware, glazed on the inside, and edged witha fringe of ashes, from the bottom of which the coffee-grounds werebubbling up and falling in the boiling liquid.

°°°°"It is boiled coffee," said Nanon.

°°°°"Ah! my dear aunt, I shall at least leave one beneficent trace of myvisit here. You are indeed behind the age! I must teach you to makegood coffee in a Chaptal coffee-pot."

°°°°He tried to explain the process of a Chaptal coffee-pot.

°°°°"Gracious! if there are so many things as all that to do," said Nanon,"we may as well give up our lives to it. I shall never make coffeethat way; I know that! Pray, who is to get the fodder for the cowwhile I make the coffee?"

°°°°"I will make it," said Eugenie.

°°°°"Child!" said Madame Grandet, looking at her daughter.

°°°°The word recalled to their minds the sorrow that was about to fallupon the unfortunate young man; the three women were silent, andlooked at him with an air of commiseration that caught his attention."Is anything the matter, my cousin?" he said.

°°°°"Hush!" said Madame Grandet to Eugenie, who was about to answer; "youknow, my daughter, that your father charged us not to speak tomonsieur--"

°°°°"Say Charles," said young Grandet.

°°°°"Ah! you are called Charles? What a beautiful name!" cried Eugenie.Presentiments of evil are almost always justified. At this momentNanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie, who had all three been thinkingwith a shudder of the old man's return, heard the knock whose echoesthey knew but too well.

°°°°"There's papa!" said Eugenie.

°°°°She removed the saucer filled with sugar, leaving a few pieces on thetable-cloth; Nanon carried off the egg-cup; Madame Grandet sat up likea frightened hare. It was evidently a panic, which amazed Charles, whowas wholly unable to understand it.

°°°°"Why! what is the matter?" he asked.

°°°°"My father has come," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, what of that?"

°°°°Monsieur Grandet entered the room, threw his keen eye upon the table,upon Charles, and saw the whole thing.

°°°°"Ha! ha! so you have been making a feast for your nephew; very good,very good, very good indeed!" he said, without stuttering. "When thecat's away, the mice will play."

°°°°"Feast!" thought Charles, incapable of suspecting or imagining therules and customs of the household.

°°°°"Give me my glass, Nanon," said the master

°°°°Eugenie brought the glass. Grandet drew a horn-handled knife with abig blade from his breeches' pocket, cut a slice of bread, took asmall bit of butter, spread it carefully on the bread, and ate itstanding. At this moment Charlie was sweetening his coffee. PereGrandet saw the bits of sugar, looked at his wife, who turned pale,and made three steps forward; he leaned down to the poor woman's earand said,--

°°°°"Where did you get all that sugar?"

°°°°"Nanon fetched it from Fessard's; there was none."

°°°°It is impossible to picture the profound interest the three women tookin this mute scene. Nanon had left her kitchen and stood looking intothe room to see what would happen. Charles, having tasted his coffee,found it bitter and glanced about for the sugar, which Grandet hadalready put away.

°°°°"What do you want?" said his uncle.

°°°°"The sugar."

°°°°"Put in more milk," answered the master of the house; "your coffeewill taste sweeter."

°°°°Eugenie took the saucer which Grandet had put away and placed it onthe table, looking calmly at her father as she did so. Most assuredly,the Parisian woman who held a silken ladder with her feeble arms tofacilitate the flight of her lover, showed no greater courage thanEugenie displayed when she replaced the sugar upon the table. Thelover rewarded his mistress when she proudly showed him her beautifulbruised arm, and bathed every swollen vein with tears and kisses tillit was cured with happiness. Charles, on the other hand, never so muchas knew the secret of the cruel agitation that shook and bruised theheart of his cousin, crushed as it was by the look of the old miser."You are not eating your breakfast, wife."

°°°°The poor helot came forward with a piteous look, cut herself a pieceof bread, and took a pear. Eugenie boldly offered her father somegrapes, saying,--

°°°°"Taste my preserves, papa. My cousin, you will eat some, will you not?I went to get these pretty grapes expressly for you."

°°°°"If no one stops them, they will pillage Saumur for you, nephew. Whenyou have finished, we will go into the garden; I have something totell you which can't be sweetened."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother cast a look on Charles whose meaning the youngman could not mistake.

°°°°"What is it you mean, uncle? Since the death of my poor mother"--atthese words his voice softened--"no other sorrow can touch me.""My nephew, who knows by what afflictions God is pleased to try us?"said his aunt.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta," said Grandet, "there's your nonsense beginning. I amsorry to see those white hands of yours, nephew"; and he showed theshoulder-of-mutton fists which Nature had put at the end of his ownarms. "There's a pair of hands made to pick up silver pieces. You'vebeen brought up to put your feet in the kid out of which we make thepurses we keep our money in. A bad look-out! Very bad!"

°°°°"What do you mean, uncle? I'll be hanged if I understand a single wordof what you are saying."

°°°°"Come!" said Grandet.

°°°°The miser closed the blade of his knife with a snap, drank the last ofhis wine, and opened the door.

°°°°"My cousin, take courage!"

°°°°The tone of the young girl struck terror to Charles's heart, and hefollowed his terrible uncle, a prey to disquieting thoughts. Eugenie,her mother, and Nanon went into the kitchen, moved by irresistiblecuriosity to watch the two actors in the scene which was about to takeplace in the garden, where at first the uncle walked silently ahead ofthe nephew. Grandet was not at all troubled at having to tell Charlesof the death of his father; but he did feel a sort of compassion inknowing him to be without a penny, and he sought for some phrase orformula by which to soften the communication of that cruel truth. "Youhave lost your father," seemed to him a mere nothing to say; fathersdie before their children. But "you are absolutely without means,"--all the misfortunes of life were summed up in those words! Grandetwalked round the garden three times, the gravel crunching under hisheavy step.

°°°°In the crucial moments of life our minds fasten upon the localitywhere joys or sorrows overwhelm us. Charles noticed with minuteattention the box-borders of the little garden, the yellow leaves asthey fluttered down, the dilapidated walls, the gnarled fruit-trees,--picturesque details which were destined to remain forever in hismemory, blending eternally, by the mnemonics that belong exclusivelyto the passions, with the recollections of this solemn hour."It is very fine weather, very warm," said Grandet, drawing a longbreath.

°°°°"Yes, uncle; but why--"

°°°°"Well, my lad," answered his uncle, "I have some bad news to give you.Your father is ill--"

°°°°"Then why am I here?" said Charles. "Nanon," he cried, "order post-horses! I can get a carriage somewhere?" he added, turning to hisuncle, who stood motionless.

°°°°"Horses and carriages are useless," answered Grandet, looking atCharles, who remained silent, his eyes growing fixed. "Yes, my poorboy, you guess the truth,--he is dead. But that's nothing; there issomething worse: he blew out his brains."

°°°°"My father!"

°°°°"Yes, but that's not the worst; the newspapers are all talking aboutit. Here, read that."

°°°°Grandet, who had borrowed the fatal article from Cruchot, thrust thepaper under his nephew's eyes. The poor young man, still a child,still at an age when feelings wear no mask, burst into tears."That's good!" thought Grandet; "his eyes frightened me. He'll be allright if he weeps,--That is not the worst, my poor nephew," he saidaloud, not noticing whether Charles heard him, "that is nothing; youwill get over it: but--"

°°°°"Never, never! My father! Oh, my father!"

°°°°"He has ruined you, you haven't a penny."

°°°°"What does that matter? My father! Where is my father?"

°°°°His sobs resounded horribly against those dreary walls andreverberated in the echoes. The three women, filled with pity, weptalso; for tears are often as contagious as laughter. Charles, withoutlistening further to his uncle, ran through the court and up thestaircase to his chamber, where he threw himself across the bed andhid his face in the sheets, to weep in peace for his lost parents."The first burst must have its way," said Grandet, entering theliving-room, where Eugenie and her mother had hastily resumed theirseats and were sewing with trembling hands, after wiping their eyes."But that young man is good for nothing; his head is more taken upwith the dead than with his money."

°°°°Eugenie shuddered as she heard her father's comment on the most sacredof all griefs. From that moment she began to judge him. Charles'ssobs, though muffled, still sounded through the sepulchral house; andhis deep groans, which seemed to come from the earth beneath, onlyceased towards evening, after growing gradually feebler.

°°°°"Poor young man!" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Fatal exclamation! Pere Grandet looked at his wife, at Eugenie, and atthe sugar-bowl. He recollected the extraordinary breakfast preparedfor the unfortunate youth, and he took a position in the middle of theroom.

°°°°"Listen to me," he said, with his usual composure. "I hope that youwill not continue this extravagance, Madame Grandet. I don't give youMY money to stuff that young fellow with sugar."

°°°°"My mother had nothing to do with it," said Eugenie; "it was I who--""Is it because you are of age," said Grandet, interrupting hisdaughter, "that you choose to contradict me? Remember, Eugenie--""Father, the son of your brother ought to receive from us--""Ta, ta, ta, ta!" exclaimed the cooper on four chromatic tones; "theson of my brother this, my nephew that! Charles is nothing at all tous; he hasn't a farthing, his father has failed; and when this dandyhas cried his fill, off he goes from here. I won't have himrevolutionize my household."

°°°°"What is 'failing,' father?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°"To fail," answered her father, "is to commit the most dishonorableaction that can disgrace a man."

°°°°"It must be a great sin," said Madame Grandet, "and our brother may bedamned."

°°°°"There, there, don't begin with your litanies!" said Grandet,shrugging his shoulders. "To fail, Eugenie," he resumed, "is to commita theft which the law, unfortunately, takes under its protection.People have given their property to Guillaume Grandet trusting to hisreputation for honor and integrity; he has made away with it all, andleft them nothing but their eyes to weep with. A highway robber isbetter than a bankrupt: the one attacks you and you can defendyourself, he risks his own life; but the other--in short, Charles isdishonored."

°°°°The words rang in the poor girl's heart and weighed it down with theirheavy meaning. Upright and delicate as a flower born in the depths ofa forest, she knew nothing of the world's maxims, of its deceitfularguments and specious sophisms; she therefore believed the atrociousexplanation which her father gave her designedly, concealing thedistinction which exists between an involuntary failure and anintentional one.

°°°°"Father, could you not have prevented such a misfortune?""My brother did not consult me. Besides, he owes four millions.""What is a 'million,' father?" she asked, with the simplicity of achild which thinks it can find out at once all that it wants to know."A million?" said Grandet, "why, it is a million pieces of twenty souseach, and it takes five twenty sous pieces to make five francs.""Dear me!" cried Eugenie, "how could my uncle possibly have had fourmillions? Is there any one else in France who ever had so manymillions?" Pere Grandet stroked his chin, smiled, and his wen seemedto dilate. "But what will become of my cousin Charles?"

°°°°"He is going off to the West Indies by his father's request, and hewill try to make his fortune there."

°°°°"Has he got the money to go with?"

°°°°"I shall pay for his journey as far as--yes, as far as Nantes."Eugenie sprang into his arms.

°°°°"Oh, father, how good you are!"

°°°°She kissed him with a warmth that almost made Grandet ashamed ofhimself, for his conscience galled him a little.

°°°°"Will it take much time to amass a million?" she asked.

°°°°"Look here!" said the old miser, "you know what a napoleon is? Well,it takes fifty thousand napoleons to make a million."

°°°°"Mamma, we must say a great many /neuvaines/ for him."

°°°°"I was thinking so," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"That's the way, always spending my money!" cried the father. "Do youthink there are francs on every bush?"

°°°°At this moment a muffled cry, more distressing than all the others,echoed through the garrets and struck a chill to the hearts of Eugenieand her mother.

°°°°"Nanon, go upstairs and see that he does not kill himself," saidGrandet. "Now, then," he added, looking at his wife and daughter, whohad turned pale at his words, "no nonsense, you two! I must leave you;I have got to see about the Dutchmen who are going away to-day. Andthen I must find Cruchot, and talk with him about all this."He departed. As soon as he had shut the door Eugenie and her motherbreathed more freely. Until this morning the young girl had never feltconstrained in the presence of her father; but for the last few hoursevery moment wrought a change in her feelings and ideas.

°°°°"Mamma, how many louis are there in a cask of wine?"

°°°°"Your father sells his from a hundred to a hundred and fifty francs,sometimes two hundred,--at least, so I've heard say."

°°°°"Then papa must be rich?"

°°°°"Perhaps he is. But Monsieur Cruchot told me he bought Froidfond twoyears ago; that may have pinched him."

°°°°Eugenie, not being able to understand the question of her father'sfortune, stopped short in her calculations.

°°°°"He didn't even see me, the darling!" said Nanon, coming back from hererrand. "He's stretched out like a calf on his bed and crying like theMadeleine, and that's a blessing! What's the matter with the poor dearyoung man!"

°°°°"Let us go and console him, mamma; if any one knocks, we can comedown."

°°°°Madame Grandet was helpless against the sweet persuasive tones of herdaughter's voice. Eugenie was sublime: she had become a woman. Thetwo, with beating hearts, went up to Charles's room. The door wasopen. The young man heard and saw nothing; plunged in grief, he onlyuttered inarticulate cries.

°°°°"How he loves his father!" said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°In the utterance of those words it was impossible to mistake the hopesof a heart that, unknown to itself, had suddenly become passionate.Madame Grandet cast a mother's look upon her daughter, and thenwhispered in her ear,--

°°°°"Take care, you will love him!"

°°°°"Love him!" answered Eugenie. "Ah! if you did but know what my fathersaid to Monsieur Cruchot."

°°°°Charles turned over, and saw his aunt and cousin.

°°°°"I have lost my father, my poor father! If he had told me his secrettroubles we might have worked together to repair them. My God! my poorfather! I was so sure I should see him again that I think I kissed himquite coldly--"

°°°°Sobs cut short the words.

°°°°"We will pray for him," said Madame Grandet. "Resign yourself to thewill of God."

°°°°"Cousin," said Eugenie, "take courage! Your loss is irreparable;therefore think only of saving your honor."

°°°°With the delicate instinct of a woman who intuitively puts her mindinto all things, even at the moment when she offers consolation,Eugenie sought to cheat her cousin's grief by turning his thoughtsinward upon himself.

°°°°"My honor?" exclaimed the young man, tossing aside his hair with animpatient gesture as he sat up on his bed and crossed his arms. "Ah!that is true. My uncle said my father had failed." He uttered a heart-rending cry, and hid his face in his hands. "Leave me, leave me,cousin! My God! my God! forgive my father, for he must have sufferedsorely!"

°°°°There was something terribly attractive in the sight of this youngsorrow, sincere without reasoning or afterthought. It was a virgingrief which the simple hearts of Eugenie and her mother were fitted tocomprehend, and they obeyed the sign Charles made them to leave him tohimself. They went downstairs in silence and took their accustomedplaces by the window and sewed for nearly an hour without exchanging aword. Eugenie had seen in the furtive glance that she cast about theyoung man's room--that girlish glance which sees all in the twinklingof an eye--the pretty trifles of his dressing-case, his scissors, hisrazors embossed with gold. This gleam of luxury across her cousin'sgrief only made him the more interesting to her, possibly by way ofcontrast. Never before had so serious an event, so dramatic a sight,touched the imaginations of these two passive beings, hitherto sunk inthe stillness and calm of solitude.

°°°°"Mamma," said Eugenie, "we must wear mourning for my uncle.""Your father will decide that," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°They relapsed into silence. Eugenie drew her stitches with a uniformmotion which revealed to an observer the teeming thoughts of hermeditation. The first desire of the girl's heart was to share hercousin's mourning.

°°°°VI

°°°°About four o'clock an abrupt knock at the door struck sharply on theheart of Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What can have happened to your father?" she said to her daughter.Grandet entered joyously. After taking off his gloves, he rubbed hishands hard enough to take off their skin as well, if his epidermis hadnot been tanned and cured like Russia leather,--saving, of course, theperfume of larch-trees and incense. Presently his secret escaped him."Wife," he said, without stuttering, "I've trapped them all! Our wineis sold! The Dutch and the Belgians have gone. I walked about themarket-place in front of their inn, pretending to be doing nothing.That Belgian fellow--you know who I mean--came up to me. The owners ofall the good vineyards have kept back their vintages, intending towait; well, I didn't hinder them. The Belgian was in despair; I sawthat. In a minute the bargain was made. He takes my vintage at twohundred francs the puncheon, half down. He paid me in gold; the notesare drawn. Here are six louis for you. In three months wines will havefallen."

°°°°These words, uttered in a quiet tone of voice, were nevertheless sobitterly sarcastic that the inhabitants of Saumur, grouped at thismoment in the market-place and overwhelmed by the news of the saleGrandet had just effected, would have shuddered had they heard them.Their panic would have brought the price of wines down fifty per centat once.

°°°°"Did you have a thousand puncheons this year, father?"

°°°°"Yes, little one."

°°°°That term applied to his daughter was the superlative expression ofthe old miser's joy.

°°°°"Then that makes two hundred thousand pieces of twenty sous each?""Yes, Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"Then, father, you can easily help Charles."

°°°°The amazement, the anger, the stupefaction of Belshazzar when he sawthe /Mene-Tekel-Upharsin/ before his eyes is not to be compared withthe cold rage of Grandet, who, having forgotten his nephew, now foundhim enshrined in the heart and calculations of his daughter."What's this? Ever since that dandy put foot in MY house everythinggoes wrong! You behave as if you had the right to buy sugar-plums andmake feasts and weddings. I won't have that sort of thing. I hope Iknow my duty at my time of life! I certainly sha'n't take lessons frommy daughter, or from anybody else. I shall do for my nephew what it isproper to do, and you have no need to poke your nose into it. As foryou, Eugenie," he added, facing her, "don't speak of this again, orI'll send you to the Abbaye des Noyers with Nanon, see if I don't; andno later than to-morrow either, if you disobey me! Where is thatfellow, has he come down yet?"

°°°°"No, my friend," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What is he doing then?"

°°°°"He is weeping for his father," said Eugenie.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter without finding a word to say; afterall, he was a father. He made a couple of turns up and down the room,and then went hurriedly to his secret den to think over an investmenthe was meditating in the public Funds. The thinning out of his twothousand acres of forest land had yielded him six hundred thousandfrancs: putting this sum to that derived from the sale of his poplarsand to his other gains for the last year and for the current year, hehad amassed a total of nine hundred thousand francs, without countingthe two hundred thousand he had got by the sale just concluded. Thetwenty per cent which Cruchot assured him would gain in a short timefrom the Funds, then quoted at seventy, tempted him. He figured outhis calculation on the margin of the newspaper which gave the accountof his brother's death, all the while hearing the moans of his nephew,but without listening to them. Nanon came and knocked on the wall tosummon him to dinner. On the last step of the staircase he was sayingto himself as he came down,--

°°°°"I'll do it; I shall get eight per cent interest. In two years I shallhave fifteen hundred thousand francs, which I will then draw out ingood gold,--Well, where's my nephew?"

°°°°"He says he doesn't want anything to eat," answered Nanon; "that's notgood for him."

°°°°"So much saved," retorted her master.

°°°°"That's so," she said.

°°°°"Bah! he won't cry long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the woods."The dinner was eaten in silence.

°°°°"My good friend," said Madame Grandet, when the cloth was removed, "wemust put on mourning."

°°°°"Upon my word, Madame Grandet! what will you invent next to spendmoney on? Mourning is in the heart, and not in the clothes.""But mourning for a brother is indispensable; and the Church commandsus to--"

°°°°"Buy your mourning out of your six louis. Give me a hat-band; that'senough for me."

°°°°Eugenie raised her eyes to heaven without uttering a word. Hergenerous instincts, slumbering and long repressed but now suddenly andfor the first time awakened, were galled at every turn. The eveningpassed to all appearance like a thousand other evenings of theirmonotonous life, yet it was certainly the most horrible. Eugenie sewedwithout raising her head, and did not use the workbox which Charleshad despised the night before. Madame Grandet knitted her sleeves.Grandet twirled his thumbs for four hours, absorbed in calculationswhose results were on the morrow to astonish Saumur. No one came tovisit the family that day. The whole town was ringing with the news ofthe business trick just played by Grandet, the failure of his brother,and the arrival of his nephew. Obeying the desire to gossip over theirmutual interests, all the upper and middle-class wine-growers inSaumur met at Monsieur des Grassins, where terrible imprecations werebeing fulminated against the ex-mayor. Nanon was spinning, and thewhirr of her wheel was the only sound heard beneath the gray raftersof that silent hall.

°°°°"We don't waste our tongues," she said, showing her teeth, as largeand white as peeled almonds.

°°°°"Nothing should be wasted," answered Grandet, rousing himself from hisreverie. He saw a perspective of eight millions in three years, and hewas sailing along that sheet of gold. "Let us go to bed. I will bid mynephew good-night for the rest of you, and see if he will takeanything."

°°°°Madame Grandet remained on the landing of the first storey to hear theconversation that was about to take place between the goodman and hisnephew. Eugenie, bolder than her mother, went up two stairs."Well, nephew, you are in trouble. Yes, weep, that's natural. A fatheris a father; but we must bear our troubles patiently. I am a gooduncle to you, remember that. Come, take courage! Will you have alittle glass of wine?" (Wine costs nothing in Saumur, and they offerit as tea is offered in China.) "Why!" added Grandet, "you have got nolight! That's bad, very bad; you ought to see what you are about," andhe walked to the chimney-piece. "What's this?" he cried. "A waxcandle! How the devil did they filch a wax candle? The spendthriftswould tear down the ceilings of my house to boil the fellow's eggs."Hearing these words, mother and daughter slipped back into their roomsand burrowed in their beds, with the celerity of frightened micegetting back to their holes.

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you found a mine?" said the man, coming into thechamber of his wife.

°°°°"My friend, wait; I am saying my prayers," said the poor mother in atrembling voice.

°°°°"The devil take your good God!" growled Grandet in reply.Misers have no belief in a future life; the present is their all inall. This thought casts a terrible light upon our present epoch, inwhich, far more than at any former period, money sways the laws andpolitics and morals.  Institutions, books, men, and dogmas, allconspire to undermine belief in a future life,--a belief upon whichthe social edifice has rested for eighteen hundred years. The grave,as a means of transition, is little feared in our day. The future,which once opened to us beyond the requiems, has now been importedinto the present. To obtain /per fas et nefas/ a terrestrial paradiseof luxury and earthly enjoyment, to harden the heart and macerate thebody for the sake of fleeting possessions, as the martyrs oncesuffered all things to reach eternal joys, this is now the universalthought--a thought written everywhere, even in the very laws which askof the legislator, "What do you pay?" instead of asking him, "What doyou think?" When this doctrine has passed down from the bourgeoisie tothe populace, where will this country be?

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you done?" asked the old man.

°°°°"My friend, I am praying for you."

°°°°"Very good! Good-night; to-morrow morning we will have a talk."The poor woman went to sleep like a schoolboy who, not having learnedhis lessons, knows he will see his master's angry face on the morrow.At the moment when, filled with fear, she was drawing the sheet aboveher head that she might stifle hearing, Eugenie, in her night-gown andwith naked feet, ran to her side and kissed her brow.

°°°°"Oh! my good mother," she said, "to-morrow I will tell him it was I.""No; he would send you to Noyers. Leave me to manage it; he cannot eatme."

°°°°"Do you hear, mamma?"

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"/He/ is weeping still."

°°°°"Go to bed, my daughter; you will take cold in your feet: the floor isdamp."

°°°°*****

°°°°Thus passed the solemn day which was destined to weight upon the wholelife of the rich and poor heiress, whose sleep was never again to beso calm, nor yet so pure, as it had been up to this moment. It oftenhappens that certain actions of human life seem, literally speaking,improbable, though actual. Is not this because we constantly omit toturn the stream of psychological light upon our impulsivedeterminations, and fail to explain the subtile reasons, mysteriouslyconceived in our minds, which impelled them? Perhaps Eugenie's deeppassion should be analyzed in its most delicate fibres; for it became,scoffers might say, a malady which influenced her whole existence.Many people prefer to deny results rather than estimate the force ofties and links and bonds, which secretly join one fact to another inthe moral order. Here, therefore, Eugenie's past life will offer toobservers of human nature an explanation of her naive want ofreflection and the suddenness of the emotions which overflowed hersoul. The more tranquil her life had been, the more vivid was herwomanly pity, the more simple-minded were the sentiments now developedin her soul.

°°°°Made restless by the events of the day, she woke at intervals tolisten to her cousin, thinking she heard the sighs which still echoedin her heart. Sometimes she saw him dying of his trouble, sometimesshe dreamed that he fainted from hunger. Towards morning she wascertain that she heard a startling cry. She dressed at once and ran,in the dawning light, with a swift foot to her cousin's chamber, thedoor of which he had left open. The candle had burned down to thesocket. Charles, overcome by nature, was sleeping, dressed and sittingin an armchair beside the bed, on which his head rested; he dreamed asmen dream on an empty stomach. Eugenie might weep at her ease; shemight admire the young and handsome face blotted with grief, the eyesswollen with weeping, that seemed, sleeping as they were, to wellforth tears. Charles felt sympathetically the young girl's presence;he opened his eyes and saw her pitying him.

°°°°"Pardon me, my cousin," he said, evidently not knowing the hour northe place in which he found himself.

°°°°"There are hearts who hear you, cousin, and /we/ thought you mightneed something. You should go to bed; you tire yourself by sittingthus."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, then, adieu!"

°°°°She escaped, ashamed and happy at having gone there. Innocence alonecan dare to be so bold. Once enlightened, virtue makes hercalculations as well as vice. Eugenie, who had not trembled beside hercousin, could scarcely stand upon her legs when she regained herchamber. Her ignorant life had suddenly come to an end; she reasoned,she rebuked herself with many reproaches.

°°°°"What will he think of me? He will think that I love him!"That was what she most wished him to think. An honest love has its ownprescience, and knows that love begets love. What an event for thispoor solitary girl thus to have entered the chamber of a young man!Are there not thoughts and actions in the life of love which tocertain souls bear the full meaning of the holiest espousals? An hourlater she went to her mother and dressed her as usual. Then they bothcame down and sat in their places before the window waiting forGrandet, with that cruel anxiety which, according to the individualcharacter, freezes the heart or warms it, shrivels or dilates it, whena scene is feared, a punishment expected,--a feeling so natural thateven domestic animals possess it, and whine at the slightest pain ofpunishment, though they make no outcry when they inadvertently hurtthemselves. The goodman came down; but he spoke to his wife with anabsent manner, kissed Eugenie, and sat down to table without appearingto remember his threats of the night before.

°°°°"What has become of my nephew? The lad gives no trouble.""Monsieur, he is asleep," answered Nanon.

°°°°"So much the better; he won't want a wax candle," said Grandet in ajeering tone.

°°°°This unusual clemency, this bitter gaiety, struck Madame Grandet withamazement, and she looked at her husband attentively. The goodman--here it may be well to explain that in Touraine, Anjou, Pitou, andBretagne the word "goodman," already used to designate Grandet, isbestowed as often upon harsh and cruel men as upon those of kindlytemperament, when either have reached a certain age; the title meansnothing on the score of individual gentleness--the goodman took hishat and gloves, saying as he went out,--

°°°°"I am going to loiter about the market-place and find Cruchot.""Eugenie, your father certainly has something on his mind."Grandet, who was a poor sleeper, employed half his nights in thepreliminary calculations which gave such astonishing accuracy to hisviews and observations and schemes, and secured to them the unfailingsuccess at sight of which his townsmen stood amazed. All human poweris a compound of time and patience. Powerful beings will and wait. Thelife of a miser is the constant exercise of human power put to theservice of self. It rests on two sentiments only,--self-love and self-interest; but self-interest being to a certain extent compact andintelligent self-love, the visible sign of real superiority, itfollows that self-love and self-interest are two parts of the samewhole,--egotism. From this arises, perhaps, the excessive curiosityshown in the habits of a miser's life whenever they are put before theworld. Every nature holds by a thread to those beings who challengeall human sentiments by concentrating all in one passion. Where is theman without desire? and what social desire can be satisfied withoutmoney?

°°°°Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

°°°°In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

°°°°"My cousin!"

°°°°"Yes, cousin."

°°°°"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

°°°°"Where you like."

°°°°"How do you feel?"

°°°°"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

°°°°This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

°°°°She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

°°°°That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

°°°°"What troubles you?" she said.

°°°°"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

°°°°Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

°°°°When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

°°°°"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

°°°°"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

°°°°Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

°°°°"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

°°°°"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

°°°°The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

°°°°"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

°°°°Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

°°°°"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

°°°°"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

°°°°*****

°°°°About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

°°°°VII

°°°°At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

°°°°The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

°°°°"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

°°°°"Certainly, nephew."

°°°°As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

°°°°He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

°°°°"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

°°°°"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

°°°°"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

°°°°"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

°°°°"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

°°°°"--is threatened with insolvency--"

°°°°"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

°°°°"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

°°°°"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

°°°°"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

°°°°"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

°°°°"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

°°°°"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

°°°°"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

°°°°"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

°°°°"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

°°°°Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

°°°°"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

°°°°"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

°°°°"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

°°°°"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Exactly so," said the president.

°°°°"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

°°°°"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

°°°°"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

°°°°"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

°°°°"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

°°°°"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

°°°°"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

°°°°"Bentham, an Englishman.'

°°°°"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

°°°°"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

°°°°"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

°°°°"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

°°°°"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

°°°°"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

°°°°"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

°°°°"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

°°°°"That's very true."

°°°°"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

°°°°"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

°°°°"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

°°°°"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

°°°°A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

°°°°"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

°°°°He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

°°°°"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

°°°°"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

°°°°These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

°°°°"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

°°°°"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

°°°°The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

°°°°"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

°°°°She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

°°°°"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

°°°°"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

°°°°"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

°°°°"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

°°°°"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

°°°°"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

°°°°"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

°°°°"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

°°°°"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

°°°°The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

°°°°"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

°°°°"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

°°°°"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

°°°°When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

°°°°"Are not they fuming, hein?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

°°°°"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

°°°°In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

°°°°When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

°°°°"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

°°°°So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

°°°°"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

°°°°Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

°°°°"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

°°°°"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

°°°°The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

°°°°"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

°°°°"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

°°°°"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

°°°°"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

°°°°"I didn't know where."

°°°°"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

°°°°"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

°°°°"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

°°°°"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

°°°°The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

°°°°VIII

°°°°"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

°°°°"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

°°°°"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

°°°°"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

°°°°These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

°°°°She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

°°°°"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

°°°°My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

°°°°great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

°°°°foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

°°°°fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

°°°°when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

°°°°yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

°°°°plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

°°°°If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

°°°°that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

°°°°fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

°°°°my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

°°°°me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

°°°°so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

°°°°the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

°°°°bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

°°°°killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

°°°°there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

°°°°ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

°°°°I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

°°°°last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

°°°°enterprise.

°°°°"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

°°°°She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

°°°°I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

°°°°hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

°°°°not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

°°°°even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

°°°°have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

°°°°to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

°°°°world like other men who have started young without a sou and

°°°°brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

°°°°faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

°°°°another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

°°°°so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

°°°°my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

°°°°life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

°°°°Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

°°°°young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

°°°°caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

°°°°family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

°°°°were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

°°°°Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

°°°°grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

°°°°with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

°°°°your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

°°°°expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

°°°°accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

°°°°Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

°°°°When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

°°°°ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

°°°°hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

°°°°your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

°°°°spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

°°°°cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

°°°°ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

°°°°depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

°°°°of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

°°°°poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

°°°°see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

°°°°life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

°°°°can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

°°°°necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

°°°°have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

°°°°face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

°°°°seems to me--

°°°°"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

°°°°Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

°°°°Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

°°°°"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

°°°°Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

°°°°Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

°°°°My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

°°°°friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

°°°°of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

°°°°settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

°°°°can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

°°°°have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

°°°°have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

°°°°and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

°°°°can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

°°°°horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

°°°°keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

°°°°the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

°°°°will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

°°°°these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

°°°°nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

°°°°give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

°°°°his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

°°°°travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

°°°°them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

°°°°do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

°°°°seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

°°°°British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

°°°°pay him--

°°°°"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

°°°°Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

°°°°"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

°°°°"I have read those letters."

°°°°Charles colored.

°°°°"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

°°°°"And what?" asked Charles.

°°°°"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

°°°°"My dear cousin--"

°°°°"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

°°°°Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

°°°°"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

°°°°Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

°°°°As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

°°°°"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

°°°°Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

°°°°"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

°°°°"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

°°°°"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

°°°°"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

°°°°Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

°°°°"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

°°°°"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

°°°°"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

°°°°"But he owns Froidfond."

°°°°"What is Froidfond worth?"

°°°°"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

°°°°"Nothing but a poor farm!"

°°°°"He has vineyards and fields."

°°°°"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

°°°°"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

°°°°Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

°°°°Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

°°°°It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

°°°°"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

°°°°"Nothing," answered the old man.

°°°°Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

°°°°"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

°°°°"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

°°°°"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

°°°°"Say /was/ worth--"

°°°°"Where the devil have they got any?"

°°°°"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

°°°°"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

°°°°"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

°°°°"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

°°°°"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

°°°°Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

°°°°"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

°°°°The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

°°°°"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

°°°°Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

°°°°"Dans les gardes francaises

°°°°J'avais un bon papa."

°°°°Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

°°°°"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

°°°°He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

°°°°"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

°°°°"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

°°°°"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

°°°°"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

°°°°IX

°°°°The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

°°°°For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

°°°°After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

°°°°Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

°°°°"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

°°°°"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

°°°°"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

°°°°"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

°°°°"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

°°°°"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

°°°°"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

°°°°"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

°°°°"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

°°°°"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

°°°°The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

°°°°"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

°°°°Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

°°°°"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

°°°°He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

°°°°"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

°°°°"I must," he said, bowing his head.

°°°°For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

°°°°"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

°°°°"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

°°°°When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

°°°°"Do you love me?" she said.

°°°°"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

°°°°"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

°°°°She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

°°°°"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

°°°°"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

°°°°The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

°°°°"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

°°°°"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

°°°°"Then my heart will be always there."

°°°°"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

°°°°No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

°°°°"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

°°°°At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

°°°°"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

°°°°"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

°°°°"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

°°°°Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

°°°°Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

°°°°"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

°°°°Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

°°°°In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

°°°°Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

°°°°In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

°°°°"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

°°°°Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

°°°°"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

°°°°"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

°°°°The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

°°°°But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

°°°°As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

°°°°"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

°°°°"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

°°°°"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

°°°°In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

°°°°*****

°°°°In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

°°°°"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

°°°°Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

°°°°"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

°°°°X

°°°°Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

°°°°"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

°°°°The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

°°°°"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

°°°°"Where could we have got the money?"

°°°°"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

°°°°"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

°°°°Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

°°°°"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

°°°°There was a moment's silence.

°°°°"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

°°°°"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

°°°°"I'm always gay,--

°°°°"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

°°°°Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

°°°°he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

°°°°Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

°°°°"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

°°°°The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

°°°°When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

°°°°"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

°°°°"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

°°°°"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

°°°°"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

°°°°"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

°°°°"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur."

°°°°"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

°°°°"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

°°°°Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

°°°°"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

°°°°"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

°°°°"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

°°°°"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

°°°°The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

°°°°"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

°°°°At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

°°°°"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

°°°°"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

°°°°The two women were dumb.

°°°°"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

°°°°Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

°°°°"I have not got /my/ gold."

°°°°"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

°°°°"No, I have not got it."

°°°°"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

°°°°"No."

°°°°"By the shears of my father!"

°°°°Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

°°°°"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

°°°°Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

°°°°"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

°°°°Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

°°°°"Yes, father."

°°°°She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

°°°°"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

°°°°"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

°°°°Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

°°°°"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

°°°°"What use?"

°°°°"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

°°°°"And this is mine."

°°°°"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

°°°°"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

°°°°"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

°°°°She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

°°°°"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

°°°°Eugenie was silent and impassive.

°°°°"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

°°°°"You are a child."

°°°°"Of age."

°°°°Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

°°°°He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

°°°°Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

°°°°"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

°°°°Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

°°°°"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

°°°°"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

°°°°"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

°°°°"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

°°°°Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

°°°°"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

°°°°"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

°°°°"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

°°°°"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

°°°°"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

°°°°"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

°°°°He looked fixedly at his wife.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

°°°°"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

°°°°"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

°°°°"I will ask God to punish only me."

°°°°"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

°°°°"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

°°°°"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

°°°°"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

°°°°*****

°°°°Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

°°°°"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

°°°°"It is grease I'm trying out."

°°°°"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

°°°°The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

°°°°"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

°°°°At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

°°°°"How is Madame Grandet?"

°°°°"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

°°°°"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

°°°°They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

°°°°"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

°°°°When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

°°°°"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

°°°°"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

°°°°XI

°°°°For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

°°°°"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

°°°°"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

°°°°Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

°°°°One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

°°°°"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

°°°°"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

°°°°"All" meant "him."

°°°°"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

°°°°"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

°°°°Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

°°°°"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

°°°°Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

°°°°When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

°°°°"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

°°°°At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

°°°°"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

°°°°"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

°°°°"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

°°°°On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

°°°°"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

°°°°"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

°°°°"What do you mean?"

°°°°"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

°°°°"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

°°°°These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

°°°°"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

°°°°"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

°°°°"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

°°°°"She has given away her gold!"

°°°°"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

°°°°"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

°°°°"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

°°°°"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

°°°°"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

°°°°"How much?"

°°°°"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

°°°°"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

°°°°After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

°°°°"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

°°°°"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

°°°°"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

°°°°"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

°°°°"She has not a month to live."

°°°°Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

°°°°"What can be done?"

°°°°"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

°°°°"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

°°°°"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

°°°°"The scoundrels!"

°°°°"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

°°°°"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

°°°°He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

°°°°"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

°°°°"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

°°°°But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

°°°°"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

°°°°He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

°°°°"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

°°°°"O God, have pity upon us!"

°°°°The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

°°°°"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

°°°°Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

°°°°"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

°°°°"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

°°°°"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

°°°°"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

°°°°"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

°°°°Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

°°°°"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

°°°°"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

°°°°The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

°°°°"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

°°°°"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

°°°°"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

°°°°Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

°°°°"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

°°°°Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

°°°°"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

°°°°"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

°°°°"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

°°°°"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

°°°°XII

°°°°On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

°°°°"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

°°°°"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

°°°°"Oh! father--"

°°°°"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

°°°°"What is it you wish me to do?"

°°°°"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

°°°°"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

°°°°"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

°°°°"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

°°°°"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

°°°°Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

°°°°"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

°°°°"I will do all you wish, father."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

°°°°"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

°°°°He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

°°°°"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

°°°°The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

°°°°"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

°°°°"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

°°°°"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

°°°°Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

°°°°*****

°°°°Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

°°°°At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

°°°°"Yes, my father," she would answer.

°°°°"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

°°°°Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

°°°°"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

°°°°When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

°°°°"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

°°°°"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

°°°°*****

°°°°Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

°°°°"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

°°°°The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

°°°°"Nanon, we are alone--"

°°°°"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

°°°°"The ocean is between us," she said.

°°°°While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

°°°°"Fast colors!" said the draper.

°°°°"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

°°°°"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

°°°°When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

°°°°At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

°°°°It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

°°°°"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

°°°°"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

°°°°"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

°°°°"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

°°°°Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

°°°°Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

°°°°"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

°°°°"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

°°°°XIII

°°°°While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

°°°°With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

°°°°Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

°°°°Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

°°°°"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

°°°°Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

°°°°Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

°°°°"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

°°°°*****

°°°°At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

°°°°"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

°°°°The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

°°°°"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

°°°°Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

°°°°"Read it, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

°°°°Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

°°°°My dear Cousin,--

°°°°"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

°°°°You--

°°°°"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

°°°°"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

°°°°"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

°°°°She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

°°°°My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

°°°°success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

°°°°rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

°°°°together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

°°°°des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

°°°°we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

°°°°Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

°°°°the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

°°°°be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

°°°°life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

°°°°To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

°°°°dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

°°°°realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

°°°°from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

°°°°forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

°°°°long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

°°°°Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

°°°°--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

°°°°forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

°°°°night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

°°°°to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

°°°°heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

°°°°Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

°°°°sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

°°°°deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

°°°°all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

°°°°present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

°°°°all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

°°°°Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

°°°°your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

°°°°will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

°°°°education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

°°°°with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

°°°°myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

°°°°to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

°°°°think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

°°°°be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

°°°°right to understand it and to judge it.

°°°°I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

°°°°francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

°°°°Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

°°°°me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

°°°°Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

°°°°dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

°°°°marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

°°°°advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

°°°°are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

°°°°my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

°°°°have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

°°°°year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

°°°°proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

°°°°You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

°°°°heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

°°°°years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

°°°°but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

°°°°remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

°°°°which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

°°°°and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

°°°°you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

°°°°convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

°°°°putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

°°°°of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

°°°°ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

°°°°simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

°°°°Your devoted cousin,

°°°°Charles.

°°°°"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

°°°°P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

°°°°thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

°°°°capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

°°°°am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

°°°°which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

°°°°gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

°°°°hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

°°°°"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

°°°°Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

°°°°"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

°°°°Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

°°°°This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

°°°°"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

°°°°"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

°°°°"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

°°°°"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

°°°°"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

°°°°At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

°°°°"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

°°°°"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

°°°°"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

°°°°"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

°°°°Eugenie read the following letter:--

°°°°My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

°°°°has been in Paris about a month--

°°°°"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

°°°°I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

°°°°Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

°°°°the banns are published--

°°°°"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

°°°°The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

°°°°will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

°°°°tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

°°°°business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

°°°°keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

°°°°fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

°°°°devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

°°°°/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

°°°°the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

°°°°francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

°°°°there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

°°°°creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

°°°°I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

°°°°Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

°°°°Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

°°°°for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

°°°°have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

°°°°happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

°°°°matter before you have spoken to her about it--

°°°°There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

°°°°"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

°°°°"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

°°°°"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

°°°°"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

°°°°"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

°°°°The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

°°°°"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

°°°°There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

°°°°"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

°°°°"A love game," said the notary.

°°°°Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

°°°°"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

°°°°"I am ready for all things," said the president.

°°°°"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

°°°°The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

°°°°"I will be your slave!" he said.

°°°°"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

°°°°The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

°°°°When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

°°°°The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

°°°°The president gave Charles the following letter:--

°°°°My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

°°°°place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

°°°°also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

°°°°sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

°°°°I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

°°°°Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

°°°°mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

°°°°I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

°°°°not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

°°°°according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

°°°°our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

°°°°your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

°°°°in your cousin

°°°°Eugenie.

°°°°The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

°°°°"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

°°°°"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

°°°°Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

°°°°"Seventeen mil--"

°°°°"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

°°°°"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

°°°°"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

°°°°"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

°°°°"In money?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

°°°°"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

°°°°"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

°°°°The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

°°°°"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

°°°°The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

°°°°"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

°°°°"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

°°°°Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

°°°°God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

°°°°The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

°°°°Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

°°°°End





°°°°Colonel Chabert

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage and Clara Bell

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Madame la Comtesse Ida de Bocarme nee du Chasteler.

°°°°COLONEL CHABERT

°°°°"HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!"

°°°°This exclamation was made by a lawyer's clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper--a messenger in fact--who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread with a hearty appetite. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

°°°°"Come, Simonnin, don't play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!" said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

°°°°The lawyer's messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and /billets-doux/ keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

°°°°"If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?" asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

°°°°And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

°°°°"What trick can we play that cove?" said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

°°°°Then he went on improvising:

°°°°"/But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth/--(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned-- you, as you engross it!)--/when he resumed the reins of Government, understood/--(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)--/the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!/--(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)--/and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents/--('numerous' is flattering, and ought to please the Bench)--/all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in/--Stop," said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, "that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.--Well," he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, "well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!"

°°°°And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating--"/given in/--Are you ready?"

°°°°"Yes," cried the three writers.

°°°°It all went all together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

°°°°"/Given in/--Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our /i/'s and cross our /t/'s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages."

°°°°"By Jingo!" repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

°°°°"What! have you written /by Jingo/?" cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

°°°°"Why, yes," said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor's copy, "he has written, '/We must dot our i's/' and spelt it /by Gingo/!"

°°°°All the clerks shouted with laughter.

°°°°"Why! Monsieur Hure, you take 'By Jingo' for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!" exclaimed Simonnin.

°°°°"Scratch it cleanly out," said the head clerk. "If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the 'Shoulder arms!' of the law."

°°°°"/Given in--in/?" asked Godeschal.--"Tell me when, Boucard."

°°°°"June 1814," replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

°°°°A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, "Come in!"

°°°°Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers--/broutilles/ (odds and ends) in French law jargon--and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

°°°°The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk's cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk's table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

°°°°The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,--all the glory of a lawyer's office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine --neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of /remainders/, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to /Chlet/)--a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

°°°°So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients--something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities--an attorney's office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

°°°°But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man's soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

°°°°"Where is my penknife?"

°°°°"I am eating my breakfast."

°°°°"You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen!"

°°°°These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

°°°°"Monsieur, is your master at home?"

°°°°The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, "I am deaf."

°°°°"What do you want, sir?" asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

°°°°"This is the fifth time I have called," replied the victim. "I wish to speak to M. Derville."

°°°°"On business?"

°°°°"Yes, but I can explain it to no one but--"

°°°°"M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to----"

°°°°The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers' clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the old man, "as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up."

°°°°Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

°°°°"It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning." The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in "parties," went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

°°°°"I will come again to-night," said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

°°°°The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

°°°°"What do you think of that for a cracked pot?" said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

°°°°"He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again," said a clerk.

°°°°"He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay," said the head clerk.

°°°°"No, he is a retired concierge," said Godeschal.

°°°°"I bet you he is a nobleman," cried Boucard.

°°°°"I bet you he has been a porter," retorted Godeschal. "Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body's. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch."

°°°°"He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch," cried Desroches. "It has been known!"

°°°°"No," Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, "I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic."

°°°°"I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Done with you," answered Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur! Monsieur!" shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

°°°°"What are you at now, Simonnin?" asked Boucard.

°°°°"I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know."

°°°°All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

°°°°"What can we say to him?" cried Godeschal.

°°°°"Leave it to me," replied Boucard.

°°°°The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Boucard, "will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know----"

°°°°"Chabert."

°°°°"The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?" asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

°°°°"The same, monsieur," replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

°°°°"Whew!"

°°°°"Done brown!"

°°°°"Poof!"

°°°°"Oh!"

°°°°"Ah!"

°°°°"Boum!"

°°°°"The old rogue!"

°°°°"Ting-a-ring-ting!"

°°°°"Sold again!"

°°°°"Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying," said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

°°°°There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopeia of the language would fail to represent.

°°°°"Which theatre shall we go to?"

°°°°"To the opera," cried the head clerk.

°°°°"In the first place," said Godeschal, "I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui."

°°°°"Madame Saqui is not the play."

°°°°"What is a play?" replied Godeschal. "First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen--"

°°°°"But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!" cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

°°°°"To be seen for money," Godeschal added.

°°°°"But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective," said Desroches.

°°°°"But do listen to me!"

°°°°"You are talking nonsense, my dear boy," said Boucard.

°°°°"Is Curtius' a play?" said Godeschal.

°°°°"No," said the head clerk, "it is a collection of figures--but it is a spectacle."

°°°°"I bet you a hundred francs to a sou," Godeschal resumed, "that Curtius' Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy."

°°°°"And so on, and so forth!" said Simonnin.

°°°°"You mind I don't box your ears!" said Godeschal.

°°°°The clerk shrugged their shoulders.

°°°°"Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us," he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. "On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients."

°°°°"Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow," said Boucard. "To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!"

°°°°"If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?" said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal's.

°°°°"Since nothing is settled," said Boucard, "let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in 'Nero.' Simonnin may go to the pit."

°°°°And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

°°°°"/Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen/ (in words)," said Godeschal. "Ready?"

°°°°"Yes," replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

°°°°"/And we hope that my lords on the Bench/," the extemporizing clerk went on. "Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself."

°°°°"Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines," said Boucard.

°°°°"/We hope/," Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, "/that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth/----"

°°°°"Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn't you like a glass of water?" said the little messenger.

°°°°"That imp of a boy!" said Boucard. "Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides."

°°°°"/Here set forth/," Godeschal went on. "Add /in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse/ (at full length) /de Grandlieu/."

°°°°"What!" cried the chief, "are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor--a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of 'inasmuch,' and go to the Courts myself."

°°°°This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, "Those were good times."

°°°°At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maitre Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

°°°°Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at finding the head clerk busily arranging in a convenient order on his master's dining-room table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take a seat, which the client did.

°°°°"On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you named such an hour for an interview," said the old man, with the forced mirth of a ruined man, who does his best to smile.

°°°°"The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too," replied the man, going on with his work. "M. Derville chooses this hour for studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect is freer at this hour--the only time when he can have the silence and quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case, read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business, then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money."

°°°°As he listened to this explanation, the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an expression so bereft of intelligence, that the clerk, after looking at him, thought no more about him.

°°°°A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers. The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius' collection to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This quiescence would not have been a subject for astonishment if it had not completed the supernatural aspect of the man's whole person. The old soldier was dry and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, if I may use such a vulgar expression, was as the face of the dead. Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

°°°°Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head was due to some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by Rembrandt, without a frame. The brim of the hat which covered the old man's brow cast a black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This grotesque effect, though natural, threw into relief by contrast the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a certain look of melancholy madness, and the deteriorating symptoms characteristic of senility, giving the face an indescribably ill- starred look which no human words could render.

°°°°But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had worn into this face, as drops of water from the sky falling on fine marble at last destroy its beauty. A physician, an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama at the sight of its sublime horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques which artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of the lithographic stone while chatting with a friend.

°°°°On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful reverie in silence and at night. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow to the young man; the leather lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was, "His intelligence must have escaped through that cut."

°°°°"If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!" thought Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Derville, "to whom have I the honor of speaking?"

°°°°"To Colonel Chabert."

°°°°"Which?"

°°°°"He who was killed at Eylau," replied the old man.

°°°°On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each other, as much as to say, "He is mad."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Colonel went on, "I wish to confide to you the secret of my position."

°°°°A thing worthy of note is the natural intrepidity of lawyers. Whether from the habit of receiving a great many persons, or from the deep sense of the protection conferred on them by the law, or from confidence in their missions, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing, like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

°°°°"During the day, sir," said the attorney, "I am not so miserly of my time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise. Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I may consider necessary. Speak."

°°°°Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he turned over the bundles of papers.

°°°°"You know, perhaps," said the dead man, "that I commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat's famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is a historical fact, recorded in /Victoires et Conquetes/, where it is related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor, after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the enemy's cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers, perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse. Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men, fifteen hundred of them--there might have been more! My death was announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution --for he was fond of me, was the master--wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and bring me into Hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, for he was very busy, 'Go and see whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.' These rascally saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse, and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was probably made out in accordance with the rules of military jurisprudence."

°°°°As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and relate a story so probable though so strange, the young lawyer ceased fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

°°°°"Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud," he said, interrupting the speaker, "Colonel Chabert's widow?"

°°°°"My wife--yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the custom in time of the war, and thrown into the common grave by the men ordered to bury the dead?

°°°°"Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded. Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a ball.

°°°°"When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. the little air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room. I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die. This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard--or I thought I heard, I will assert nothing--groans from the world of dead among whom I was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very indistinct, in spite of my impressions of far more acute suffering I was fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

°°°°"But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such as I have never known elsewhere--literally, the silence of the grave. At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would seem that, thanks to the carelessness and the haste with which we had been pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules! A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unhoped-for help, I must have perished. But with a fury you may imagine, I began to work my way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which had no doubt been thrown over us--I say us, as if there had been others living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms. This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw daylight, but through snow!

°°°°"At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse, who knows, had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow. However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole, where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the moment for saying, 'Respect courage in misfortune!' In short, monsieur, after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy, of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them they got me to their poor hovel.

°°°°"It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy--allow me to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which, from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

°°°°"You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave as naked as I came from my mother's; so that six months afterwards, when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert, and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man, named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

°°°°"Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence, nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond, begging my bread, treated as a madman when I have told my story, without ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert. For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample reason for shutting a man up.

°°°°"At the end of two years' detention, which I was compelled to submit to, after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, 'Here is a poor man who thinks he is Colonel Chabert' to people who would reply, 'Poor fellow!' I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh, monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I----"

°°°°Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study, which Derville respected.

°°°°"One fine day," his visitor resumed, "one spring day, they gave me the key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me. If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name, no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field- Marshal in Austria or Russia. Who knows?"

°°°°"Monsieur," said the attorney, "you have upset all my ideas. I feel as if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you."

°°°°"You are the only person," said the Colonel, with a melancholy look, "who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary documents to begin my lawsuit--"

°°°°"What lawsuit?" said the attorney, who had forgotten his client's painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

°°°°"Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a son. When I tell lawyers these things--men of sense; when I propose-- I, a beggar--to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I--a dead man--bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold politeness, which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler or a madman--it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts, under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!"

°°°°"Pray resume your narrative," said Derville.

°°°°" 'Pray resume it!' " cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer's hand. "That is the first polite word I have heard since----"

°°°°The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing and unutterable eloquence that lies in the eyes, in a gesture, even in silence, entirely convinced Derville, and touched him deeply.

°°°°"Listen, monsieur," said he; "I have this evening won three hundred francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his fortune to make. Proceed."

°°°°The Colonel, as he called himself, sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps it was in obedience to the inexplicable feeling, the latent germ in every man's heart, to which we owe the experiments of alchemists, the passion for glory, the discoveries of astronomy and of physics, everything which prompts man to expand his being by multiplying himself through deeds or ideas. In his mind the /Ego/ was now but a secondary object, just as the vanity of success or the pleasures of winning become dearer to the gambler than the object he has at stake. The young lawyer's words were as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer's office the ten gold pieces which had so long been refused him by so many people, and in so many ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured. There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us, it is like a thunderbolt; they burn us. The poor man's gratitude was too great to find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found his voice.

°°°°"Where was I?" said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier, and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in France.

°°°°"At Stuttgart. You were out of prison," said Derville.

°°°°"You know my wife?" asked the Colonel.

°°°°"Yes," said Derville, with a bow.

°°°°"What is she like?"

°°°°"Still quite charming."

°°°°The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation that is characteristic of men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, with a sort of cheerfulness--for he breathed again, the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave; he had just melted a covering of snow less easily thawed than that which had once before frozen his head; and he drew a deep breath, as if he had just escaped from a dungeon--"Monsieur, if I had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a /sans-culotte/. I was more like an Esquimaux than a Frenchman--I, who had formerly been considered one of the smartest of fops in 1799!--I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

°°°°"Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier's name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; but though I recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin's mouth opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known. It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was, then, unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former friends!

°°°°"I had once saved Boutin's life, but it was only the repayment of a debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but, like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I recalled them to his mind his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me, were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered triumphantly.

°°°°"He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon's first abdication. That news was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

°°°°"We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland, Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies. Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert. That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage, whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose only protector is the Almighty.--Nay, I am wrong! I had a father--the Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see /his Chabert/, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my wife's silence!

°°°°"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar. Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me. I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

°°°°"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu. There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me! Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

°°°°"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur, knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury, "when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

°°°°"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness; well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not know what will become of me!"

°°°°With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

°°°°"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg, it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

°°°°"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I fail, I can die--but not alone."

°°°°The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy, lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

°°°°"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

°°°°"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

°°°°"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to recover; you are rich."

°°°°This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

°°°°"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

°°°°The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville, and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

°°°°"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

°°°°The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs, and held a light for him.

°°°°"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the day."

°°°°When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

°°°°"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.

°°°°About three months after this interview, at night, in Derville's room, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville's account to his eccentric client, came to consult the attorney on a serious matter, and began by begging him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

°°°°"Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?" said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought up the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

°°°°"I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair," replied Derville. "My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty- five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism."

°°°°As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers his head clerk had laid out for him. His eye was struck by the appearance of the stamps--long, square, and triangular, in red and blue ink, which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

°°°°"Ah ha!" said he with a laugh, "here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!"

°°°°He took up the letter and opened it; but he could not read it; it was written in German.

°°°°"Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately," said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

°°°°The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, all perfectly regular and duly witnessed, and legally stamped to serve as evidence in law. He also informed him that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

°°°°"This looks like business," cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. "But look here, my boy," he went on, addressing the notary, "I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?"

°°°°"We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin," interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

°°°°"Well, was it not that ill-used man who has just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients' money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert's estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud."

°°°°"Yes," said Crottat. "It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollections, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at the time of his decease, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury."

°°°°"So that Comte Chabert's personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?"

°°°°"Consequently so it was, old fellow!" said Crottat. "You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other."

°°°°Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint- Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were rather too deep for cab wheels. Looking about him on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, "Vergniaud, dairyman." To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, all painted in white. The gate was open, and no doubt remained open all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels built in the neighborhood of Paris, which are like nothing else, not even the most wretched dwellings in the country, of which they have all the poverty without their poetry.

°°°°Indeed, in the midst of the fields, even a hovel may have a certain grace derived from the pure air, the verdure, the open country--a hill, a serpentine road, vineyards, quickset hedges, moss-grown thatch and rural implements; but poverty in Paris gains dignity only by horror. Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found a legitimate use; they had been collected from the various demolitions which are going on every day in Paris. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, "Fancy Goods." The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed to be the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil, and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall of this frail construction, which seemed rather more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred their numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes, the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough deal boards nailed so as to overlap, and shabbily thatched with rushes.

°°°°Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of the necessity for being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags that were used to clean them, fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat was munching the shoots of a starved and dusty vine that clung to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, was licking them over. The fowls, scared by Derville's approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

°°°°"And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!" said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the general effect of the squalid scene.

°°°°The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, in the hope that they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole thing tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither of them replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity, if I may combine those two words. Derville repeated his questions, but without success. Provoked by the saucy cunning of these three imps, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry which young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

°°°°The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold of his doorway with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely- colored pipe--a technical phrase to a smoker--a humble, short clay pipe of the kind called "/brule-queule/." He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join his benefactor the sooner, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

°°°°"Silence in the ranks!"

°°°°The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

°°°°"Why did you not write to me?" he said to Derville. "Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there," he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer's hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

°°°°Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; and, in fact, Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel's bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread two or three of those old fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating salt-petre, green with mould, and full of cracks, were so excessively damp that on the side where the Colonel's bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the /Bulletins de la Grande Armee/, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel's reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit to Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived in them traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

°°°°"Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?" he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

°°°°"But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!"

°°°°The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the deplorable experience which they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

°°°°"Here," said he to himself, "is a man who has of course spent my money in satisfying a trooper's three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!"

°°°°"To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----" And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--"I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace."

°°°°Derville reflected that there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums of money he had advanced, so he merely said:

°°°°"But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, but where you would have been better lodged?"

°°°°"Why," replied the Colonel, "the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me /gratis/ for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old /Egyptian/--"

°°°°"An Egyptian!"

°°°°"We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read."

°°°°"He might have lodged you better for your money," said Derville.

°°°°"Bah!" said the Colonel, "his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune . . . However, it does very well."

°°°°"Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!"

°°°°"Curse the money! To think I haven't got any!" he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

°°°°Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

°°°°"Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business," said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

°°°°"To me," said the soldier, "it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau."

°°°°"Things are not done so in the legal world," said Derville. "Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing that justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

°°°°"In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets."

°°°°"And my fortune?"

°°°°"Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?"

°°°°"Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?"

°°°°"My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs."

°°°°"And you call that justice!" said the Colonel, in dismay.

°°°°"Why, certainly--"

°°°°"A pretty kind of justice!"

°°°°"So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, that what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor."

°°°°"But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----"

°°°°"I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to."

°°°°"That would be to sell my wife!"

°°°°"With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in the position in which you are, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice."

°°°°"Let us go together."

°°°°"What, just as you are?" said the lawyer. "No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot."

°°°°"Can I possibly gain it?"

°°°°"On every count," replied Derville. "But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor."

°°°°"To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that," said he simply.

°°°°"Well, until then," Derville went on, "will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it."

°°°°Large tears gathered in the poor veteran's faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

°°°°"I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!" he cried. "I will call out: 'I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!'--The statue--he--he will know me."

°°°°"And you will find yourself in Charenton."

°°°°At this terrible name the soldier's transports collapsed.

°°°°"And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?"

°°°°"The war office!" said Derville. "Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire."

°°°°The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

°°°°His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements, which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

°°°°Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

°°°°"Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests."

°°°°"Do what you will," said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death."

°°°°"Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?"

°°°°"That is not my view of it," said the lawyer. "We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud's intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension."

°°°°"Well, proceed then," said Chabert. "I put myself entirely in your hands."

°°°°"I will send you a power of attorney to sign," said Derville. "Good- bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me."

°°°°Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer's hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him excepting with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

°°°°During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer's; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir," said he, taking Derville by the arm, "if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General's."

°°°°"And what then?" replied Derville. "What concern have you with him?-- But who are you?" said the cautious lawyer.

°°°°"I am Louis Vergniaud," he replied at once. "I have a few words to say to you."

°°°°"So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?"

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think? --Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it's neighbors' fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings."

°°°°"He?"

°°°°"Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, 'Really, General----' 'Bah!' says he, 'I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.'--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados-- Do you know him, sir?"

°°°°"But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you."

°°°°"He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it's just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----"

°°°°Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

°°°°"On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!" thought he.

°°°°"All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure."

°°°°"And will that be soon?"

°°°°"Why, yes."

°°°°"Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!" and the cowkeeper's tanned face seemed to expand.

°°°°"Now," said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, "let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but . . ."

°°°°And he set to work to study the Countess' position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves up when concocting their own plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

°°°°But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer's cleverness.

°°°°Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old /Parlement/ of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon's blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor's advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised the restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

°°°°The Emperor fell.

°°°°At the time of Comte Chabert's death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband's fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving of this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband's will; but Napoleon's hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count's marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

°°°°Then came the Restoration. The Count's political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the "Gulf of Revolution should be closed"--for this phrase of the King's, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer's preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

°°°°Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master's influence, and he made the Count's fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness of which most women have a share more or less, understood the man's motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well, that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

°°°°The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess' abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress' capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on the housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess' greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

°°°°At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert's widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

°°°°A speech he made, /a propos/ of Talleyrand's marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess' heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband's return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

°°°°"There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud's position," said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. "How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the /pairie/ by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the /Parlement/ is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King's great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess," thought he as he went up the steps.

°°°°Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

°°°°She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, while playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert's wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

°°°°"The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them."

°°°°A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

°°°°"Good-morning, Monsieur Derville," said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

°°°°"Madame," said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. "I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter."

°°°°"I am so /grieved/, M. le Comte is away--"

°°°°"I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count."

°°°°"Then I will send for Delbecq," said she.

°°°°"He would be of no use to you, clever as he is," replied Derville. "Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!"

°°°°"Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?" said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

°°°°"Madame," he said with cold and piercing solemnity, "you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point."

°°°°"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

°°°°"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

°°°°"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come."

°°°°"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

°°°°"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--"

°°°°"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

°°°°"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----"

°°°°The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's attorney, be so good as to--"

°°°°"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening."

°°°°"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

°°°°"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

°°°°"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

°°°°"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you."

°°°°"And who is he?"

°°°°"Comte Ferraud."

°°°°"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--"

°°°°"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--"

°°°°"He would defend me, monsieur."

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

°°°°"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

°°°°The Countess turned pale.

°°°°"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

°°°°"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?"

°°°°"Compromise!" said Derville.

°°°°"Does he still love me?" she said.

°°°°"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

°°°°The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

°°°°"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.

°°°°A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and seemed to have acquired youth and /impasto/, to borrow a picturesque word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture and a book.

°°°°When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville's office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off, when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a dress which, though simple, was cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was. She wore a pretty drawn bonnet lined with pink, which framed her face to perfection, softening its outlines and making it look younger.

°°°°If the clients were rejuvenescent, the office was unaltered, and presented the same picture as that described at the beginning of this story. Simonnin was eating his breakfast, his shoulder leaning against the window, which was then open, and he was staring up at the blue sky in the opening of the courtyard enclosed by four gloomy houses.

°°°°"Ah, ha!" cried the little clerk, "who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?"

°°°°"The chief is a great magician," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Then there is no trick to play on him this time?" asked Desroches.

°°°°"His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud," said Boucard.

°°°°"What next?" said Godeschal. "Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?"

°°°°"Here she is," answered Simonnin.

°°°°"So you are not deaf, you young rogue!" said Chabert, taking the gutter-jumper by the ear and twisting it, to the delight of the other clerks, who began to laugh, looking at the Colonel with the curious attention due to so singular a personage.

°°°°Comte Chabert was in Derville's private room at the moment when his wife came in by the door of the office.

°°°°"I say, Boucard, there is going to be a queer scene in the chief's room! There is a woman who can spend her days alternately, the odd with Comte Ferraud, and the even with Comte Chabert."

°°°°"And in leap year," said Godeschal, "they must settle the /count/ between them."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen, you can be heard!" said Boucard severely. "I never was in an office where there was so much jesting as there is here over the clients."

°°°°Derville had made the Colonel retire to the bedroom when the Countess was admitted.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert, I have placed you apart. If, however, you should wish it--"

°°°°"It is an attention for which I am obliged to you."

°°°°"I have drawn up the memorandum of an agreement of which you and M. Chabert can discuss the conditions, here, and now. I will go alternately to him and to you, and explain your views respectively."

°°°°"Let me see, monsieur," said the Countess impatiently.

°°°°Derville read aloud:

°°°°" 'Between the undersigned:

°°°°" 'M. Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, Marechal de Camp, and Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, living in Paris, Rue du Petit-Banquier, on the one part;

°°°°" 'And Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the aforesaid M. le Comte Chabert, /nee/--' "

°°°°"Pass over the preliminaries," said she. "Come to the conditions."

°°°°"Madame," said the lawyer, "the preamble briefly sets forth the position in which you stand to each other. Then, by the first clause, you acknowledge, in the presence of three witnesses, of whom two shall be notaries, and one the dairyman with whom your husband has been lodging, to all of whom your secret is known, and who will be absolutely silent--you acknowledge, I say, that the individual designated in the documents subjoined to the deed, and whose identity is to be further proved by an act of recognition prepared by your notary, Alexandre Crottat, is your first husband, Comte Chabert. By the second clause Comte Chabert, to secure your happiness, will undertake to assert his rights only under certain circumstances set forth in the deed.--And these," said Derville, in a parenthesis, "are none other than a failure to carry out the conditions of this secret agreement.--M. Chabert, on his part, agrees to accept judgment on a friendly suit, by which his certificate of death shall be annulled, and his marriage dissolved."

°°°°"That will not suit me in the least," said the Countess with surprise. "I will be a party to no suit; you know why."

°°°°"By the third clause," Derville went on, with imperturbable coolness, "you pledge yourself to secure to Hyacinthe Comte Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock held in his name, to revert to you at his death--"

°°°°"But it is much too dear!" exclaimed the Countess.

°°°°"Can you compromise the matter cheaper?"

°°°°"Possibly."

°°°°"But what do you want, madame?"

°°°°"I want--I will not have a lawsuit. I want--"

°°°°"You want him to remain dead?" said Derville, interrupting her hastily.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, "if twenty-four thousand francs a year are necessary, we will go to law--"

°°°°"Yes, we will go to law," said the Colonel in a deep voice, as he opened the door and stood before his wife, with one hand in his waistcoat and the other hanging by his side--an attitude to which the recollection of his adventure gave horrible significance.

°°°°"It is he," said the Countess to herself.

°°°°"Too dear!" the old soldier exclaimed. "I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you--you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved--"

°°°°"But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!" cried the Countess, in feigned amazement.

°°°°"Indeed!" said the old man, in a tone of intense irony. "Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais Royal----"

°°°°The Countess turned pale. Seeing her grow white under her rouge, the old soldier paused, touched by the acute suffering he was inflicting on the woman he had once so ardently loved; but she shot such a venomous glance at him that he abruptly went on:

°°°°"You were with La--"

°°°°"Allow me, Monsieur Derville," said the Countess to the lawyer. "You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things."

°°°°She rose and went out. Derville rushed after her; but the Countess had taken wings, and seemed to have flown from the place.

°°°°On returning to his private room, he found the Colonel in a towering rage, striding up and down.

°°°°"In those times a man took his wife where he chose," said he. "But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted to appearances. She has no heart."

°°°°"Well, Colonel, was I not right to beg you not to come?--I am now positive of your identity; when you came in, the Countess gave a little start, of which the meaning was unequivocal. But you have lost your chances. Your wife knows that you are unrecognizable."

°°°°"I will kill her!"

°°°°"Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch. Besides you might miss! That would be unpardonable. A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife.--Let me set things straight; you are only a big child. Go now. Take care of yourself; she is capable of setting some trap for you and shutting you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you against a surprise."

°°°°The unhappy Colonel obeyed his young benefactor, and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly went down the dark staircase, lost in gloomy thoughts, and crushed perhaps by the blow just dealt him--the most cruel he could feel, the thrust that could most deeply pierce his heart--when he heard the rustle of a woman's dress on the lowest landing, and his wife stood before him.

°°°°"Come, monsieur," said she, taking his arm with a gesture like those familiar to him of old. Her action and the accent of her voice, which had recovered its graciousness, were enough to allay the Colonel's wrath, and he allowed himself to be led to the carriage.

°°°°"Well, get in!" said she, when the footman had let down the step.

°°°°And as if by magic, he found himself sitting by his wife in the brougham.

°°°°"Where to?" asked the servant.

°°°°"To Groslay," said she.

°°°°The horses started at once, and carried them all across Paris.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, in a tone of voice which betrayed one of those emotions which are rare in our lives, and which agitate every part of our being. At such moments the heart, fibres, nerves, countenance, soul, and body, everything, every pore even, feels a thrill. Life no longer seems to be within us; it flows out, springs forth, is communicated as if by contagion, transmitted by a look, a tone of voice, a gesture, impressing our will on others. The old soldier started on hearing this single word, this first, terrible "monsieur!" But still it was at once a reproach and a pardon, a hope and a despair, a question and an answer. This word included them all; none but an actress could have thrown so much eloquence, so many feelings into a single word. Truth is less complete in its utterance; it does not put everything on the outside; it allows us to see what is within. The Colonel was filled with remorse for his suspicions, his demands, and his anger; he looked down not to betray his agitation.

°°°°"Monsieur," repeated she, after an imperceptible pause, "I knew you at once."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old soldier, "those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes."

°°°°Two large tears rolled hot on to his wife's hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

°°°°"Monsieur," she went on, "could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false as mine now is? If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in the privacy of my family. Ought not such a secret to remain buried in our hearts? You will forgive me, I hope, for my apparent indifference to the woes of a Chabert in whose existence I could not possibly believe. I received your letters," she hastily added, seeing in his face the objection it expressed, "but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing was unrecognizable; and after obtaining Napoleon's signature to my second marriage contract, I could not help believing that some clever swindler wanted to make a fool of me. Therefore, to avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud's peace of mind, and disturbing family ties, I was obliged to take precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right, I ask you?"

°°°°"Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot, the owl, the dolt, not to have calculated better what the consequences of such a position might be.--But where are we going?" he asked, seeing that they had reached the barrier of La Chapelle.

°°°°"To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There, monsieur, we will consider the steps to be taken. I know my duties. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? We need not inform the public of a situation, which for me has its ridiculous side, and let us preserve our dignity. You still love me," she said, with a sad, sweet gaze at the Colonel, "but have not I been authorized to form other ties? In so strange a position, a secret voice bids me trust to your kindness, which is so well known to me. Can I be wrong in taking you as the sole arbiter of my fate? Be at once judge and party to the suit. I trust in your noble character; you will be generous enough to forgive me for the consequences of faults committed in innocence. I may then confess to you: I love M. Ferraud. I believed that I had a right to love him. I do not blush to make this confession to you; even if it offends you, it does not disgrace us. I cannot conceal the facts. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother."

°°°°The Colonel with a wave of his hand bid his wife be silent, and for a mile and a half they sat without speaking a single word. Chabert could fancy he saw the two little ones before him.

°°°°"Rosine."

°°°°"Monsieur?"

°°°°"The dead are very wrong to come to life again."

°°°°"Oh, monsieur, no, no! Do not think me ungrateful. Only, you find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old man in a softened tone, "I no longer feel any resentment against you. We will forget anything," he added, with one of those smiles which always reflect a noble soul; "I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me."

°°°°The Countess gave him a flashing look full of such deep gratitude that poor Chabert would have been glad to sink again into his grave at Eylau. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion, of which the whole reward consists in the assurance that they have made the person they love happy.

°°°°"My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested," said the Countess.

°°°°The conversation turned to other subjects, for it was impossible to dwell very long on this one. Though the couple came back again and again to their singular position, either by some allusion or of serious purpose, they had a delightful drive, recalling the events of their former life together and the times of the Empire. The Countess knew how to lend peculiar charm to her reminiscences, and gave the conversation the tinge of melancholy that was needed to keep it serious. She revived his love without awakening his desires, and allowed her first husband to discern the mental wealth she had acquired while trying to accustom him to moderate his pleasure to that which a father may feel in the society of a favorite daughter.

°°°°The Colonel had known the Countess of the Empire; he found her a Countess of the Restoration.

°°°°At last, by a cross-road, they arrived at the entrance to a large park lying in the little valley which divides the heights of Margency from the pretty village of Groslay. The Countess had there a delightful house, where the Colonel on arriving found everything in readiness for his stay there, as well as for his wife's. Misfortune is a kind of talisman whose virtue consists in its power to confirm our original nature; in some men it increases their distrust and malignancy, just as it improves the goodness of those who have a kind heart.

°°°°Sorrow had made the Colonel even more helpful and good than he had always been, and he could understand some secrets of womanly distress which are unrevealed to most men. Nevertheless, in spite of his loyal trustfulness, he could not help saying to his wife:

°°°°"Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?"

°°°°"Yes," replied she, "if I found Colonel Chabert in Derville's client."

°°°°The appearance of truth she contrived to give to this answer dissipated the slight suspicions which the Colonel was ashamed to have felt. For three days the Countess was quite charming to her first husband. By tender attentions and unfailing sweetness she seemed anxious to wipe out the memory of the sufferings he had endured, and to earn forgiveness for the woes which, as she confessed, she had innocently caused him. She delighted in displaying for him the charms she knew he took pleasure in, while at the same time she assumed a kind of melancholy; for men are more especially accessible to certain ways, certain graces of the heart or of the mind which they cannot resist. She aimed at interesting him in her position, and appealing to his feelings so far as to take possession of his mind and control him despotically.

°°°°Ready for anything to attain her ends, she did not yet know what she was to do with this man; but at any rate she meant to annihilate him socially. On the evening of the third day she felt that in spite of her efforts she could not conceal her uneasiness as to the results of her manoeuvres. To give herself a minute's reprieve she went up to her room, sat down before her writing-table, and laid aside the mask of composure which she wore in Chabert's presence, like an actress who, returning to her dressing-room after a fatiguing fifth act, drops half dead, leaving with the audience an image of herself which she no longer resembles. She proceeded to finish a letter she had begun to Delbecq, whom she desired to go in her name and demand of Derville the deeds relating to Colonel Chabert, to copy them, and to come to her at once to Groslay. She had hardly finished when she heard the Colonel's step in the passage; uneasy at her absence, he had come to look for her.

°°°°"Alas!" she exclaimed, "I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable . . ."

°°°°"Why, what is the matter?" asked the good man.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing!" she replied.

°°°°She rose, left the Colonel, and went down to speak privately to her maid, whom she sent off to Paris, impressing on her that she was herself to deliver to Delbecq the letter just written, and to bring it back to the writer as soon as he had read it. Then the Countess went out to sit on a bench sufficiently in sight for the Colonel to join her as soon as he might choose. The Colonel, who was looking for her, hastened up and sat down by her.

°°°°"Rosine," said he, "what is the matter with you?"

°°°°She did not answer.

°°°°It was one of those glorious, calm evenings in the month of June, whose secret harmonies infuse such sweetness into the sunset. The air was clear, the stillness perfect, so that far away in the park they could hear the voices of some children, which added a kind of melody to the sublimity of the scene.

°°°°"You do not answer me?" the Colonel said to his wife.

°°°°"My husband----" said the Countess, who broke off, started a little, and with a blush stopped to ask him, "What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?"

°°°°"Call him your husband, my poor child," replied the Colonel, in a kind voice. "Is he not the father of your children?"

°°°°"Well, then," she said, "if he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out that I came here, alone, with a stranger, what am I to say to him? Listen, monsieur," she went on, assuming a dignified attitude, "decide my fate, I am resigned to anything--"

°°°°"My dear," said the Colonel, taking possession of his wife's hands, "I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness--"

°°°°"That is impossible!" she exclaimed, with a sudden spasmodic movement. "Remember that you would have to renounce your identity, and in an authenticated form."

°°°°"What?" said the Colonel. "Is not my word enough for you?"

°°°°The word "authenticated" fell on the old man's heart, and roused involuntary distrust. He looked at his wife in a way that made her color, she cast down her eyes, and he feared that he might find himself compelled to despise her. The Countess was afraid lest she had scared the shy modesty, the stern honesty, of a man whose generous temper and primitive virtues were known to her. Though these feelings had brought the clouds to her brow, they immediately recovered their harmony. This was the way of it. A child's cry was heard in the distance.

°°°°"Jules, leave your sister in peace," the Countess called out.

°°°°"What, are your children here?" said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but I told them not to trouble you."

°°°°The old soldier understood the delicacy, the womanly tact of so gracious a precaution, and took the Countess' hand to kiss it.

°°°°"But let them come," said he.

°°°°The little girl ran up to complain of her brother.

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"It was Jules--"

°°°°"It was her--"

°°°°Their little hands were held out to their mother, and the two childish voices mingled; it was an unexpected and charming picture.

°°°°"Poor little things!" cried the Countess, no longer restraining her tears, "I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother's heart cannot be divided; I want them, I want them."

°°°°"Are you making mamma cry?" said Jules, looking fiercely at the Colonel.

°°°°"Silence, Jules!" said the mother in a decided tone.

°°°°The two children stood speechless, examining their mother and the stranger with a curiosity which it is impossible to express in words.

°°°°"Oh yes!" she cried. "If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything . . ."

°°°°This was the decisive speech which gained all that she had hoped from it.

°°°°"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, as if he were ending a sentence already begun in his mind, "I must return underground again. I had told myself so already."

°°°°"Can I accept such a sacrifice?" replied his wife. "If some men have died to save a mistress' honor, they gave their life but once. But in this case you would be giving your life every day. No, no. It is impossible. If it were only your life, it would be nothing; but to sign a declaration that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to sacrifice your honor, and live a lie every hour of the day! Human devotion cannot go so far. Only think!--No. But for my poor children I would have fled with you by this time to the other end of the world."

°°°°"But," said Chabert, "cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn out as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but a little tobacco and the /Constitutionnel/."

°°°°The Countess melted into tears. There was a contest of generosity between the Comtesse Ferraud and Colonel Chabert, and the soldier came out victorious. One evening, seeing this mother with her children, the soldier was bewitched by the touching grace of a family picture in the country, in the shade and the silence; he made a resolution to remain dead, and, frightened no longer at the authentication of a deed, he asked what he could do to secure beyond all risk the happiness of this family.

°°°°"Do exactly as you like," said the Countess. "I declare to you that I will have nothing to do with this affair. I ought not."

°°°°Delbecq had arrived some days before, and in obedience to the Countess' verbal instructions, the intendant had succeeded in gaining the old soldier's confidence. So on the following morning Colonel Chabert went with the erewhile attorney to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had caused the notary to draw up an affidavit in such terms that, after hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

°°°°"Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!" he exclaimed.

°°°°"Indeed, monsieur," said Delbecq, "I should advise you not to sign in haste. In your place I would get at least thirty thousand francs a year out of the bargain. Madame would pay them."

°°°°After annihilating this scoundrel /emeritus/ by the lightning look of an honest man insulted, the Colonel rushed off, carried away by a thousand contrary emotions. He was suspicious, indignant, and calm again by turns.

°°°°Finally he made his way back into the park of Groslay by a gap in a fence, and slowly walked on to sit down and rest, and meditate at his ease, in a little room under a gazebo, from which the road to Saint- Leu could be seen. The path being strewn with the yellowish sand which is used instead of river-gravel, the Countess, who was sitting in the upper room of this little summer-house, did not hear the Colonel's approach, for she was too much preoccupied with the success of her business to pay the smallest attention to the slight noise made by her husband. Nor did the old man notice that his wife was in the room over him.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur Delbecq, has he signed?" the Countess asked her secretary, whom she saw alone on the road beyond the hedge of a haha.

°°°°"No, madame. I do not even know what has become of our man. The old horse reared."

°°°°"Then we shall be obliged to put him into Charenton," said she, "since we have got him."

°°°°The Colonel, who recovered the elasticity of youth to leap the haha, in the twinkling of an eye was standing in front of Delbecq, on whom he bestowed the two finest slaps that ever a scoundrel's cheeks received.

°°°°"And you may add that old horses can kick!" said he.

°°°°His rage spent, the Colonel no longer felt vigorous enough to leap the ditch. He had seen the truth in all its nakedness. The Countess' speech and Delbecq's reply had revealed the conspiracy of which he was to be the victim. The care taken of him was but a bait to entrap him in a snare. That speech was like a drop of subtle poison, bringing on in the old soldier a return of all his sufferings, physical and moral. He came back to the summer-house through the park gate, walking slowly like a broken man.

°°°°Then for him there was to be neither peace nor truce. From this moment he must begin the odious warfare with this woman of which Derville had spoken, enter on a life of litigation, feed on gall, drink every morning of the cup of bitterness. And then--fearful thought!--where was he to find the money needful to pay the cost of the first proceedings? He felt such disgust of life, that if there had been any water at hand he would have thrown himself into it; that if he had had a pistol, he would have blown out his brains. Then he relapsed into the indecision of mind which, since his conversation with Derville at the dairyman's had changed his character.

°°°°At last, having reached the kiosque, he went up to the gazebo, where little rose-windows afforded a view over each lovely landscape of the valley, and where he found his wife seated on a chair. The Countess was gazing at the distance, and preserved a calm countenance, showing that impenetrable face which women can assume when resolved to do their worst. She wiped her eyes as if she had been weeping, and played absently with the pink ribbons of her sash. Nevertheless, in spite of her apparent assurance, she could not help shuddering slightly when she saw before her her venerable benefactor, standing with folded arms, his face pale, his brow stern.

°°°°"Madame," he said, after gazing at her fixedly for a moment and compelling her to blush, "Madame, I do not curse you--I scorn you. I can now thank the chance that has divided us. I do not feel even a desire for revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on the strength of my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps have made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of the sunshine.--Farewell!"

°°°°The Countess threw herself at his feet; she would have detained him by taking his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust, saying:

°°°°"Do not touch me!"

°°°°The Countess' expression when she heard her husband's retreating steps is quite indescribable. Then, with the deep perspicacity given only by utter villainy, or by fierce worldly selfishness, she knew that she might live in peace on the word and the contempt of this loyal veteran.

°°°°Chabert, in fact, disappeared. The dairyman failed in business, and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel, perhaps, took up some similar industry for a time. Perhaps, like a stone flung into a chasm, he went falling from ledge to ledge, to be lost in the mire of rags that seethes through the streets of Paris.

°°°°Six months after this event, Derville, hearing no more of Colonel Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed that they had no doubt come to a compromise, which the Countess, out of revenge, had had arranged by some other lawyer. So one morning he added up the sums he had advanced to the said Chabert with the costs, and begged the Comtesse Ferraud to claim from M. le Comte Chabert the amount of the bill, assuming that she would know where to find her first husband.

°°°°The very next day Comte Ferraud's man of business, lately appointed President of the County Court in a town of some importance, wrote this distressing note to Derville:

°°°°"MONSIEUR,--

°°°°"Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your   client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the   individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he   came forward under false pretences. "Yours, etc.,                DELBECQ."

°°°°"One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half," cried Derville. "They don't deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand- franc notes!"

°°°°Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader to whom he wished to speak, and who was employed in the Police Court. As chance would have it, Derville went into Court Number 6 at the moment when the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months' imprisonment as a vagabond, and subsequently to be taken to the Mendicity House of Detention, a sentence which, by magistrates' law, is equivalent to perpetual imprisonment. On hearing the name of Hyacinthe, Derville looked at the deliquent, sitting between two /gendarmes/ on the bench for the accused, and recognized in the condemned man his false Colonel Chabert.

°°°°The old soldier was placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In spite of his rags, in spite of the misery stamped on his countenance, it gave evidence of noble pride. His eye had a stoical expression which no magistrate ought to have misunderstood; but as soon as a man has fallen into the hands of justice, he is no more than a moral entity, a matter of law or of fact, just as to statists he has become a zero.

°°°°When the veteran was taken back to the lock-up, to be removed later with the batch of vagabonds at that moment at the bar, Derville availed himself of the privilege accorded to lawyers of going wherever they please in the Courts, and followed him to the lock-up, where he stood scrutinizing him for some minutes, as well as the curious crew of beggars among whom he found himself. The passage to the lock-up at that moment afforded one of those spectacles which, unfortunately, neither legislators, nor philanthropists, nor painters, nor writers come to study. Like all the laboratories of the law, this ante-room is a dark and malodorous place; along the walls runs a wooden seat, blackened by the constant presence there of the wretches who come to this meeting-place of every form of social squalor, where not one of them is missing.

°°°°A poet might say that the day was ashamed to light up this dreadful sewer through which so much misery flows! There is not a spot on that plank where some crime has not sat, in embryo or matured; not a corner where a man has never stood who, driven to despair by the blight which justice has set upon him after his first fault, has not there begun a career, at the end of which looms the guillotine or the pistol-snap of the suicide. All who fall on the pavement of Paris rebound against these yellow-gray walls, on which a philanthropist who was not a speculator might read a justification of the numerous suicides complained of by hypocritical writers who are incapable of taking a step to prevent them--for that justification is written in that ante- room, like a preface to the dramas of the Morgue, or to those enacted on the Place de la Greve.

°°°°At this moment Colonel Chabert was sitting among these men--men with coarse faces, clothed in the horrible livery of misery, and silent at intervals, or talking in a low tone, for three gendarmes on duty paced to and fro, their sabres clattering on the floor.

°°°°"Do you recognize me?" said Derville to the old man, standing in front of him.

°°°°"Yes, sir," said Chabert, rising.

°°°°"If you are an honest man," Derville went on in an undertone, "how could you remain in my debt?"

°°°°The old soldier blushed as a young girl might when accused by her mother of a clandestine love affair.

°°°°"What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?" cried he in a loud voice.

°°°°"Paid me?" said Derville. "She wrote to me that you were a swindler."

°°°°The Colonel cast up his eyes in a sublime impulse of horror and imprecation, as if to call heaven to witness to this fresh subterfuge.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, in a voice that was calm by sheer huskiness, "get the gendarmes to allow me to go into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored."

°°°°At a word from Derville to the sergeant he was allowed to take his client into the room, where Hyacinthe wrote a few lines, and addressed them to the Comtesse Ferraud.

°°°°"Send her that," said the soldier, "and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is not the less there," and he laid his hand on his heart. "Yes, it is there, deep and sincere. But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all."

°°°°"What!" said Derville. "Did you not stipulate for an allowance?"

°°°°"Do not speak of it!" cried the old man. "You cannot conceive how deep my contempt is for the outside life to which most men cling. I was suddenly attacked by a sickness--disgust of humanity. When I think that Napoleon is at Saint-Helena, everything on earth is a matter of indifference to me. I can no longer be a soldier; that is my only real grief. After all," he added with a gesture of childish simplicity, "it is better to enjoy luxury of feeling than of dress. For my part, I fear nobody's contempt."

°°°°And the Colonel sat down on his bench again.

°°°°Derville went away. On returning to his office, he sent Godeschal, at that time his second clerk, to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert's lawyer.

°°°°In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now himself an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, to whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal's staff among beggars by living on at Bicetre as poor women live on at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures who are lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners, which consists in drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords to its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

°°°°"I say, Derville," said Godeschal to his traveling companion, "look at that old fellow. Isn't he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy."

°°°°Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

°°°°"That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?"

°°°°"Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious," said Godeschal.

°°°°"That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger's glare she shot at him at that moment."

°°°°This opening having excited Godeschal's curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

°°°°Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

°°°°"Good-morning, Colonel Chabert," said Derville.

°°°°"Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe," replied the veteran. "I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7," he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--"Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?" he asked after a moment's silence. "He is not married! He is very lucky!"

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Godeschal. "Would you like something to buy snuff?"

°°°°With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

°°°°"Brave troopers!"

°°°°He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

°°°°"Fire! both arms! /Vive Napoleon/!" And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

°°°°"The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish," said Derville.

°°°°"Childish! he?" said another old pauper, who was looking on. "Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, 'Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.'--'I was too young to be there,' said Hyacinthe. 'But I was at Jena.' And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions."

°°°°"What a destiny!" exclaimed Derville. "Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow," Derville went on after a pause, "there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

°°°°"How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris."

°°°°"I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches' office," replied Godeschal.

°°°°PARIS, February-March 1832.

°°°°End



°°°°Father Goriot

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage

°°°°To the great and illustrious Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a token of admiration for his works and genius. DE BALZAC.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans) is an elderly person, who for the past forty years has kept a lodging-house in the Rue Nueve- Sainte-Genevieve, in the district that lies between the Latin Quarter and the Faubourg Saint-Marcel. Her house (known in the neighborhood as the Maison Vauquer) receives men and women, old and young, and no word has ever been breathed against her respectable establishment; but, at the same time, it must be said that as a matter of fact no young woman has been under her roof for thirty years, and that if a young man stays there for any length of time it is a sure sign that his allowance must be of the slenderest. In 1819, however, the time when this drama opens, there was an almost penniless young girl among Mme. Vauquer's boarders.

°°°°That word drama has been somewhat discredited of late; it has been overworked and twisted to strange uses in these days of dolorous literature; but it must do service again here, not because this story is dramatic in the restricted sense of the word, but because some tears may perhaps be shed intra et extra muros before it is over.

°°°°Will any one without the walls of Paris understand it? It is open to doubt. The only audience who could appreciate the results of close observation, the careful reproduction of minute detail and local color, are dwellers between the heights of Montrouge and Montmartre, in a vale of crumbling stucco watered by streams of black mud, a vale of sorrows which are real and joys too often hollow; but this audience is so accustomed to terrible sensations, that only some unimaginable and well-neigh impossible woe could produce any lasting impression there. Now and again there are tragedies so awful and so grand by reason of the complication of virtues and vices that bring them about, that egotism and selfishness are forced to pause and are moved to pity; but the impression that they receive is like a luscious fruit, soon consumed. Civilization, like the car of Juggernaut, is scarcely stayed perceptibly in its progress by a heart less easy to break than the others that lie in its course; this also is broken, and Civilization continues on her course triumphant. And you, too, will do the like; you who with this book in your white hand will sink back among the cushions of your armchair, and say to yourself, "Perhaps this may amuse me." You will read the story of Father Goriot's secret woes, and, dining thereafter with an unspoiled appetite, will lay the blame of your insensibility upon the writer, and accuse him of exaggeration, of writing romances. Ah! once for all, this drama is neither a fiction nor a romance! ALL IS TRUE,--so true, that every one can discern the elements of the tragedy in his own house, perhaps in his own heart.

°°°°The lodging-house is Mme. Vauquer's own property. It is still standing in the lower end of the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, just where the road slopes so sharply down to the Rue de l'Arbalete, that wheeled traffic seldom passes that way, because it is so stony and steep. This position is sufficient to account for the silence prevalent in the streets shut in between the dome of the Pantheon and the dome of the Val-de-Grace, two conspicuous public buildings which give a yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies beneath the shadow of their leaden- hued cupolas.

°°°°In that district the pavements are clean and dry, there is neither mud nor water in the gutters, grass grows in the chinks of the walls. The most heedless passer-by feels the depressing influences of a place where the sound of wheels creates a sensation; there is a grim look about the houses, a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls. A Parisian straying into a suburb apparently composed of lodging-houses and public institutions would see poverty and dullness, old age lying down to die, and joyous youth condemned to drudgery. It is the ugliest quarter of Paris, and, it may be added, the least known. But, before all things, the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve is like a bronze frame for a picture for which the mind cannot be too well prepared by the contemplation of sad hues and sober images. Even so, step by step the daylight decreases, and the cicerone's droning voice grows hollower as the traveler descends into the Catacombs. The comparison holds good! Who shall say which is more ghastly, the sight of the bleached skulls or of dried-up human hearts?

°°°°The front of the lodging-house is at right angles to the road, and looks out upon a little garden, so that you see the side of the house in section, as it were, from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. Beneath the wall of the house front there lies a channel, a fathom wide, paved with cobble-stones, and beside it runs a graveled walk bordered by geraniums and oleanders and pomegranates set in great blue and white glazed earthenware pots. Access into the graveled walk is afforded by a door, above which the words MAISON VAUQUER may be read, and beneath, in rather smaller letters, "Lodgings for both sexes, etc."

°°°°During the day a glimpse into the garden is easily obtained through a wicket to which a bell is attached. On the opposite wall, at the further end of the graveled walk, a green marble arch was painted once upon a time by a local artist, and in this semblance of a shrine a statue representing Cupid is installed; a Parisian Cupid, so blistered and disfigured that he looks like a candidate for one of the adjacent hospitals, and might suggest an allegory to lovers of symbolism. The half-obliterated inscription on the pedestal beneath determines the date of this work of art, for it bears witness to the widespread enthusiasm felt for Voltaire on his return to Paris in 1777:

°°°°"Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;   He is, or was, or ought to be."

°°°°At night the wicket gate is replaced by a solid door. The little garden is no wider than the front of the house; it is shut in between the wall of the street and the partition wall of the neighboring house. A mantle of ivy conceals the bricks and attracts the eyes of passers-by to an effect which is picturesque in Paris, for each of the walls is covered with trellised vines that yield a scanty dusty crop of fruit, and furnish besides a subject of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her lodgers; every year the widow trembles for her vintage.

°°°°A straight path beneath the walls on either side of the garden leads to a clump of lime-trees at the further end of it; LINE- trees, as Mme. Vauquer persists in calling them, in spite of the fact that she was a de Conflans, and regardless of repeated corrections from her lodgers.

°°°°The central space between the walls is filled with artichokes and rows of pyramid fruit-trees, and surrounded by a border of lettuce, pot-herbs, and parsley. Under the lime-trees there are a few green-painted garden seats and a wooden table, and hither, during the dog-days, such of the lodgers as are rich enough to indulge in a cup of coffee come to take their pleasure, though it is hot enough to roast eggs even in the shade.

°°°°The house itself is three stories high, without counting the attics under the roof. It is built of rough stone, and covered with the yellowish stucco that gives a mean appearance to almost every house in Paris. There are five windows in each story in the front of the house; all the blinds visible through the small square panes are drawn up awry, so that the lines are all at cross purposes. At the side of the house there are but two windows on each floor, and the lowest of all are adorned with a heavy iron grating.

°°°°Behind the house a yard extends for some twenty feet, a space inhabited by a happy family of pigs, poultry, and rabbits; the wood-shed is situated on the further side, and on the wall between the wood-shed and the kitchen window hangs the meat-safe, just above the place where the sink discharges its greasy streams. The cook sweeps all the refuse out through a little door into the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, and frequently cleanses the yard with copious supplies of water, under pain of pestilence.

°°°°The house might have been built on purpose for its present uses. Access is given by a French window to the first room on the ground floor, a sitting-room which looks out upon the street through the two barred windows already mentioned. Another door opens out of it into the dining-room, which is separated from the kitchen by the well of the staircase, the steps being constructed partly of wood, partly of tiles, which are colored and beeswaxed. Nothing can be more depressing than the sight of that sitting- room. The furniture is covered with horse hair woven in alternate dull and glossy stripes. There is a round table in the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from Telemaque are depicted, the various classical personages being colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

°°°°The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the language, and which should be called the odeur de pension. The damp atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy, musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet, in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining dining- room.

°°°°The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which the lodgers' table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine, are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long table is so greasy that a waggish externe will write his name on the surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky, worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one- eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire, parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet, its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

°°°°This apartment is in all its glory at seven o'clock in the morning, when Mme. Vauquer's cat appears, announcing the near approach of his mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated countenance, and a nose like a parrot's beak set in the middle of it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn; there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and interpretation of her lodging- house, as surely as her lodging-house implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital. The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room, and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its mistress.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who "have seen a deal of trouble." She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still, "she is a good woman at bottom," said the lodgers who believed that the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

°°°°What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head. How had she lost her money? "Through trouble," was her answer. He had treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody, because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every possible misfortune.

°°°°Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress' shuffling footsteps, hastened to serve the lodgers' breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these externes usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty francs a month.

°°°°At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme. Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary- general in the service of the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred francs a year.

°°°°The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on the third floor were also let-- one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle. Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli, Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as "Father Goriot." The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of passage, to impecunious students, who like "Father Goriot" and Mlle. Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of better.

°°°°At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him. Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that their parents' hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as by those who had brought it to pass.

°°°°Above the third story there was a garret where the linen was hung to dry, and a couple of attics. Christophe, the man-of-all-work, slept in one, and Sylvie, the stout cook, in the other. Beside the seven inmates thus enumerated, taking one year with another, some eight law or medical students dined in the house, as well as two or three regular comers who lived in the neighborhood. There were usually eighteen people at dinner, and there was room, if need be, for twenty at Mme. Vauquer's table; at breakfast, however, only the seven lodgers appeared. It was almost like a family party. Every one came down in dressing-gown and slippers, and the conversation usually turned on anything that had happened the evening before; comments on the dress or appearance of the dinner contingent were exchanged in friendly confidence.

°°°°These seven lodgers were Mme. Vauquer's spoiled children. Among them she distributed, with astronomical precision, the exact proportion of respect and attention due to the varying amounts they paid for their board. One single consideration influenced all these human beings thrown together by chance. The two second- floor lodgers only paid seventy-two francs a month. Such prices as these are confined to the Faubourg Saint-Marcel and the district between La Bourbe and the Salpetriere; and, as might be expected, poverty, more or less apparent, weighed upon them all, Mme. Couture being the sole exception to the rule.

°°°°The dreary surroundings were reflected in the costumes of the inmates of the house; all were alike threadbare. The color of the men's coats were problematical; such shoes, in more fashionable quarters, are only to be seen lying in the gutter; the cuffs and collars were worn and frayed at the edges; every limp article of clothing looked like the ghost of its former self. The women's dresses were faded, old-fashioned, dyed and re-dyed; they wore gloves that were glazed with hard wear, much-mended lace, dingy ruffles, crumpled muslin fichus. So much for their clothing; but, for the most part, their frames were solid enough; their constitutions had weathered the storms of life; their cold, hard faces were worn like coins that have been withdrawn from circulation, but there were greedy teeth behind the withered lips. Dramas brought to a close or still in progress are foreshadowed by the sight of such actors as these, not the dramas that are played before the footlights and against a background of painted canvas, but dumb dramas of life, frost-bound dramas that sere hearts like fire, dramas that do not end with the actors' lives.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau, that elderly young lady, screened her weak eyes from the daylight by a soiled green silk shade with a rim of brass, an object fit to scare away the Angel of Pity himself. Her shawl, with its scanty, draggled fringe, might have covered a skeleton, so meagre and angular was the form beneath it. Yet she must have been pretty and shapely once. What corrosive had destroyed the feminine outlines? Was it trouble, or vice, or greed? Had she loved too well? Had she been a second-hand clothes dealer, a frequenter of the backstairs of great houses, or had she been merely a courtesan? Was she expiating the flaunting triumphs of a youth overcrowded with pleasures by an old age in which she was shunned by every passer-by? Her vacant gaze sent a chill through you; her shriveled face seemed like a menace. Her voice was like the shrill, thin note of the grasshopper sounding from the thicket when winter is at hand. She said that she had nursed an old gentleman, ill of catarrh of the bladder, and left to die by his children, who thought that he had nothing left. His bequest to her, a life annuity of a thousand francs, was periodically disputed by his heirs, who mingled slander with their persecutions. In spite of the ravages of conflicting passions, her face retained some traces of its former fairness and fineness of tissue, some vestiges of the physical charms of her youth still survived.

°°°°M. Poiret was a sort of automaton. He might be seen any day sailing like a gray shadow along the walks of the Jardin des Plantes, on his head a shabby cap, a cane with an old yellow ivory handle in the tips of his thin fingers; the outspread skirts of his threadbare overcoat failed to conceal his meagre figure; his breeches hung loosely on his shrunken limbs; the thin, blue-stockinged legs trembled like those of a drunken man; there was a notable breach of continuity between the dingy white waistcoat and crumpled shirt frills and the cravat twisted about a throat like a turkey gobbler's; altogether, his appearance set people wondering whether this outlandish ghost belonged to the audacious race of the sons of Japhet who flutter about on the Boulevard Italien. What devouring kind of toil could have so shriveled him? What devouring passions had darkened that bulbous countenance, which would have seemed outrageous as a caricature? What had he been? Well, perhaps he had been part of the machinery of justice, a clerk in the office to which the executioner sends in his accounts,--so much for providing black veils for parricides, so much for sawdust, so much for pulleys and cord for the knife. Or he might have been a receiver at the door of a public slaughter-house, or a sub-inspector of nuisances. Indeed, the man appeared to have been one of the beasts of burden in our great social mill; one of those Parisian Ratons whom their Bertrands do not even know by sight; a pivot in the obscure machinery that disposes of misery and things unclean; one of those men, in short, at sight of whom we are prompted to remark that, "After all, we cannot do without them."

°°°°Stately Paris ignores the existence of these faces bleached by moral or physical suffering; but, then, Paris is in truth an ocean that no line can plumb. You may survey its surface and describe it; but no matter how numerous and painstaking the toilers in this sea, there will always be lonely and unexplored regions in its depths, caverns unknown, flowers and pearls and monsters of the deep overlooked or forgotten by the divers of literature. The Maison Vauquer is one of these curious monstrosities.

°°°°Two, however, of Mme. Vauquer's boarders formed a striking contrast to the rest. There was a sickly pallor, such as is often seen in anaemic girls, in Mlle. Victorine Taillefer's face; and her unvarying expression of sadness, like her embarrassed manner and pinched look, was in keeping with the general wretchedness of the establishment in the Rue Nueve-Saint-Genevieve, which forms a background to this picture; but her face was young, there was youthfulness in her voice and elasticity in her movements. This young misfortune was not unlike a shrub, newly planted in an uncongenial soil, where its leaves have already begun to wither. The outlines of her figure, revealed by her dress of the simplest and cheapest materials, were also youthful. There was the same kind of charm about her too slender form, her faintly colored face and light-brown hair, that modern poets find in mediaeval statuettes; and a sweet expression, a look of Christian resignation in the dark gray eyes. She was pretty by force of contrast; if she had been happy, she would have been charming. Happiness is the poetry of woman, as the toilette is her tinsel. If the delightful excitement of a ball had made the pale face glow with color; if the delights of a luxurious life had brought the color to the wan cheeks that were slightly hollowed already; if love had put light into the sad eyes, then Victorine might have ranked among the fairest; but she lacked the two things which create woman a second time--pretty dresses and love- letters.

°°°°A book might have been made of her story. Her father was persuaded that he had sufficient reason for declining to acknowledge her, and allowed her a bare six hundred francs a year; he had further taken measures to disinherit his daughter, and had converted all his real estate into personalty, that he might leave it undivided to his son. Victorine's mother had died broken-hearted in Mme. Couture's house; and the latter, who was a near relation, had taken charge of the little orphan. Unluckily, the widow of the commissary-general to the armies of the Republic had nothing in the world but her jointure and her widow's pension, and some day she might be obliged to leave the helpless, inexperienced girl to the mercy of the world. The good soul, therefore, took Victorine to mass every Sunday, and to confession once a fortnight, thinking that, in any case, she would bring up her ward to be devout. She was right; religion offered a solution of the problem of the young girl's future. The poor child loved the father who refused to acknowledge her. Once every year she tried to see him to deliver her mother's message of forgiveness, but every year hitherto she had knocked at that door in vain; her father was inexorable. Her brother, her only means of communication, had not come to see her for four years, and had sent her no assistance; yet she prayed to God to unseal her father's eyes and to soften her brother's heart, and no accusations mingled with her prayers. Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exhausted the vocabulary of abuse, and failed to find words that did justice to the banker's iniquitous conduct; but while they heaped execrations on the millionaire, Victorine's words were as gentle as the moan of the wounded dove, and affection found expression even in the cry drawn from her by pain.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac was a thoroughly southern type; he had a fair complexion, blue eyes, black hair. In his figure, manner, and his whole bearing it was easy to see that he had either come of a noble family, or that, from his earliest childhood, he had been gently bred. If he was careful of his wardrobe, only taking last year's clothes into daily wear, still upon occasion he could issue forth as a young man of fashion. Ordinarily he wore a shabby coat and waistcoat, the limp black cravat, untidily knotted, that students affect, trousers that matched the rest of his costume, and boots that had been resoled.

°°°°Vautrin (the man of forty with the dyed whiskers) marked a transition stage between these two young people and the others. He was the kind of man that calls forth the remark: "He looks a jovial sort!" He had broad shoulders, a well-developed chest, muscular arms, and strong square-fisted hands; the joints of his fingers were covered with tufts of fiery red hair. His face was furrowed by premature wrinkles; there was a certain hardness about it in spite of his bland and insinuating manner. His bass voice was by no means unpleasant, and was in keeping with his boisterous laughter. He was always obliging, always in good spirits; if anything went wrong with one of the locks, he would soon unscrew it, take it to pieces, file it, oil and clean and set it in order, and put it back in its place again; "I am an old hand at it," he used to say. Not only so, he knew all about ships, the sea, France, foreign countries, men, business, law, great houses and prisons,--there was nothing that he did not know. If any one complained rather more than usual, he would offer his services at once. He had several times lent money to Mme. Vauquer, or to the boarders; but, somehow, those whom he obliged felt that they would sooner face death than fail to repay him; a certain resolute look, sometimes seen on his face, inspired fear of him, for all his appearance of easy good-nature. In the way he spat there was an imperturbable coolness which seemed to indicate that this was a man who would not stick at a crime to extricate himself from a false position. His eyes, like those of a pitiless judge, seemed to go to the very bottom of all questions, to read all natures, all feelings and thoughts. His habit of life was very regular; he usually went out after breakfast, returning in time for dinner, and disappeared for the rest of the evening, letting himself in about midnight with a latch key, a privilege that Mme. Vauquer accorded to no other boarder. But then he was on very good terms with the widow; he used to call her "mamma," and put his arm round her waist, a piece of flattery perhaps not appreciated to the full! The worthy woman might imagine this to be an easy feat; but, as a matter of fact, no arm but Vautrin's was long enough to encircle her.

°°°°It was a characteristic trait of his generously to pay fifteen francs a month for the cup of coffee with a dash of brandy in it, which he took after dinner. Less superficial observers than young men engulfed by the whirlpool of Parisian life, or old men, who took no interest in anything that did not directly concern them, would not have stopped short at the vaguely unsatisfactory impression that Vautrin made upon them. He knew or guessed the concerns of every one about him; but none of them had been able to penetrate his thoughts, or to discover his occupation. He had deliberately made his apparent good-nature, his unfailing readiness to oblige, and his high spirits into a barrier between himself and the rest of them, but not seldom he gave glimpses of appalling depths of character. He seemed to delight in scourging the upper classes of society with the lash of his tongue, to take pleasure in convicting it of inconsistency, in mocking at law and order with some grim jest worthy of Juvenal, as if some grudge against the social system rankled in him, as if there were some mystery carefully hidden away in his life.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer felt attracted, perhaps unconsciously, by the strength of the one man, and the good looks of the other; her stolen glances and secret thoughts were divided between them; but neither of them seemed to take any notice of her, although some day a chance might alter her position, and she would be a wealthy heiress. For that matter, there was not a soul in the house who took any trouble to investigate the various chronicles of misfortunes, real or imaginary, related by the rest. Each one regarded the others with indifference, tempered by suspicion; it was a natural result of their relative positions. Practical assistance not one could give, this they all knew, and they had long since exhausted their stock of condolence over previous discussions of their grievances. They were in something the same position as an elderly couple who have nothing left to say to each other. The routine of existence kept them in contact, but they were parts of a mechanism which wanted oil. There was not one of them but would have passed a blind man begging in the street, not one that felt moved to pity by a tale of misfortune, not one who did not see in death the solution of the all- absorbing problem of misery which left them cold to the most terrible anguish in others.

°°°°The happiest of these hapless beings was certainly Mme. Vauquer, who reigned supreme over this hospital supported by voluntary contributions. For her, the little garden, which silence, and cold, and rain, and drought combined to make as dreary as an Asian steppe, was a pleasant shaded nook; the gaunt yellow house, the musty odors of a back shop had charms for her, and for her alone. Those cells belonged to her. She fed those convicts condemned to penal servitude for life, and her authority was recognized among them. Where else in Paris would they have found wholesome food in sufficient quantity at the prices she charged them, and rooms which they were at liberty to make, if not exactly elegant or comfortable, at any rate clean and healthy? If she had committed some flagrant act of injustice, the victim would have borne it in silence.

°°°°Such a gathering contained, as might have been expected, the elements out of which a complete society might be constructed. And, as in a school, as in the world itself, there was among the eighteen men and women who met round the dinner table a poor creature, despised by all the others, condemned to be the butt of all their jokes. At the beginning of Eugene de Rastignac's second twelvemonth, this figure suddenly started out into bold relief against the background of human forms and faces among which the law student was yet to live for another two years to come. This laughing-stock was the retired vermicelli-merchant, Father Goriot, upon whose face a painter, like the historian, would have concentrated all the light in his picture.

°°°°How had it come about that the boarders regarded him with a half- malignant contempt? Why did they subject the oldest among their number to a kind of persecution, in which there was mingled some pity, but no respect for his misfortunes? Had he brought it on himself by some eccentricity or absurdity, which is less easily forgiven or forgotten than more serious defects? The question strikes at the root of many a social injustice. Perhaps it is only human nature to inflict suffering on anything that will endure suffering, whether by reason of its genuine humility, or indifference, or sheer helplessness. Do we not, one and all, like to feel our strength even at the expense of some one or of something? The poorest sample of humanity, the street arab, will pull the bell handle at every street door in bitter weather, and scramble up to write his name on the unsullied marble of a monument.

°°°°In the year 1813, at the age of sixty-nine or thereabouts, "Father Goriot" had sold his business and retired--to Mme. Vauquer's boarding house. When he first came there he had taken the rooms now occupied by Mme. Couture; he had paid twelve hundred francs a year like a man to whom five louis more or less was a mere trifle. For him Mme. Vauquer had made various improvements in the three rooms destined for his use, in consideration of a certain sum paid in advance, so it was said, for the miserable furniture, that is to say, for some yellow cotton curtains, a few chairs of stained wood covered with Utrecht velvet, several wretched colored prints in frames, and wall papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained. Possibly it was the careless generosity with which Father Goriot allowed himself to be overreached at this period of his life (they called him Monsieur Goriot very respectfully then) that gave Mme. Vauquer the meanest opinion of his business abilities; she looked on him as an imbecile where money was concerned.

°°°°Goriot had brought with him a considerable wardrobe, the gorgeous outfit of a retired tradesman who denies himself nothing. Mme. Vauquer's astonished eyes beheld no less than eighteen cambric- fronted shirts, the splendor of their fineness being enhanced by a pair of pins each bearing a large diamond, and connected by a short chain, an ornament which adorned the vermicelli-maker's shirt front. He usually wore a coat of corn-flower blue; his rotund and portly person was still further set off by a clean white waistcoat, and a gold chain and seals which dangled over that broad expanse. When his hostess accused him of being "a bit of a beau," he smiled with the vanity of a citizen whose foible is gratified. His cupboards (ormoires, as he called them in the popular dialect) were filled with a quantity of plate that he brought with him. The widow's eyes gleamed as she obligingly helped him to unpack the soup ladles, table-spoons, forks, cruet- stands, tureens, dishes, and breakfast services--all of silver, which were duly arranged upon shelves, besides a few more or less handsome pieces of plate, all weighing no inconsiderable number of ounces; he could not bring himself to part with these gifts that reminded him of past domestic festivals.

°°°°"This was my wife's present to me on the first anniversary of our wedding day," he said to Mme. Vauquer, as he put away a little silver posset dish, with two turtle-doves billing on the cover. "Poor dear! she spent on it all the money she had saved before we were married. Do you know, I would sooner scratch the earth with my nails for a living, madame, than part with that. But I shall be able to take my coffee out of it every morning for the rest of my days, thank the Lord! I am not to be pitied. There's not much fear of my starving for some time to come."

°°°°Finally, Mme. Vauquer's magpie's eye had discovered and read certain entries in the list of shareholders in the funds, and, after a rough calculation, was disposed to credit Goriot (worthy man) with something like ten thousand francs a year. From that day forward Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans), who, as a matter of fact, had seen forty-eight summers, though she would only own to thirty-nine of them--Mme. Vauquer had her own ideas. Though Goriot's eyes seemed to have shrunk in their sockets, though they were weak and watery, owing to some glandular affection which compelled him to wipe them continually, she considered him to be a very gentlemanly and pleasant-looking man. Moreover, the widow saw favorable indications of character in the well-developed calves of his legs and in his square-shaped nose, indications still further borne out by the worthy man's full-moon countenance and look of stupid good-nature. This, in all probability, was a strongly-build animal, whose brains mostly consisted in a capacity for affection. His hair, worn in ailes de pigeon, and duly powdered every morning by the barber from the Ecole Polytechnique, described five points on his low forehead, and made an elegant setting to his face. Though his manners were somewhat boorish, he was always as neat as a new pin and he took his snuff in a lordly way, like a man who knows that his snuff- box is always likely to be filled with maccaboy, so that when Mme. Vauquer lay down to rest on the day of M. Goriot's installation, her heart, like a larded partridge, sweltered before the fire of a burning desire to shake off the shroud of Vauquer and rise again as Goriot. She would marry again, sell her boarding-house, give her hand to this fine flower of citizenship, become a lady of consequence in the quarter, and ask for subscriptions for charitable purposes; she would make little Sunday excursions to Choisy, Soissy, Gentilly; she would have a box at the theatre when she liked, instead of waiting for the author's tickets that one of her boarders sometimes gave her, in July; the whole Eldorado of a little Parisian household rose up before Mme. Vauquer in her dreams. Nobody knew that she herself possessed forty thousand francs, accumulated sou by sou, that was her secret; surely as far as money was concerned she was a very tolerable match. "And in other respects, I am quite his equal," she said to herself, turning as if to assure herself of the charms of a form that the portly Sylvie found moulded in down feathers every morning.

°°°°For three months from that day Mme. Veuve Vauquer availed herself of the services of M. Goriot's coiffeur, and went to some expense over her toilette, expense justifiable on the ground that she owed it to herself and her establishment to pay some attention to appearances when such highly-respectable persons honored her house with their presence. She expended no small amount of ingenuity in a sort of weeding process of her lodgers, announcing her intention of receiving henceforward none but people who were in every way select. If a stranger presented himself, she let him know that M. Goriot, one of the best known and most highly- respected merchants in Paris, had singled out her boarding-house for a residence. She drew up a prospectus headed MAISON VAUQUER, in which it was asserted that hers was "one of the oldest and most highly recommended boarding-houses in the Latin Quarter." "From the windows of the house," thus ran the prospectus, "there is a charming view of the Vallee des Gobelins (so there is--from the third floor), and a BEAUTIFUL garden, EXTENDING down to AN AVENUE OF LINDENS at the further end." Mention was made of the bracing air of the place and its quiet situation.

°°°°It was this prospectus that attracted Mme. la Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil, a widow of six and thirty, who was awaiting the final settlement of her husband's affairs, and of another matter regarding a pension due to her as the wife of a general who had died "on the field of battle." On this Mme. Vauquer saw to her table, lighted a fire daily in the sitting-room for nearly six months, and kept the promise of her prospectus, even going to some expense to do so. And the Countess, on her side, addressed Mme. Vauquer as "my dear," and promised her two more boarders, the Baronne de Vaumerland and the widow of a colonel, the late Comte de Picquoisie, who were about to leave a boarding-house in the Marais, where the terms were higher than at the Maison Vauquer. Both these ladies, moreover, would be very well to do when the people at the War Office had come to an end of their formalities. "But Government departments are always so dilatory," the lady added.

°°°°After dinner the two widows went together up to Mme. Vauquer's room, and had a snug little chat over some cordial and various delicacies reserved for the mistress of the house. Mme. Vauquer's ideas as to Goriot were cordially approved by Mme. de l'Ambermesnil; it was a capital notion, which for that matter she had guessed from the very first; in her opinion the vermicelli maker was an excellent man.

°°°°"Ah! my dear lady, such a well-preserved man of his age, as sound as my eyesight--a man who might make a woman happy!" said the widow.

°°°°The good-natured Countess turned to the subject of Mme. Vauquer's dress, which was not in harmony with her projects. "You must put yourself on a war footing," said she.

°°°°After much serious consideration the two widows went shopping together--they purchased a hat adorned with ostrich feathers and a cap at the Palais Royal, and the Countess took her friend to the Magasin de la Petite Jeannette, where they chose a dress and a scarf. Thus equipped for the campaign, the widow looked exactly like the prize animal hung out for a sign above an a la mode beef shop; but she herself was so much pleased with the improvement, as she considered it, in her appearance, that she felt that she lay under some obligation to the Countess; and, though by no means open-handed, she begged that lady to accept a hat that cost twenty francs. The fact was that she needed the Countess' services on the delicate mission of sounding Goriot; the countess must sing her praises in his ears. Mme. de l'Ambermesnil lent herself very good-naturedly to this manoeuvre, began her operations, and succeeded in obtaining a private interview; but the overtures that she made, with a view to securing him for herself, were received with embarrassment, not to say a repulse. She left him, revolted by his coarseness.

°°°°"My angel," said she to her dear friend, "you will make nothing of that man yonder. He is absurdly suspicious, and he is a mean curmudgeon, an idiot, a fool; you would never be happy with him."

°°°°After what had passed between M. Goriot and Mme. de l'Ambermesnil, the Countess would no longer live under the same roof. She left the next day, forgot to pay for six months' board, and left behind her wardrobe, cast-off clothing to the value of five francs. Eagerly and persistently as Mme. Vauquer sought her quondam lodger, the Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil was never heard of again in Paris. The widow often talked of this deplorable business, and regretted her own too confiding disposition. As a matter of fact, she was as suspicious as a cat; but she was like many other people, who cannot trust their own kin and put themselves at the mercy of the next chance comer--an odd but common phenomenon, whose causes may readily be traced to the depths of the human heart.

°°°°Perhaps there are people who know that they have nothing more to look for from those with whom they live; they have shown the emptiness of their hearts to their housemates, and in their secret selves they are conscious that they are severely judged, and that they deserve to be judged severely; but still they feel an unconquerable craving for praises that they do not hear, or they are consumed by a desire to appear to possess, in the eyes of a new audience, the qualities which they have not, hoping to win the admiration or affection of strangers at the risk of forfeiting it again some day. Or, once more, there are other mercenary natures who never do a kindness to a friend or a relation simply because these have a claim upon them, while a service done to a stranger brings its reward to self-love. Such natures feel but little affection for those who are nearest to them; they keep their kindness for remoter circles of acquaintance, and show most to those who dwell on its utmost limits. Mme. Vauquer belonged to both these essentially mean, false, and execrable classes.

°°°°"If I had been there at the time," Vautrin would say at the end of the story, I would have shown her up, and that misfortune would not have befallen you. I know that kind of phiz!"

°°°°Like all narrow natures, Mme. Vauquer was wont to confine her attention to events, and did not go very deeply into the causes that brought them about; she likewise preferred to throw the blame of her own mistakes on other people, so she chose to consider that the honest vermicelli maker was responsible for her misfortune. It had opened her eyes, so she said, with regard to him. As soon as she saw that her blandishments were in vain, and that her outlay on her toilette was money thrown away, she was not slow to discover the reason of his indifference. It became plain to her at once that there was SOME OTHER ATTRACTION, to use her own expression. In short, it was evident that the hope she had so fondly cherished was a baseless delusion, and that she would "never make anything out of that man yonder," in the Countess' forcible phrase. The Countess seemed to have been a judge of character. Mme. Vauquer's aversion was naturally more energetic than her friendship, for her hatred was not in proportion to her love, but to her disappointed expectations. The human heart may find here and there a resting-place short of the highest height of affection, but we seldom stop in the steep, downward slope of hatred. Still, M. Goriot was a lodger, and the widow's wounded self-love could not vent itself in an explosion of wrath; like a monk harassed by the prior of his convent, she was forced to stifle her sighs of disappointment, and to gulp down her craving for revenge. Little minds find gratification for their feelings, benevolent or otherwise, by a constant exercise of petty ingenuity. The widow employed her woman's malice to devise a system of covert persecution. She began by a course of retrenchment--various luxuries which had found their way to the table appeared there no more.

°°°°"No more gherkins, no more anchovies; they have made a fool of me!" she said to Sylvie one morning, and they returned to the old bill of fare.

°°°°The thrifty frugality necessary to those who mean to make their way in the world had become an inveterate habit of life with M. Goriot. Soup, boiled beef, and a dish of vegetables had been, and always would be, the dinner he liked best, so Mme. Vauquer found it very difficult to annoy a boarder whose tastes were so simple. He was proof against her malice, and in desperation she spoke to him and of him slightingly before the other lodgers, who began to amuse themselves at his expense, and so gratified her desire for revenge.

°°°°Towards the end of the first year the widow's suspicions had reached such a pitch that she began to wonder how it was that a retired merchant with a secure income of seven or eight thousand livres, the owner of such magnificent plate and jewelry handsome enough for a kept mistress, should be living in her house. Why should he devote so small a proportion of his money to his expenses? Until the first year was nearly at an end, Goriot had dined out once or twice every week, but these occasions came less frequently, and at last he was scarcely absent from the dinner- table twice a month. It was hardly expected that Mme. Vauquer should regard the increased regularity of her boarder's habits with complacency, when those little excursions of his had been so much to her interest. She attributed the change not so much to a gradual diminution of fortune as to a spiteful wish to annoy his hostess. It is one of the most detestable habits of a Liliputian mind to credit other people with its own malignant pettiness.

°°°°Unluckily, towards the end of the second year, M. Goriot's conduct gave some color to the idle talk about him. He asked Mme. Vauquer to give him a room on the second floor, and to make a corresponding reduction in her charges. Apparently, such strict economy was called for, that he did without a fire all through the winter. Mme. Vauquer asked to be paid in advance, an arrangement to which M. Goriot consented, and thenceforward she spoke of him as "Father Goriot."

°°°°What had brought about this decline and fall? Conjecture was keen, but investigation was difficult. Father Goriot was not communicative; in the sham countess' phrase he was "a curmudgeon." Empty-headed people who babble about their own affairs because they have nothing else to occupy them, naturally conclude that if people say nothing of their doings it is because their doings will not bear being talked about; so the highly respectable merchant became a scoundrel, and the late beau was an old rogue. Opinion fluctuated. Sometimes, according to Vautrin, who came about this time to live in the Maison Vauquer, Father Goriot was a man who went on 'Change and DABBLED (to use the sufficiently expressive language of the Stock Exchange) in stocks and shares after he had ruined himself by heavy speculation. Sometimes it was held that he was one of those petty gamblers who nightly play for small stakes until they win a few francs. A theory that he was a detective in the employ of the Home Office found favor at one time, but Vautrin urged that "Goriot was not sharp enough for one of that sort." There were yet other solutions; Father Goriot was a skinflint, a shark of a money- lender, a man who lived by selling lottery tickets. He was by turns all the most mysterious brood of vice and shame and misery; yet, however vile his life might be, the feeling of repulsion which he aroused in others was not so strong that he must be banished from their society--he paid his way. Besides, Goriot had his uses, every one vented his spleen or sharpened his wit on him; he was pelted with jokes and belabored with hard words. The general consensus of opinion was in favor of a theory which seemed the most likely; this was Mme. Vauquer's view. According to her, the man so well preserved at his time of life, as sound as her eyesight, with whom a woman might be very happy, was a libertine who had strange tastes. These are the facts upon which Mme. Vauquer's slanders were based.

°°°°Early one morning, some few months after the departure of the unlucky Countess who had managed to live for six months at the widow's expense, Mme. Vauquer (not yet dressed) heard the rustle of a silk dress and a young woman's light footstep on the stair; some one was going to Goriot's room. He seemed to expect the visit, for his door stood ajar. The portly Sylvie presently came up to tell her mistress that a girl too pretty to be honest, "dressed like a goddess," and not a speck of mud on her laced cashmere boots, had glided in from the street like a snake, had found the kitchen, and asked for M. Goriot's room. Mme. Vauquer and the cook, listening, overheard several words affectionately spoken during the visit, which lasted for some time. When M. Goriot went downstairs with the lady, the stout Sylvie forthwith took her basket and followed the lover-like couple, under pretext of going to do her marketing.

°°°°"M. Goriot must be awfully rich, all the same, madame," she reported on her return, "to keep her in such style. Just imagine it! There was a splendid carriage waiting at the corner of the Place de l'Estrapade, and SHE got into it."

°°°°While they were at dinner that evening, Mme. Vauquer went to the window and drew the curtain, as the sun was shining into Goriot's eyes.

°°°°"You are beloved of fair ladies, M. Goriot--the sun seeks you out," she said, alluding to his visitor. "Peste! you have good taste; she was very pretty."

°°°°"That was my daughter," he said, with a kind of pride in his voice, and the rest chose to consider this as the fatuity of an old man who wishes to save appearances.

°°°°A month after this visit M. Goriot received another. The same daughter who had come to see him that morning came again after dinner, this time in evening dress. The boarders, in deep discussion in the dining-room, caught a glimpse of a lovely, fair-haired woman, slender, graceful, and much too distinguished- looking to be a daughter of Father Goriot's.

°°°°"Two of them!" cried the portly Sylvie, who did not recognize the lady of the first visit.

°°°°A few days later, and another young lady--a tall, well-moulded brunette, with dark hair and bright eyes--came to ask for M. Goriot.

°°°°"Three of them!" said Sylvie.

°°°°Then the second daughter, who had first come in the morning to see her father, came shortly afterwards in the evening. She wore a ball dress, and came in a carriage.

°°°°"Four of them!" commented Mme. Vauquer and her plump handmaid. Sylvie saw not a trace of resemblance between this great lady and the girl in her simple morning dress who had entered her kitchen on the occasion of her first visit.

°°°°At that time Goriot was paying twelve hundred francs a year to his landlady, and Mme. Vauquer saw nothing out of the common in the fact that a rich man had four or five mistresses; nay, she thought it very knowing of him to pass them off as his daughters. She was not at all inclined to draw a hard-and-fast line, or to take umbrage at his sending for them to the Maison Vauquer; yet, inasmuch as these visits explained her boarder's indifference to her, she went so far (at the end of the second year) as to speak of him as an "ugly old wretch." When at length her boarder declined to nine hundred francs a year, she asked him very insolently what he took her house to be, after meeting one of these ladies on he stairs. Father Goriot answered that the lady was his eldest daughter.

°°°°"So you have two or three dozen daughters, have you?" said Mme. Vauquer sharply.

°°°°"I have only two," her boarder answered meekly, like a ruined man who is broken in to all the cruel usage of misfortune.

°°°°Towards the end of the third year Father Goriot reduced his expenses still further; he went up to the third story, and now paid forty-five francs a month. He did without snuff, told his hairdresser that he no longer required his services, and gave up wearing powder. When Goriot appeared for the first time in this condition, an exclamation of astonishment broke from his hostess at the color of his hair--a dingy olive gray. He had grown sadder day by day under the influence of some hidden trouble; among all the faces round the table, his was the most woe-begone. There was no longer any doubt. Goriot was an elderly libertine, whose eyes had only been preserved by the skill of the physician from the malign influence of the remedies necessitated by the state of his health. The disgusting color of his hair was a result of his excesses and of the drugs which he had taken that he might continue his career. The poor old man's mental and physical condition afforded some grounds for the absurd rubbish talked about him. When his outfit was worn out, he replaced the fine linen by calico at fourteen sous the ell. His diamonds, his gold snuff-box, watch-chain and trinkets, disappeared one by one. He had left off wearing the corn-flower blue coat, and was sumptuously arrayed, summer as well as winter, in a coarse chestnut-brown coat, a plush waistcoat, and doeskin breeches. He grew thinner and thinner; his legs were shrunken, his cheeks, once so puffed out by contented bourgeois prosperity, were covered with wrinkles, and the outlines of the jawbones were distinctly visible; there were deep furrows in his forehead. In the fourth year of his residence in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve he was no longer like his former self. The hale vermicelli manufacturer, sixty-two years of age, who had looked scarce forty, the stout, comfortable, prosperous tradesman, with an almost bucolic air, and such a brisk demeanor that it did you good to look at him; the man with something boyish in his smile, had suddenly sunk into his dotage, and had become a feeble, vacillating septuagenarian.

°°°°The keen, bright blue eyes had grown dull, and faded to a steel- gray color; the red inflamed rims looked as though they had shed tears of blood. He excited feelings of repulsion in some, and of pity in others. The young medical students who came to the house noticed the drooping of his lower lip and the conformation of the facial angle; and, after teasing him for some time to no purpose, they declared that cretinism was setting in.

°°°°One evening after dinner Mme. Vauquer said half banteringly to him, "So those daughters of yours don't come to see you any more, eh?" meaning to imply her doubts as to his paternity; but Father Goriot shrank as if his hostess had touched him with a sword- point.

°°°°"They come sometimes," he said in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Aha! you still see them sometimes?" cried the students. "Bravo, Father Goriot!"

°°°°The old man scarcely seemed to hear the witticisms at his expense that followed on the words; he had relapsed into the dreamy state of mind that these superficial observers took for senile torpor, due to his lack of intelligence. If they had only known, they might have been deeply interested by the problem of his condition; but few problems were more obscure. It was easy, of course, to find out whether Goriot had really been a vermicelli manufacturer; the amount of his fortune was readily discoverable; but the old people, who were most inquisitive as to his concerns, never went beyond the limits of the Quarter, and lived in the lodging-house much as oysters cling to a rock. As for the rest, the current of life in Paris daily awaited them, and swept them away with it; so soon as they left the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, they forgot the existence of the old man, their butt at dinner. For those narrow souls, or for careless youth, the misery in Father Goriot's withered face and its dull apathy were quite incompatible with wealth or any sort of intelligence. As for the creatures whom he called his daughters, all Mme. Vauquer's boarders were of her opinion. With the faculty for severe logic sedulously cultivated by elderly women during long evenings of gossip till they can always find an hypothesis to fit all circumstances, she was wont to reason thus:

°°°°"If Father Goriot had daughters of his own as rich as those ladies who came here seemed to be, he would not be lodging in my house, on the third floor, at forty-five francs a month; and he would not go about dressed like a poor man."

°°°°No objection could be raised to these inferences. So by the end of the month of November 1819, at the time when the curtain rises on this drama, every one in the house had come to have a very decided opinion as to the poor old man. He had never had either wife or daughter; excesses had reduced him to this sluggish condition; he was a sort of human mollusk who should be classed among the capulidoe, so one of the dinner contingent, an employe at the Museum, who had a pretty wit of his own. Poiret was an eagle, a gentleman, compared with Goriot. Poiret would join the talk, argue, answer when he was spoken to; as a matter of fact, his talk, arguments, and responses contributed nothing to the conversation, for Poiret had a habit of repeating what the others said in different words; still, he did join in the talk; he was alive, and seemed capable of feeling; while Father Goriot (to quote the Museum official again) was invariably at zero--Reaumur.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac had just returned to Paris in a state of mind not unknown to young men who are conscious of unusual powers, and to those whose faculties are so stimulated by a difficult position, that for the time being they rise above the ordinary level.

°°°°Rastignac's first year of study for the preliminary examinations in law had left him free to see the sights of Paris and to enjoy some of its amusements. A student has not much time on his hands if he sets himself to learn the repertory of every theatre, and to study the ins and outs of the labyrinth of Paris. To know its customs; to learn the language, and become familiar with the amusements of the capital, he must explore its recesses, good and bad, follow the studies that please him best, and form some idea of the treasures contained in galleries and museums.

°°°°At this stage of his career a student grows eager and excited about all sorts of follies that seem to him to be of immense importance. He has his hero, his great man, a professor at the College de France, paid to talk down to the level of his audience. He adjusts his cravat, and strikes various attitudes for the benefit of the women in the first galleries at the Opera- Comique. As he passes through all these successive initiations, and breaks out of his sheath, the horizons of life widen around him, and at length he grasps the plan of society with the different human strata of which it is composed.

°°°°If he begins by admiring the procession of carriages on sunny afternoons in the Champs-Elysees, he soon reaches the further stage of envying their owners. Unconsciously, Eugene had served his apprenticeship before he went back to Angouleme for the long vacation after taking his degrees as bachelor of arts and bachelor of law. The illusions of childhood had vanished, so also had the ideas he brought with him from the provinces; he had returned thither with an intelligence developed, with loftier ambitions, and saw things as they were at home in the old manor house. His father and mother, his two brothers and two sisters, with an aged aunt, whose whole fortune consisted in annuities, lived on the little estate of Rastignac. The whole property brought in about three thousand francs; and though the amount varied with the season (as must always be the case in a vine- growing district), they were obliged to spare an unvarying twelve hundred francs out of their income for him. He saw how constantly the poverty, which they had generously hidden from him, weighed upon them; he could not help comparing the sisters, who had seemed so beautiful to his boyish eyes, with women in Paris, who had realized the beauty of his dreams. The uncertain future of the whole family depended upon him. It did not escape his eyes that not a crumb was wasted in the house, nor that the wine they drank was made from the second pressing; a multitude of small things, which it is useless to speak of in detail here, made him burn to distinguish himself, and his ambition to succeed increased tenfold.

°°°°He meant, like all great souls, that his success should be owing entirely to his merits; but his was pre-eminently a southern temperament, the execution of his plans was sure to be marred by the vertigo that seizes on youth when youth sees itself alone in a wide sea, uncertain how to spend its energies, whither to steer its course, how to adapt its sails to the winds. At first he determined to fling himself heart and soul into his work, but he was diverted from this purpose by the need of society and connections; then he saw how great an influence women exert in social life, and suddenly made up his mind to go out into this world to seek a protectress there. Surely a clever and high- spirited young man, whose wit and courage were set off to advantage by a graceful figure and the vigorous kind of beauty that readily strikes a woman's imagination, need not despair of finding a protectress. These ideas occurred to him in his country walks with his sisters, whom he had once joined so gaily. The girls thought him very much changed.

°°°°His aunt, Mme. de Marcillac, had been presented at court, and had moved among the brightest heights of that lofty region. Suddenly the young man's ambition discerned in those recollections of hers, which had been like nursery fairy tales to her nephews and nieces, the elements of a social success at least as important as the success which he had achieved at the Ecole de Droit. He began to ask his aunt about those relations; some of the old ties might still hold good. After much shaking of the branches of the family tree, the old lady came to the conclusion that of all persons who could be useful to her nephew among the selfish genus of rich relations, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was the least likely to refuse. To this lady, therefore, she wrote in the old-fashioned style, recommending Eugene to her; pointing out to her nephew that if he succeeded in pleasing Mme. de Beauseant, the Vicomtesse would introduce him to other relations. A few days after his return to Paris, therefore, Rastignac sent his aunt's letter to Mme. de Beauseant. The Vicomtesse replied by an invitation to a ball for the following evening. This was the position of affairs at the Maison Vauquer at the end of November 1819.

°°°°A few days later, after Mme. de Beauseant's ball, Eugene came in at two o'clock in the morning. The persevering student meant to make up for the lost time by working until daylight. It was the first time that he had attempted to spend the night in this way in that silent quarter. The spell of a factitious energy was upon him; he had beheld the pomp and splendor of the world. He had not dined at the Maison Vauquer; the boarders probably would think that he would walk home at daybreak from the dance, as he had done sometimes on former occasions, after a fete at the Prado, or a ball at the Odeon, splashing his silk stockings thereby, and ruining his pumps.

°°°°It so happened that Christophe took a look into the street before drawing the bolts of the door; and Rastignac, coming in at that moment, could go up to his room without making any noise, followed by Christophe, who made a great deal. Eugene exchanged his dress suit for a shabby overcoat and slippers, kindled a fire with some blocks of patent fuel, and prepared for his night's work in such a sort that the faint sounds he made were drowned by Christophe's heavy tramp on the stairs.

°°°°Eugene sat absorbed in thought for a few moments before plunging into his law books. He had just become aware of the fact that the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was one of the queens of fashion, that her house was thought to be the pleasantest in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. And not only so, she was, by right of her fortune, and the name she bore, one of the most conspicuous figures in that aristocratic world. Thanks to the aunt, thanks to Mme. de Marcillac's letter of introduction, the poor student had been kindly received in that house before he knew the extent of the favor thus shown to him. It was almost like a patent of nobility to be admitted to those gilded salons; he had appeared in the most exclusive circle in Paris, and now all doors were open for him. Eugene had been dazzled at first by the brilliant assembly, and had scarcely exchanged a few words with the Vicomtesse; he had been content to single out a goddess among this throng of Parisian divinities, one of those women who are sure to attract a young man's fancy.

°°°°The Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud was tall and gracefully made; she had one of the prettiest figures in Paris. Imagine a pair of great dark eyes, a magnificently moulded hand, a shapely foot. There was a fiery energy in her movements; the Marquis de Ronquerolles had called her "a thoroughbred," "a pure pedigree," these figures of speech have replaced the "heavenly angel" and Ossianic nomenclature; the old mythology of love is extinct, doomed to perish by modern dandyism. But for Rastignac, Mme. Anastasie de Restaud was the woman for whom he had sighed. He had contrived to write his name twice upon the list of partners upon her fan, and had snatched a few words with her during the first quadrille.

°°°°"Where shall I meet you again, Madame?" he asked abruptly, and the tones of his voice were full of the vehement energy that women like so well.

°°°°"Oh, everywhere!" said she, "in the Bois, at the Bouffons, in my own house."

°°°°With the impetuosity of his adventurous southern temper, he did all he could to cultivate an acquaintance with this lovely countess, making the best of his opportunities in the quadrille and during a waltz that she gave him. When he told her that he was a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's, the Countess, whom he took for a great lady, asked him to call at her house, and after her parting smile, Rastignac felt convinced that he must make this visit. He was so lucky as to light upon some one who did not laugh at his ignorance, a fatal defect among the gilded and insolent youth of that period; the coterie of Maulincourts, Maximes de Trailles, de Marsays, Ronquerolles, Ajuda-Pintos, and Vandenesses who shone there in all the glory of coxcombry among the best-dressed women of fashion in Paris--Lady Brandon, the Duchesse de Langeais, the Comtesse de Kergarouet, Mme. de Serizy, the Duchesse de Carigliano, the Comtesse Ferraud, Mme. de Lanty, the Marquise d'Aiglemont, Mme. Firmiani, the Marquise de Listomere and the Marquise d'Espard, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and the Grandlieus. Luckily, therefore, for him, the novice happened upon the Marquis de Montriveau, the lover of the Duchesse de Langeais, a general as simple as a child; from him Rastignac learned that the Comtesse lived in the Rue du Helder.

°°°°Ah, what it is to be young, eager to see the world, greedily on the watch for any chance that brings you nearer the woman of your dreams, and behold two houses open their doors to you! To set foot in the Vicomtesse de Beauseant's house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; to fall on your knees before a Comtesse de Restaud in the Chaussee d'Antin; to look at one glance across a vista of Paris drawing-rooms, conscious that, possessing sufficient good looks, you may hope to find aid and protection there in a feminine heart! To feel ambitious enough to spurn the tight-rope on which you must walk with the steady head of an acrobat for whom a fall is impossible, and to find in a charming woman the best of all balancing poles.

°°°°He sat there with his thoughts for a while, Law on the one hand, and Poverty on the other, beholding a radiant vision of a woman rise above the dull, smouldering fire. Who would not have paused and questioned the future as Eugene was doing? who would not have pictured it full of success? His wondering thoughts took wings; he was transported out of the present into that blissful future; he was sitting by Mme. de Restaud's side, when a sort of sigh, like the grunt of an overburdened St. Joseph, broke the silence of the night. It vibrated through the student, who took the sound for a death groan. He opened his door noiselessly, went out upon the landing, and saw a thin streak of light under Father Goriot's door. Eugene feared that his neighbor had been taken ill; he went over and looked through the keyhole; the old man was busily engaged in an occupation so singular and so suspicious that Rastignac thought he was only doing a piece of necessary service to society to watch the self-styled vermicelli maker's nocturnal industries.

°°°°The table was upturned, and Goriot had doubtless in some way secured a silver plate and cup to the bar before knotting a thick rope round them; he was pulling at this rope with such enormous force that they were being crushed and twisted out of shape; to all appearance he meant to convert the richly wrought metal into ingots.

°°°°"Peste! what a man!" said Rastignac, as he watched Goriot's muscular arms; there was not a sound in the room while the old man, with the aid of the rope, was kneading the silver like dough. "Was he then, indeed, a thief, or a receiver of stolen goods, who affected imbecility and decrepitude, and lived like a beggar that he might carry on his pursuits the more securely?" Eugene stood for a moment revolving these questions, then he looked again through the keyhole.

°°°°Father Goriot had unwound his coil of rope; he had covered the table with a blanket, and was now employed in rolling the flattened mass of silver into a bar, an operation which he performed with marvelous dexterity.

°°°°"Why, he must be as strong as Augustus, King of Poland!" said Eugene to himself when the bar was nearly finished.

°°°°Father Goriot looked sadly at his handiwork, tears fell from his eyes, he blew out the dip which had served him for a light while he manipulated the silver, and Eugene heard him sigh as he lay down again.

°°°°"He is mad," thought the student.

°°°°"Poor child!" Father Goriot said aloud. Rastignac, hearing those words, concluded to keep silence; he would not hastily condemn his neighbor. He was just in the doorway of his room when a strange sound from the staircase below reached his ears; it might have been made by two men coming up in list slippers. Eugene listened; two men there certainly were, he could hear their breathing. Yet there had been no sound of opening the street door, no footsteps in the passage. Suddenly, too, he saw a faint gleam of light on the second story; it came from M. Vautrin's room.

°°°°"There are a good many mysteries here for a lodging-house!" he said to himself.

°°°°He went part of the way downstairs and listened again. The rattle of gold reached his ears. In another moment the light was put out, and again he distinctly heard the breathing of two men, but no sound of a door being opened or shut. The two men went downstairs, the faint sounds growing fainter as they went.

°°°°"Who is there?" cried Mme. Vauquer out of her bedroom window.

°°°°"I, Mme. Vauquer," answered Vautrin's deep bass voice. "I am coming in."

°°°°"That is odd! Christophe drew the bolts," said Eugene, going back to his room. "You have to sit up at night, it seems, if you really mean to know all that is going on about you in Paris."

°°°°These incidents turned his thought from his ambitious dreams; he betook himself to his work, but his thought wandered back to Father Goriot's suspicious occupation; Mme. de Restaud's face swam again and again before his eyes like a vision of a brilliant future; and at last he lay down and slept with clenched fists. When a young man makes up his mind that he will work all night, the chances are that seven times out of ten he will sleep till morning. Such vigils do not begin before we are turned twenty.

°°°°The next morning Paris was wrapped in one of the dense fogs that throw the most punctual people out in their calculations as to the time; even the most business-like folk fail to keep their appointments in such weather, and ordinary mortals wake up at noon and fancy it is eight o'clock. On this morning it was half- past nine, and Mme. Vauquer still lay abed. Christophe was late, Sylvie was late, but the two sat comfortably taking their coffee as usual. It was Sylvie's custom to take the cream off the milk destined for the boarders' breakfast for her own, and to boil the remainder for some time, so that madame should not discover this illegal exaction.

°°°°"Sylvie," said Christophe, as he dipped a piece of toast into the coffee, "M. Vautrin, who is not such a bad sort, all the same, had two people come to see him again last night. If madame says anything, mind you say nothing about it."

°°°°"Has he given you something?"

°°°°"He gave me a five-franc piece this month, which is as good as saying, 'Hold your tongue.' "

°°°°"Except him and Mme. Couture, who doesn't look twice at every penny, there's no one in the house that doesn't try to get back with the left hand all that they give with the right at New Year," said Sylvie.

°°°°"And, after all," said Christophe, "what do they give you? A miserable five-franc piece. There is Father Goriot, who has cleaned his shoes himself these two years past. There is that old beggar Poiret, who goes without blacking altogether; he would sooner drink it than put it on his boots. Then there is that whipper-snapper of a student, who gives me a couple of francs, Two francs will not pay for my brushes, and he sells his old clothes, and gets more for them than they are worth. Oh! they're a shabby lot!"

°°°°"Pooh!" said Sylvie, sipping her coffee, "our places are the best in the Quarter, that I know. But about that great big chap Vautrin, Christophe; has any one told you anything about him?"

°°°°"Yes. I met a gentleman in the street a few days ago; he said to me, 'There's a gentleman in your place, isn't there? a tall man that dyes his whiskers?' I told him, 'No, sir; they aren't dyed. A gay fellow like him hasn't the time to do it.' And when I told M. Vautrin about it afterwards, he said, 'Quite right, my boy. That is the way to answer them. There is nothing more unpleasant than to have your little weaknesses known; it might spoil many a match.' "

°°°°"Well, and for my part," said Sylvie, "a man tried to humbug me at the market wanting to know if I had seen him put on his shirt. Such bosh! There," she cried, interrupting herself, "that's a quarter to ten striking at the Val-de-Grace, and not a soul stirring!"

°°°°"Pooh! they are all gone out. Mme. Couture and the girl went out at eight o'clock to take the wafer at Saint-Etienne. Father Goriot started off somewhere with a parcel, and the student won't be back from his lecture till ten o'clock. I saw them go while I was sweeping the stairs; Father Goriot knocked up against me, and his parcel was as hard as iron. What is the old fellow up to, I wonder? He is as good as a plaything for the rest of them; they can never let him alone; but he is a good man, all the same, and worth more than all of them put together. He doesn't give you much himself, but he sometimes sends you with a message to ladies who fork out famous tips; they are dressed grandly, too."

°°°°"His daughters, as he calls them, eh? There are a dozen of them."

°°°°"I have never been to more than two--the two who came here."

°°°°"There is madame moving overhead; I shall have to go, or she will raise a fine racket. Just keep an eye on the milk, Christophe; don't let the cat get at it."

°°°°Sylvie went up to her mistress' room.

°°°°"Sylvie! How is this? It's nearly ten o'clock, and you let me sleep like a dormouse! Such a thing has never happened before."

°°°°"It's the fog; it is that thick, you could cut it with a knife."

°°°°"But how about breakfast?"

°°°°"Bah! the boarders are possessed, I'm sure. They all cleared out before there was a wink of daylight."

°°°°"Do speak properly, Sylvie," Mme. Vauquer retorted; "say a blink of daylight."

°°°°"Ah, well, madame, whichever you please. Anyhow, you can have breakfast at ten o'clock. La Michonnette and Poiret have neither of them stirred. There are only those two upstairs, and they are sleeping like the logs they are."

°°°°"But, Sylvie, you put their names together as if----"

°°°°"As if what?" said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. "The two of them make a pair."

°°°°"It is a strange thing, isn't it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last night after Christophe had bolted the door?"

°°°°"Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?"

°°°°"Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears on the table, those at five a penny."

°°°°A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all haste.

°°°°"Mistigris!" she cried.

°°°°The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

°°°°"Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!" she said. "Sylvie! Sylvie!"

°°°°"Yes, madame; what is it?"

°°°°"Just see what the cat has done!"

°°°°"It is all that stupid Christophe's fault. I told him to stop and lay the table. What has become of him? Don't you worry, madame; Father Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won't know the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats."

°°°°"I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?" said Mme. Vauquer, setting the plates round the table.

°°°°"Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"I have overslept myself," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same."

°°°°The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the sitting-room, singing loudly:

°°°°" 'Tis the same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance . .

°°°°"Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!" he cried at the sight of his hostess, and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

°°°°"There! have done----"

°°°°" 'Impertinence!' Say it!" he answered. "Come, say it! Now, isn't that what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah! I am a nice man, am I not?

°°°°"For the locks of brown and the golden hair   A sighing lover . . .

°°°°"Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

°°°°. . . . led by chance."

°°°°"What?" asked the widow.

°°°°"Father Goriot in the goldsmith's shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there, and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that's not used to the trade."

°°°°"Really? You don't say so?"

°°°°"Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair. He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went into a money-lender's house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father's bones, a Turk, a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob HIM, for he puts all his coin into the Bank."

°°°°"Then what was Father Goriot doing there?"

°°°°"Doing?" said Vautrin. "Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----"

°°°°"There he is!" cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Christophe," cried Father Goriot's voice, "come upstairs with me."

°°°°Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

°°°°"Where are you going?" Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

°°°°"Out on an errand for M. Goriot."

°°°°"What may that be?" said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe's hand. "Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud," he read. "Where are you going with it?" he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

°°°°"To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands myself."

°°°°"What is there inside it?" said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the light. "A banknote? No." He peered into the envelope. "A receipted account!" he cried. "My word! 'tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you, old chap," he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe's head, and spinning the man round like a thimble; "you will have a famous tip."

°°°°By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme. Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

°°°°"The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance."

°°°°When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

°°°°"Where have you been this morning, fair lady?" said Mme. Vauquer, turning to Mme. Couture.

°°°°"We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She is trembling like a leaf," Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

°°°°"Warm yourself, Victorine," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften your father's heart," said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the orphan girl; "but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl needs a dowry nowadays."

°°°°"Poor child!" said Mme. Vauquer. "Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself."

°°°°Victorine's eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

°°°°"If we could only see him!" said the Commissary-General's widow; "if I could speak to him myself and give him his wife's last letter! I have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my handwriting----"

°°°°" 'Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!' " exclaimed Vautrin, breaking in upon her. "So that is how you are, is it? In a few days' time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall see."

°°°°"Oh! sir," said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin, who showed no sign of being touched by it, "if you know of any way of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his affection and my mother's honor are more to me than all the money in the world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----"

°°°°"The same old story everywhere," sang Vautrin, with a satirical intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven people thus assembled bade each other good- morning, and took their places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student's footstep was heard outside.

°°°°"Ah! here you are, M. Eugene," said Sylvie; "every one is breakfasting at home to-day."

°°°°The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside Goriot.

°°°°"I have just met with a queer adventure," he said, as he helped himself abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer's eyes gauged as usual.

°°°°"An adventure?" queried Poiret.

°°°°"Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?" Vautrin asked of Poiret. "M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing."

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

°°°°"Tell us about your adventure!" demanded M. Vautrin.

°°°°"Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a king---"

°°°°"Fisher," put in Vautrin, interrupting.

°°°°"What do you mean, sir?" said Eugene sharply.

°°°°"I said 'fisher,' because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than kings."

°°°°"Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a king," said Poiret the ditto-ist, "because----"

°°°°"In fact"--the law-student cut him short--"I danced with one of the handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this divine countess about nine o'clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how my heart beat! I began to think----"

°°°°"That she was coming here," said Vautrin, with a keen look at the student. "I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman's heart, you will find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder."

°°°°The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

°°°°"Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!" cried Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

°°°°"It is just as I guessed," said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme. Vauquer's ear.

°°°°Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own thoughts than he did at that moment.

°°°°"Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! there you are!" answered Vautrin. "Old Father Goriot there knew it quite well! and why should I not know it too?"

°°°°"M. Goriot?" the student cried.

°°°°"What is it?" asked the old man. "So she was very beautiful, was she, yesterday night?"

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"Look at the old wretch," said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; "how his eyes light up!"

°°°°"Then does he really keep her?" said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to the student.

°°°°"Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty," Eugene answered. Father Goriot watched him with eager eyes. "If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there, my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list, and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a galloping horse, or a woman dancing."

°°°°"So the wheel turns," said Vautrin; "yesterday night at a duchess' ball, this morning in a money-lender's office, on the lowest rung of the ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers' hearts to find something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside down. Just a Parisienne through and through!"

°°°°Father Goriot's face, which had shone at the student's words like the sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of Vautrin's.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. Vauquer, "but where is your adventure? Did you speak to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?"

°°°°"She did not see me," said Eugene. "But only think of meeting one of the prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o'clock! She could not have reached home after the ball till two o'clock this morning. Wasn't it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of adventures."

°°°°"Pshaw! much funnier things than THAT happen here!" exclaimed Vautrin.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

°°°°"Well, did you see?" said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest of the circle. "He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain."

°°°°"Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de Restaud is anything to Father Goriot," cried the student.

°°°°"Well, and if you don't," broke in Vautrin, "we are not set on convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed to be like the sound of a trumpet to a trooper's horse. "Aha!" said Vautrin, stopping in his speech to give her a searching glance, "so we have had our little experiences, have we?"

°°°°The old maid lowered her eyes like a nun who sees a statue.

°°°°"Well," he went on, "when folk of that kind get a notion into their heads, they cannot drop it. They must drink the water from some particular spring--it is stagnant as often as not; but they will sell their wives and families, they will sell their own souls to the devil to get it. For some this spring is play, or the stock-exchange, or music, or a collection of pictures or insects; for others it is some woman who can give them the dainties they like. You might offer these last all the women on earth--they would turn up their noses; they will have the only one who can gratify their passion. It often happens that the woman does not care for them at all, and treats them cruelly; they buy their morsels of satisfaction very dear; but no matter, the fools are never tired of it; they will take their last blanket to the pawnbroker's to give their last five-franc piece to her. Father Goriot here is one of that sort. He is discreet, so the Countess exploits him--just the way of the gay world. The poor old fellow thinks of her and of nothing else. In all other respects you see he is a stupid animal; but get him on that subject, and his eyes sparkle like diamonds. That secret is not difficult to guess. He took some plate himself this morning to the melting-pot, and I saw him at Daddy Gobseck's in the Rue des Gres. And now, mark what follows--he came back here, and gave a letter for the Comtesse de Restaud to that noodle of a Christophe, who showed us the address; there was a receipted bill inside it. It is clear that it was an urgent matter if the Countess also went herself to the old money lender. Father Goriot has financed her handsomely. There is no need to tack a tale together; the thing is self-evident. So that shows you, sir student, that all the time your Countess was smiling, dancing, flirting, swaying her peach-flower crowned head, with her gown gathered into her hand, her slippers were pinching her, as they say; she was thinking of her protested bills, or her lover's protested bills."

°°°°"You have made me wild to know the truth," cried Eugene; "I will go to call on Mme. de Restaud to-morrow."

°°°°"Yes," echoed Poiret; "you must go and call on Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"And perhaps you will find Father Goriot there, who will take payment for the assistance he politely rendered."

°°°°Eugene looked disgusted. "Why, then, this Paris of yours is a slough."

°°°°"And an uncommonly queer slough, too," replied Vautrin. "The mud splashes you as you drive through it in your carriage--you are a respectable person; you go afoot and are splashed--you are a scoundrel. You are so unlucky as to walk off with something or other belonging to somebody else, and they exhibit you as a curiosity in the Place du Palais-de-Justice; you steal a million, and you are pointed out in every salon as a model of virtue. And you pay thirty millions for the police and the courts of justice, for the maintenance of law and order! A pretty slate of things it is!"

°°°°"What," cried Mme. Vauquer, "has Father Goriot really melted down his silver posset-dish?"

°°°°"There were two turtle-doves on the lid, were there not?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that there were."

°°°°"Then, was he fond of it?" said Eugene. "He cried while he was breaking up the cup and plate. I happened to see him by accident."

°°°°"It was dear to him as his own life," answered the widow.

°°°°"There! you see how infatuated the old fellow is!" cried Vautrin. "The woman yonder can coax the soul out of him"

°°°°The student went up to his room. Vautrin went out, and a few moments later Mme. Couture and Victorine drove away in a cab which Sylvie had called for them. Poiret gave his arm to Mlle. Michonneau, and they went together to spend the two sunniest hours of the day in the Jardin des Plantes.

°°°°"Well, those two are as good as married," was the portly Sylvie's comment. "They are going out together to-day for the first time. They are such a couple of dry sticks that if they happen to strike against each other they will draw sparks like flint and steel."

°°°°"Keep clear of Mlle. Michonneau's shawl, then, said Mme. Vauquer, laughing; "it would flare up like tinder."

°°°°At four o'clock that evening, when Goriot came in, he saw, by the light of two smoky lamps, that Victorine's eyes were red. Mme. Vauquer was listening to the history of the visit made that morning to M. Taillefer; it had been made in vain. Taillefer was tired of the annual application made by his daughter and her elderly friend; he gave them a personal interview in order to arrive at an understanding with them.

°°°°"My dear lady," said Mme. Couture, addressing Mme. Vauquer, "just imagine it; he did not even ask Victorine to sit down, she was standing the whole time. He said to me quite coolly, without putting himself in a passion, that we might spare ourselves the trouble of going there; that the young lady (he would not call her his daughter) was injuring her cause by importuning him (IMPORTUNING! once a year, the wretch!); that as Victorine's mother had nothing when he married her, Victorine ought not to expect anything from him; in fact, he said the most cruel things, that made the poor child burst out crying. The little thing threw herself at her father's feet and spoke up bravely; she said that she only persevered in her visits for her mother's sake; that she would obey him without a murmur, but that she begged him to read her poor dead mother's farewell letter. She took it up and gave it to him, saying the most beautiful things in the world, most beautifully expressed; I do not know where she learned them; God

°°°°must have put them into her head, for the poor child was inspired to speak so nicely that it made me cry like a fool to hear her talk. And what do you think the monster was doing all the time? Cutting his nails! He took the letter that poor Mme. Taillefer had soaked with tears, and flung it on to the chimney-piece. 'That is all right,' he said. He held out his hands to raise his daughter, but she covered them with kisses, and he drew them away again. Scandalous, isn't it? And his great booby of a son came in and took no notice of his sister."

°°°°"What inhuman wretches they must be!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"And then they both went out of the room," Mme. Couture went on, without heeding the worthy vermicelli maker's exclamation; "father and son bowed to me, and asked me to excuse them on account of urgent business! That is the history of our call. Well, he has seen his daughter at any rate. How he can refuse to acknowledge her I cannot think, for they are as alike as two peas."

°°°°The boarders dropped in one after another, interchanging greetings and empty jokes that certain classes of Parisians regard as humorous and witty. Dulness is their prevailing ingredient, and the whole point consists in mispronouncing a word or a gesture. This kind of argot is always changing. The essence of the jest consists in some catchword suggested by a political event, an incident in the police courts, a street song, or a bit of burlesque at some theatre, and forgotten in a month. Anything and everything serves to keep up a game of battledore and shuttlecock with words and ideas. The diorama, a recent invention, which carried an optical illusion a degree further than panoramas, had given rise to a mania among art students for ending every word with RAMA. The Maison Vauquer had caught the infection from a young artist among the boarders.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur-r-r Poiret," said the employe from the Museum, "how is your health-orama?" Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned to Mme. Couture and Victorine with a "Ladies, you seem melancholy."

°°°°"Is dinner ready?" cried Horace Bianchon, a medical student, and a friend of Rastignac's; "my stomach is sinking usque ad talones."

°°°°"There is an uncommon frozerama outside," said Vautrin. "Make room there, Father Goriot! Confound it, your foot covers the whole front of the stove."

°°°°"Illustrious M. Vautrin," put in Bianchon, "why do you say frozerama? It is incorrect; it should be frozenrama."

°°°°"No, it shouldn't," said the official from the Museum; "frozerama is right by the same rule that you say 'My feet are froze.' "

°°°°"Ah! ah!"

°°°°"Here is his Excellency the Marquis de Rastignac, Doctor of the Law of Contraries," cried Bianchon, seizing Eugene by the throat, and almost throttling him.

°°°°"Hallo there! hallo!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau came noiselessly in, bowed to the rest of the party, and took her place beside the three women without saying a word.

°°°°"That old bat always makes me shudder," said Bianchon in a low voice, indicating Mlle. Michonneau to Vautrin. "I have studied Gall's system, and I am sure she has the bump of Judas."

°°°°"Then you have seen a case before?" said Vautrin.

°°°°"Who has not?" answered Bianchon. "Upon my word, that ghastly old maid looks just like one of the long worms that will gnaw a beam through, give them time enough."

°°°°"That is the way, young man," returned he of the forty years and the dyed whiskers:

°°°°"The rose has lived the life of a rose--   A morning's space."

°°°°"Aha! here is a magnificent soupe-au-rama," cried Poiret as Christophe came in bearing the soup with cautious heed.

°°°°"I beg your pardon, sir," said Mme. Vauquer; "it is soupe aux choux."

°°°°All the young men roared with laughter.

°°°°"Had you there, Poiret!"

°°°°"Poir-r-r-rette! she had you there!"

°°°°"Score two points to Mamma Vauquer," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Did any of you notice the fog this morning?" asked the official.

°°°°"It was a frantic fog," said Bianchon, "a fog unparalleled, doleful, melancholy, sea-green, asthmatical--a Goriot of a fog!"

°°°°"A Goriorama," said the art student, "because you couldn't see a thing in it."

°°°°"Hey! Milord Gaoriotte, they air talking about yoo-o-ou!"

°°°°Father Goriot, seated at the lower end of the table, close to the door through which the servant entered, raised his face; he had smelt at a scrap of bread that lay under his table napkin, an old trick acquired in his commercial capacity, that still showed itself at times.

°°°°"Well," Madame Vauquer cried in sharp tones, that rang above the rattle of spoons and plates and the sound of other voices, "and is there anything the matter with the bread?"

°°°°"Nothing whatever, madame," he answered; "on the contrary, it is made of the best quality of corn; flour from Etampes."

°°°°"How could you tell?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"By the color, by the flavor."

°°°°"You knew the flavor by the smell, I suppose," said Mme. Vauquer. "You have grown so economical, you will find out how to live on the smell of cooking at last."

°°°°"Take out a patent for it, then," cried the Museum official; "you would make a handsome fortune."

°°°°"Never mind him," said the artist; "he does that sort of thing to delude us into thinking that he was a vermicelli maker."

°°°°"Your nose is a corn-sampler, it appears?" inquired the official.

°°°°"Corn WHAT?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"Corn-el."

°°°°"Corn-et."

°°°°"Corn-elian."

°°°°"Corn-ice."

°°°°"Corn-ucopia."

°°°°"Corn-crake."

°°°°"Corn-cockle."

°°°°"Corn-orama."

°°°°The eight responses came like a rolling fire from every part of the room, and the laughter that followed was the more uproarious because poor Father Goriot stared at the others with a puzzled look, like a foreigner trying to catch the meaning of words in a language which he does not understand.

°°°°"Corn? . . ." he said, turning to Vautrin, his next neighbor.

°°°°"Corn on your foot, old man!" said Vautrin, and he drove Father Goriot's cap down over his eyes by a blow on the crown.

°°°°The poor old man thus suddenly attacked was for a moment too bewildered to do anything. Christophe carried off his plate, thinking that he had finished his soup, so that when Goriot had pushed back his cap from his eyes his spoon encountered the table. Every one burst out laughing. "You are a disagreeable joker, sir," said the old man, "and if you take any further liberties with me----"

°°°°"Well, what then, old boy?" Vautrin interrupted.

°°°°"Well, then, you shall pay dearly for it some day----"

°°°°"Down below, eh?" said the artist, "in the little dark corner where they put naughty boys."

°°°°"Well, mademoiselle," Vautrin said, turning to Victorine, "you are eating nothing. So papa was refractory, was he?"

°°°°"A monster!" said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"Mademoiselle might make application for aliment pending her suit; she is not eating anything. Eh! eh! just see how Father Goriot is staring at Mlle. Victorine."

°°°°The old man had forgotten his dinner, he was so absorbed in gazing at the poor girl; the sorrow in her face was unmistakable,--the slighted love of a child whose father would not recognize her.

°°°°"We are mistaken about Father Goriot, my dear boy," said Eugene in a low voice. "He is not an idiot, nor wanting in energy. Try your Gall system on him, and let me know what you think. I saw him crush a silver dish last night as if it had been made of wax; there seems to be something extra-ordinary going on in his mind just now, to judge by his face. His life is so mysterious that it must be worth studying. Oh! you may laugh, Bianchon; I am not joking."

°°°°"The man is a subject, is he?" said Bianchon; "all right! I will dissect him, if he will give me the chance."

°°°°"No; feel his bumps."

°°°°"Hm!--his stupidity might perhaps be contagious."

°°°°The next day Rastignac dressed himself very elegantly, and about three o'clock in the afternoon went to call on Mme. de Restaud. On the way thither he indulged in the wild intoxicating dreams which fill a young head so full of delicious excitement. Young men at his age take no account of obstacles nor of dangers; they see success in every direction; imagination has free play, and turns their lives into a romance; they are saddened or discouraged by the collapse of one of the visionary schemes that have no existence save in their heated fancy. If youth were not ignorant and timid, civilization would be impossible.

°°°°Eugene took unheard-of pains to keep himself in a spotless condition, but on his way through the streets he began to think about Mme. de Restaud and what he should say to her. He equipped himself with wit, rehearsed repartees in the course of an imaginary conversation, and prepared certain neat speeches a la Talleyrand, conjuring up a series of small events which should prepare the way for the declaration on which he had based his future; and during these musings the law student was bespattered with mud, and by the time he reached the Palais Royal he was obliged to have his boots blacked and his trousers brushed.

°°°°"If I were rich," he said, as he changed the five-franc piece he had brought with him in case anything might happen, "I would take a cab, then I could think at my ease."

°°°°At last he reached the Rue du Helder, and asked for the Comtesse de Restaud. He bore the contemptuous glances of the servants, who had seen him cross the court on foot, with the cold fury of a man who knows that he will succeed some day. He understood the meaning of their glances at once, for he had felt his inferiority as soon as he entered the court, where a smart cab was waiting. All the delights of life in Paris seemed to be implied by this visible and manifest sign of luxury and extravagance. A fine horse, in magnificent harness, was pawing the ground, and all at once the law student felt out of humor with himself. Every compartment in his brain which he had thought to find so full of wit was bolted fast; he grew positively stupid. He sent up his name to the Countess, and waited in the ante-chamber, standing on one foot before a window that looked out upon the court; mechanically he leaned his elbow against the sash, and stared before him. The time seemed long; he would have left the house but for the southern tenacity of purpose which works miracles when it is single-minded.

°°°°"Madame is in her boudoir, and cannot see any one at present, sir," said the servant. "She gave me no answer; but if you will go into the dining-room, there is some one already there."

°°°°Rastignac was impressed with a sense of the formidable power of the lackey who can accuse or condemn his masters by a word; he coolly opened the door by which the man had just entered the ante-chamber, meaning, no doubt, to show these insolent flunkeys that he was familiar with the house; but he found that he had thoughtlessly precipitated himself into a small room full of dressers, where lamps were standing, and hot-water pipes, on which towels were being dried; a dark passage and a back staircase lay beyond it. Stifled laughter from the ante-chamber added to his confusion.

°°°°"This way to the drawing-room, sir," said the servant, with the exaggerated respect which seemed to be one more jest at his expense.

°°°°Eugene turned so quickly that he stumbled against a bath. By good luck, he managed to keep his hat on his head, and saved it from immersion in the water; but just as he turned, a door opened at the further end of the dark passage, dimly lighted by a small lamp. Rastignac heard voices and the sound of a kiss; one of the speakers was Mme. de Restaud, the other was Father Goriot. Eugene followed the servant through the dining-room into the drawing- room; he went to a window that looked out into the courtyard, and stood there for a while. He meant to know whether this Goriot was really the Goriot that he knew. His heart beat unwontedly fast; he remembered Vautrin's hideous insinuations. A well-dressed young man suddenly emerged from the room almost as Eugene entered it, saying impatiently to the servant who stood at the door: "I am going, Maurice. Tell Madame la Comtesse that I waited more than half an hour for her."

°°°°Whereupon this insolent being, who, doubtless, had a right to be insolent, sang an Italian trill, and went towards the window where Eugene was standing, moved thereto quite as much by a desire to see the student's face as by a wish to look out into the courtyard.

°°°°"But M. le Comte had better wait a moment longer; madame is disengaged," said Maurice, as he returned to the ante-chamber.

°°°°Just at that moment Father Goriot appeared close to the gate; he had emerged from a door at the foot of the back staircase. The worthy soul was preparing to open his umbrella regardless of the fact that the great gate had opened to admit a tilbury, in which a young man with a ribbon at his button-hole was seated. Father Goriot had scarcely time to start back and save himself. The horse took fright at the umbrella, swerved, and dashed forward towards the flight of steps. The young man looked round in annoyance, saw Father Goriot, and greeted him as he went out with constrained courtesy, such as people usually show to a money- lender so long as they require his services, or the sort of respect they feel it necessary to show for some one whose reputation has been blown upon, so that they blush to acknowledge his acquaintance. Father Goriot gave him a little friendly nod and a good-natured smile. All this happened with lightning speed. Eugene was so deeply interested that he forgot that he was not alone till he suddenly heard the Countess' voice.

°°°°"Oh! Maxime, were you going away?" she said reproachfully, with a shade of pique in her manner. The Countess had not seen the incident nor the entrance of the tilbury. Rastignac turned abruptly and saw her standing before him, coquettishly dressed in a loose white cashmere gown with knots of rose-colored ribbon here and there; her hair was carelessly coiled about her head, as is the wont of Parisian women in the morning; there was a soft fragrance about her--doubtless she was fresh from a bath;--her graceful form seemed more flexible, her beauty more luxuriant. Her eyes glistened. A young man can see everything at a glance; he feels the radiant influence of woman as a plant discerns and absorbs its nutriment from the air; he did not need to touch her hands to feel their cool freshness. He saw faint rose tints through the cashmere of the dressing gown; it had fallen slightly open, giving glimpses of a bare throat, on which the student's eyes rested. The Countess had no need of the adventitious aid of corsets; her girdle defined the outlines of her slender waist; her throat was a challenge to love; her feet, thrust into slippers, were daintily small. As Maxime took her hand and kissed it, Eugene became aware of Maxime's existence, and the Countess saw Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! is that you M. de Rastignac? I am very glad to see you," she said, but there was something in her manner that a shrewd observer would have taken as a hint to depart.

°°°°Maxime, as the Countess Anastasie had called the young man with the haughty insolence of bearing, looked from Eugene to the lady, and from the lady to Eugene; it was sufficiently evident that he wished to be rid of the latter. An exact and faithful rendering of the glance might be given in the words: "Look here, my dear; I hope you intend to send this little whipper-snapper about his business."

°°°°The Countess consulted the young man's face with an intent submissiveness that betrays all the secrets of a woman's heart, and Rastignac all at once began to hate him violently. To begin with, the sight of the fair carefully arranged curls on the other's comely head had convinced him that his own crop was hideous; Maxime's boots, moreover, were elegant and spotless, while his own, in spite of all his care, bore some traces of his recent walk; and, finally, Maxime's overcoat fitted the outline of his figure gracefully, he looked like a pretty woman, while Eugene was wearing a black coat at half-past two. The quick- witted child of the Charente felt the disadvantage at which he was placed beside this tall, slender dandy, with the clear gaze and the pale face, one of those men who would ruin orphan children without scruple. Mme. de Restaud fled into the next room without waiting for Eugene to speak; shaking out the skirts of her dressing-gown in her flight, so that she looked like a white butterfly, and Maxime hurried after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant's ball; he guessed the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he said to himself, "This is my rival; I mean to cut him out."

°°°°Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls's eye twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and so sulkily, that Anastasie's fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, "Why do you not go?" a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make their exit.

°°°°Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

°°°°"Madame," he began, "I hastened to call upon you----"

°°°°He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess; he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime with a cordial "Good morning," that astonished Eugene not a little. The young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

°°°°"M. de Restaud," said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law student.

°°°°Eugene bowed profoundly.

°°°°"This gentleman," she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband, "is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last ball."

°°°°Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs! These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house, produced a magical effect. The Count's stiff manner relaxed at once as he returned the student's bow.

°°°°"Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance," he said.

°°°°Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a fairy's wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open again; Rastignac's carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer's lodging- house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

°°°°"I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct," the Comte de Restaud said, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, they are extinct," answered the law student. "My great- uncle, the Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family. They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault, Mme. de Beauseant's grandfather on the mother's side. We are the younger branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King's service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated."

°°°°"Was not your great-uncle in command of the Vengeur before 1789?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the Warwick."

°°°°Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who should say, "If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that fellow, it is all over with us." Anastasie understood the glance that M. de Trailles gave her. With a woman's admirable tact, she began to smile and said:

°°°°"Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the Warwick and the Vengeur."

°°°°She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the boudoir. The morganatic couple (to use a convenient German expression which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

°°°°"Anastasie!" he cried pettishly, "just stay a moment, dear; you know very well that----"

°°°°"I am coming back in a minute," she interrupted; "I have a commission for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it."

°°°°She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her husband's voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands' characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, "You are busy, I do not want to interrupt you; good-day," and he went.

°°°°"Just wait a moment, Maxime!" the Count called after him.

°°°°"Come and dine with us," said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure that Rastignac had taken his leave.

°°°°The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover, for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate, hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair typical Parisian.

°°°°"Anastasie!" the Count called again to his wife.

°°°°"Poor Maxime!" she said, addressing the young man. "Come, we must resign ourselves. This evening----"

°°°°"I hope, Nasie," he said in her ear, "that you will give orders not to admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you will compel me to kill him."

°°°°"Are you mad, Maxime?" she said. "A young lad of a student is, on the contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him."

°°°°Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip, and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had been closed after him.

°°°°"What do you think, dear?" cried the Count, her husband, "this gentleman's family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted."

°°°°"Delighted to find that we have acquaintances in common," said the Countess, with a preoccupied manner.

°°°°"More than you think," said Eugene, in a low voice.

°°°°"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

°°°°"Why, only just now," said the student, "I saw a gentleman go out at the gate, Father Goriot, my next door neighbor in the house where I am lodging."

°°°°At the sound of this name, and the prefix that embellished it, the Count, who was stirring the fire, let the tongs fall as though they had burned his fingers, and rose to his feet.

°°°°"Sir," he cried, "you might have called him 'Monsieur Goriot'!"

°°°°The Countess turned pale at first at the sight of her husband's vexation, then she reddened; clearly she was embarrassed, her answer was made in a tone that she tried to make natural, and with an air of assumed carelessness:

°°°°"You could not know any one who is dearer to us both . . ."

°°°°She broke off, glanced at the piano as if some fancy had crossed her mind, and asked, "Are you fond of music, M. de Rastignac?"

°°°°"Exceedingly," answered Eugene, flushing, and disconcerted by a dim suspicion that he had somehow been guilty of a clumsy piece of folly.

°°°°"Do you sing?" she cried, going to the piano, and, sitting down before it, she swept her fingers over the keyboard from end to end. R-r-r-rah!

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°The Comte de Restaud walked to and fro.

°°°°"That is a pity; you are without one great means of success.--Ca- ro, ca-a-ro, ca-a-a-ro, non du-bi-ta-re," sang the Countess.

°°°°Eugene had a second time waved a magic wand when he uttered Goriot's name, but the effect seemed to be entirely opposite to that produced by the formula "related to Mme. de Beauseant." His position was not unlike that of some visitor permitted as a favor to inspect a private collection of curiosities, when by inadvertence he comes into collision with a glass case full of sculptured figures, and three or four heads, imperfectly secured, fall at the shock. He wished the earth would open and swallow him. Mme. de Restaud's expression was reserved and chilly, her eyes had grown indifferent, and sedulously avoided meeting those of the unlucky student of law.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "you wish to talk with M. de Restaud; permit me to wish you good-day----"

°°°°The Countess interrupted him by a gesture, saying hastily, "Whenever you come to see us, both M. de Restaud and I shall be delighted to see you."

°°°°Eugene made a profound bow and took his leave, followed by M. de Restaud, who insisted, in spite of his remonstrances, on accompanying him into the hall.

°°°°"Neither your mistress nor I are at home to that gentleman when he calls," the Count said to Maurice.

°°°°As Eugene set foot on the steps, he saw that it was raining.

°°°°"Come," said he to himself, "somehow I have just made a mess of it, I do not know how. And now I am going to spoil my hat and coat into the bargain. I ought to stop in my corner, grind away at law, and never look to be anything but a boorish country magistrate. How can I go into society, when to manage properly you want a lot of cabs, varnished boots, gold watch chains, and all sorts of things; you have to wear white doeskin gloves that cost six francs in the morning, and primrose kid gloves every evening? A fig for that old humbug of a Goriot!"

°°°°When he reached the street door, the driver of a hackney coach, who had probably just deposited a wedding party at their door, and asked nothing better than a chance of making a little money for himself without his employer's knowledge, saw that Eugene had no umbrella, remarked his black coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, and varnished boots, and stopped and looked at him inquiringly. Eugene, in the blind desperation that drives a young man to plunge deeper and deeper into an abyss, as if he might hope to find a fortunate issue in its lowest depths, nodded in reply to the driver's signal, and stepped into the cab; a few stray petals of orange blossom and scraps of wire bore witness to its recent occupation by a wedding party.

°°°°"Where am I to drive, sir?" demanded the man, who, by this time, had taken off his white gloves.

°°°°"Confound it!" Eugene said to himself, "I am in for it now, and at least I will not spend cab-hire for nothing!--Drive to the Hotel Beauseant," he said aloud.

°°°°"Which?" asked the man, a portentous word that reduced Eugene to confusion. This young man of fashion, species incerta, did not know that there were two Hotels Beauseant; he was not aware how rich he was in relations who did not care about him.

°°°°"The Vicomte de Beauseant, Rue----"

°°°°"De Grenelle," interrupted the driver, with a jerk of his head. "You see, there are the hotels of the Marquis and Comte de Beauseant in the Rue Saint-Dominique," he added, drawing up the step.

°°°°"I know all about that," said Eugene, severely.--"Everybody is laughing at me to-day, it seems!" he said to himself, as he deposited his hat on the opposite seat. "This escapade will cost me a king's ransom, but, at any rate, I shall call on my so- called cousin in a thoroughly aristocratic fashion. Goriot has cost me ten francs already, the old scoundrel. My word! I will tell Mme. de Beauseant about my adventure; perhaps it may amuse her. Doubtless she will know the secret of the criminal relation between that handsome woman and the old rat without a tail. It would be better to find favor in my cousin's eyes than to come in contact with that shameless woman, who seems to me to have very expensive tastes. Surely the beautiful Vicomtesse's personal interest would turn the scale for me, when the mere mention of her name produces such an effect. Let us look higher. If you set yourself to carry the heights of heaven, you must face God."

°°°°The innumerable thoughts that surged through his brain might be summed up in these phrases. He grew calmer, and recovered something of his assurance as he watched the falling rain. He told himself that though he was about to squander two of the precious five-franc pieces that remained to him, the money was well laid out in preserving his coat, boots, and hat; and his cabman's cry of "Gate, if you please," almost put him in spirits. A Swiss, in scarlet and gold, appeared, the great door groaned on its hinges, and Rastignac, with sweet satisfaction, beheld his equipage pass under the archway and stop before the flight of steps beneath the awning. The driver, in a blue-and-red greatcoat, dismounted and let down the step. As Eugene stepped out of the cab, he heard smothered laughter from the peristyle. Three or four lackeys were making merry over the festal appearance of the vehicle. In another moment the law student was enlightened as to the cause of their hilarity; he felt the full force of the contrast between his equipage and one of the smartest broughams in Paris; a coachman, with powdered hair, seemed to find it difficult to hold a pair of spirited horses, who stood chafing the bit. In Mme. de Restaud's courtyard, in the Chaussee d'Antin, he had seen the neat turnout of a young man of six-and-twenty; in the Faubourg Saint-Germain he found the luxurious equipage of a man of rank; thirty thousand francs would not have purchased it.

°°°°"Who can be here?" said Eugene to himself. He began to understand, though somewhat tardily, that he must not expect to find many women in Paris who were not already appropriated, and that the capture of one of these queens would be likely to cost something more than bloodshed. "Confound it all! I expect my cousin also has her Maxime."

°°°°He went up the steps, feeling that he was a blighted being. The glass door was opened for him; the servants were as solemn as jackasses under the curry comb. So far, Eugene had only been in the ballroom on the ground floor of the Hotel Beauseant; the fete had followed so closely on the invitation, that he had not had time to call on his cousin, and had therefore never seen Mme. de Beauseant's apartments; he was about to behold for the first time a great lady among the wonderful and elegant surroundings that reveal her character and reflect her daily life. He was the more curious, because Mme. de Restaud's drawing-room had provided him with a standard of comparison.

°°°°At half-past four the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was visible. Five minutes earlier she would not have received her cousin, but Eugene knew nothing of the recognized routine of various houses in Paris. He was conducted up the wide, white-painted, crimson- carpeted staircase, between the gilded balusters and masses of flowering plants, to Mme. de Beauseant's apartments. He did not know the rumor current about Mme. de Beauseant, one of the biographies told, with variations, in whispers, every evening in the salons of Paris.

°°°°For three years past her name had been spoken of in connection with that of one of the most wealthy and distinguished Portuguese nobles, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto. It was one of those innocent liaisons which possess so much charm for the two thus attached to each other that they find the presence of a third person intolerable. The Vicomte de Beauseant, therefore, had himself set an example to the rest of the world by respecting, with as good a grace as might be, this morganatic union. Any one who came to call on the Vicomtesse in the early days of this friendship was sure to find the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto there. As, under the circumstances, Mme. de Beauseant could not very well shut her door against these visitors, she gave them such a cold reception, and showed so much interest in the study of the ceiling, that no one could fail to understand how much he bored her; and when it became known in Paris that Mme. de Beauseant was bored by callers between two and four o'clock, she was left in perfect solitude during that interval. She went to the Bouffons or to the Opera with M. de Beauseant and M. d'Ajuda-Pinto; and M. de Beauseant, like a well-bred man of the world, always left his wife and the Portuguese as soon as he had installed them. But M. d'Ajuda-Pinto must marry, and a Mlle. de Rochefide was the young lady. In the whole fashionable world there was but one person who as yet knew nothing of the arrangement, and that was Mme. de Beauseant. Some of her friends had hinted at the possibility, and she had laughed at them, believing that envy had prompted those ladies to try to make mischief. And now, though the bans were about to be published, and although the handsome Portuguese had come that day to break the news to the Vicomtesse, he had not found courage as yet to say one word about his treachery. How was it? Nothing is doubtless more difficult than the notification of an ultimatum of this kind. There are men who feel more at their ease when they stand up before another man who threatens their lives with sword or pistol than in the presence of a woman who, after two hours of lamentations and reproaches, falls into a dead swoon and requires salts. At this moment, therefore, M. d'Ajuda-Pinto was on thorns, and anxious to take his leave. He told himself that in some way or other the news would reach Mme. de Beauseant; he would write, it would be much better to do it by letter, and not to utter the words that should stab her to the heart.

°°°°So when the servant announced M. Eugene de Rastignac, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto trembled with joy. To be sure, a loving woman shows even more ingenuity in inventing doubts of her lover than in varying the monotony of his happiness; and when she is about to be forsaken, she instinctively interprets every gesture as rapidly as Virgil's courser detected the presence of his companion by snuffing the breeze. It was impossible, therefore, that Mme. de Beauseant should not detect that involuntary thrill of satisfaction; slight though it was, it was appalling in its artlessness.

°°°°Eugene had yet to learn that no one in Paris should present himself in any house without first making himself acquainted with the whole history of its owner, and of its owner's wife and family, so that he may avoid making any of the terrible blunders which in Poland draw forth the picturesque exclamation, "Harness five bullocks to your cart!" probably because you will need them all to pull you out of the quagmire into which a false step has plunged you. If, down to the present day, our language has no name for these conversational disasters, it is probably because they are believed to be impossible, the publicity given in Paris to every scandal is so prodigious. After the awkward incident at Mme. de Restaud's, no one but Eugene could have reappeared in his character of bullock-driver in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room. But if Mme. de Restaud and M. de Trailles had found him horribly in the way, M. d'Ajuda hailed his coming with relief.

°°°°"Good-bye," said the Portuguese, hurrying to the door, as Eugene made his entrance into a dainty little pink-and-gray drawing- room, where luxury seemed nothing more than good taste.

°°°°"Until this evening," said Mme. de Beauseant, turning her head to give the Marquis a glance. "We are going to the Bouffons, are we not?"

°°°°"I cannot go," he said, with his fingers on the door handle.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant rose and beckoned to him to return. She did not pay the slightest attention to Eugene, who stood there dazzled by the sparkling marvels around him; he began to think that this was some story out of the Arabian Nights made real, and did not know where to hide himself, when the woman before him seemed to be unconscious of his existence. The Vicomtesse had raised the forefinger of her right hand, and gracefully signed to the Marquis to seat himself beside her. The Marquis felt the imperious sway of passion in her gesture; he came back towards her. Eugene watched him, not without a feeling of envy.

°°°°"That is the owner of the brougham!" he said to himself. "But is it necessary to have a pair of spirited horses, servants in livery, and torrents of gold to draw a glance from a woman here in Paris?"

°°°°The demon of luxury gnawed at his heart, greed burned in his veins, his throat was parched with the thirst of gold.

°°°°He had a hundred and thirty francs every quarter. His father, mother, brothers, sisters, and aunt did not spend two hundred francs a month among them. This swift comparison between his present condition and the aims he had in view helped to benumb his faculties.

°°°°"Why not?" the Vicomtesse was saying, as she smiled at the Portuguese. "Why cannot you come to the Italiens?"

°°°°"Affairs! I am to dine with the English Ambassador."

°°°°"Throw him over."

°°°°When a man once enters on a course of deception, he is compelled to add lie to lie. M. d'Ajuda therefore said, smiling, "Do you lay your commands on me?"

°°°°"Yes, certainly."

°°°°"That was what I wanted to have you say to me," he answered, dissembling his feelings in a glance which would have reassured any other woman.

°°°°He took the Vicomtesse's hand, kissed it, and went.

°°°°Eugene ran his fingers through his hair, and constrained himself to bow. He thought that now Mme. de Beauseant would give him her attention; but suddenly she sprang forward, rushed to a window in the gallery, and watched M. d'Ajuda step into his carriage; she listened to the order that he gave, and heard the Swiss repeat it to the coachman:

°°°°"To M. de Rochefide's house."

°°°°Those words, and the way in which M. d'Ajuda flung himself back in the carriage, were like a lightning flash and a thunderbolt for her; she walked back again with a deadly fear gnawing at her heart. The most terrible catastrophes only happen among the heights. The Vicomtesse went to her own room, sat down at a table, and took up a sheet of dainty notepaper.

°°°°"When, instead of dining with the English Ambassador,"   she wrote, "you go to the Rochefides, you owe me an   explanation, which I am waiting to hear."

°°°°She retraced several of the letters, for her hand was trembling so that they were indistinct; then she signed the note with an initial C for "Claire de Bourgogne," and rang the bell.

°°°°"Jacques," she said to the servant, who appeared immediately, "take this note to M. de Rochefide's house at half-past seven and ask for the Marquis d'Ajuda. If M. d'Ajuda is there, leave the note without waiting for an answer; if he is not there, bring the note back to me."

°°°°"Madame la Vicomtess, there is a visitor in the drawing-room."

°°°°"Ah! yes, of course," she said, opening the door.

°°°°Eugene was beginning to feel very uncomfortable, but at last the Vicomtesse appeared; she spoke to him, and the tremulous tones of her voice vibrated through his heart.

°°°°"Pardon me, monsieur," she said; "I had a letter to write. Now I am quite at liberty."

°°°°She scarcely knew what she was saying, for even as she spoke she thought, "Ah! he means to marry Mlle. de Rochefide? But is he still free? This evening the marriage shall be broken off, or else . . . But before to-morrow I shall know."

°°°°"Cousin . . ." the student replied.

°°°°"Eh?" said the Countess, with an insolent glance that sent a cold shudder through Eugene; he understood what that "Eh?" meant; he had learned a great deal in three hours, and his wits were on the alert. He reddened:

°°°°"Madame . . ." he began; he hesitated a moment, and then went on. "Pardon me; I am in such need of protection that the nearest scrap of relationship could do me no harm."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant smiled but there was sadness in her smile; even now she felt forebodings of the coming pain, the air she breathed was heavy with the storm that was about to burst.

°°°°"If you knew how my family are situated," he went on, "you would love to play the part of a beneficent fairy godmother who graciously clears the obstacles from the path of her protege."

°°°°"Well, cousin," she said, laughing, "and how can I be of service to you?"

°°°°"But do I know even that? I am distantly related to you, and this obscure and remote relationship is even now a perfect godsend to me. You have confused my ideas; I cannot remember the things that I meant to say to you. I know no one else here in Paris. . . . Ah! if I could only ask you to counsel me, ask you to look upon me as a poor child who would fain cling to the hem of your dress, who would lay down his life for you."

°°°°"Would you kill a man for me?"

°°°°"Two," said Eugene.

°°°°"You, child. Yes, you are a child," she said, keeping back the tears that came to her eyes; "you would love sincerely."

°°°°"Oh!" he cried, flinging up his head.

°°°°The audacity of the student's answer interested the Vicomtesse in him. The southern brain was beginning to scheme for the first time. Between Mme. de Restaud's blue boudoir and Mme. de Beauseant's rose-colored drawing-room he had made a three years' advance in a kind of law which is not a recognized study in Paris, although it is a sort of higher jurisprudence, and, when well understood, is a highroad to success of every kind.

°°°°"Ah! that is what I meant to say!" said Eugene. "I met Mme. de Restaud at your ball, and this morning I went to see her.

°°°°"You must have been very much in the way," said Mme. de Beauseant, smiling as she spoke.

°°°°"Yes, indeed. I am a novice, and my blunders will set every one against me, if you do not give me your counsel. I believe that in Paris it is very difficult to meet with a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion who would be willing to teach me, what you women can explain so well--life. I shall find a M. de Trailles everywhere. So I have come to you to ask you to give me a key to a puzzle, to entreat you to tell me what sort of blunder I made this morning. I mentioned an old man----"

°°°°"Madame la Duchess de Langeais," Jacques cut the student short; Eugene gave expression to his intense annoyance by a gesture.

°°°°"If you mean to succeed," said the Vicomtesse in a low voice, "in the first place you must not be so demonstrative."

°°°°"Ah! good morning, dear," she continued, and rising and crossing the room, she grasped the Duchess' hands as affectionately as if they had been sisters; the Duchess responded in the prettiest and most gracious way.

°°°°"Two intimate friends!" said Rastignac to himself. "Henceforward I shall have two protectresses; those two women are great friends, no doubt, and this newcomer will doubtless interest herself in her friend's cousin."

°°°°"To what happy inspiration do I owe this piece of good fortune, dear Antoinette?" asked Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°"Well, I saw M. d'Ajuda-Pinto at M. de Rochefide's door, so I thought that if I came I should find you alone."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant's mouth did not tighten, her color did not rise, her expression did not alter, or rather, her brow seemed to clear as the Duchess uttered those deadly words.

°°°°"If I had known that you were engaged----" the speaker added, glancing at Eugene.

°°°°"This gentleman is M. Eugene de Rastignac, one of my cousins," said the Vicomtesse. "Have you any news of General de Montriveau?" she continued. "Serizy told me yesterday that he never goes anywhere now; has he been to see you to-day?"

°°°°It was believed that the Duchess was desperately in love with M. de Montriveau, and that he was a faithless lover; she felt the question in her very heart, and her face flushed as she answered:

°°°°"He was at the Elysee yesterday."

°°°°"In attendance?"

°°°°"Claire," returned the Duchess, and hatred overflowed in the glances she threw at Mme. de Beauseant; "of course you know that M. d'Ajuda-Pinto is going to marry Mlle. de Rochefide; the bans will be published to-morrow."

°°°°This thrust was too cruel; the Vicomtesse's face grew white, but she answered, laughing, "One of those rumors that fools amuse themselves with. What should induce M. d'Ajuda to take one of the noblest names in Portugal to the Rochefides? The Rochefides were only ennobled yesterday."

°°°°"But Bertha will have two hundred thousand livres a year, they say."

°°°°"M. d'Ajuda is too wealthy to marry for money."

°°°°"But, my dear, Mlle. de Rochefide is a charming girl."

°°°°"Indeed?"

°°°°"And, as a matter of fact, he is dining with them to-day; the thing is settled. It is very surprising to me that you should know so little about it."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant turned to Rastignac. "What was the blunder that you made, monsieur?" she asked. "The poor boy is only just launched into the world, Antoinette, so that he understands nothing of all this that we are speaking of. Be merciful to him, and let us finish our talk to-morrow. Everything will be announced to-morrow, you know, and your kind informal communication can be accompanied by official confirmation."

°°°°The Duchess gave Eugene one of those insolent glances that measure a man from head to foot, and leave him crushed and annihilated.

°°°°"Madame, I have unwittingly plunged a dagger into Mme. de Restaud's heart; unwittingly--therein lies my offence," said the student of law, whose keen brain had served him sufficiently well, for he had detected the biting epigrams that lurked beneath this friendly talk. "You continue to receive, possibly you fear, those who know the amount of pain that they deliberately inflict; but a clumsy blunderer who has no idea how deeply he wounds is looked upon as a fool who does not know how to make use of his opportunities, and every one despise him."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant gave the student a glance, one of those glances in which a great soul can mingle dignity and gratitude. It was like balm to the law student, who was still smarting under the Duchess' insolent scrutiny; she had looked at him as an auctioneer might look at some article to appraise its value.

°°°°"Imagine, too, that I had just made some progress with the Comte de Restaud; for I should tell you, madame," he went on, turning to the Duchess with a mixture of humility and malice in his manner, "that as yet I am only a poor devil of a student, very much alone in the world, and very poor----"

°°°°"You should not tell us that, M. de Rastignac. We women never care about anything that no one else will take."

°°°°"Bah!" said Eugene. "I am only two-and-twenty, and I must make up my mind to the drawbacks of my time of life. Besides, I am confessing my sins, and it would be impossible to kneel in a more charming confessional; you commit your sins in one drawing-room, and receive absolution for them in another."

°°°°The Duchess' expression grew colder, she did not like the flippant tone of these remarks, and showed that she considered them to be in bad taste by turning to the Vicomtesse with--"This gentleman has only just come----"

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant began to laugh outright at her cousin and at the Duchess both.

°°°°"He has only just come to Paris, dear, and is in search of some one who will give him lessons in good taste."

°°°°"Mme. la Duchesse," said Eugene, "is it not natural to wish to be initiated into the mysteries which charm us?" ("Come, now," he said to himself, "my language is superfinely elegant, I'm sure.")

°°°°"But Mme. de Restaud is herself, I believe, M. de Trailles' pupil," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Of that I had no idea, madame," answered the law student, "so I rashly came between them. In fact, I got on very well with the lady's husband, and his wife tolerated me for a time until I took it into my head to tell them that I knew some one of whom I had just caught a glimpse as he went out by a back staircase, a man who had given the Countess a kiss at the end of a passage."

°°°°"Who was it?" both women asked together.

°°°°"An old man who lives at the rate of two louis a month in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, where I, a poor student, lodge likewise. He is a truly unfortunate creature, everybody laughs at him--we all call him 'Father Goriot.' "

°°°°"Why, child that you are," cried the Vicomtesse, "Mme. de Restaud was a Mlle. Goriot!"

°°°°"The daughter of a vermicelli manufacturer," the Duchess added; "and when the little creature went to Court, the daughter of a pastry-cook was presented on the same day. Do you remember, Claire? The King began to laugh, and made some joke in Latin about flour. People--what was it?--people----"

°°°°"Ejusdem farinae," said Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that was it," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Oh! is that her father?" the law student continued, aghast.

°°°°"Yes, certainly; the old man had two daughters; he dotes on them, so to speak, though they will scarcely acknowledge him."

°°°°"Didn't the second daughter marry a banker with a German name?" the Vicomtesse asked, turning to Mme. de Langeais, "a Baron de Nucingen? And her name is Delphine, is it not? Isn't she a fair- haired woman who has a side-box at the Opera? She comes sometimes to the Bouffons, and laughs loudly to attract attention."

°°°°The Duchess smiled and said:

°°°°"I wonder at you, dear. Why do you take so much interest in people of that kind? One must have been as madly in love as Restaud was, to be infatuated with Mlle. Anastasie and her flour sacks. Oh! he will not find her a good bargain! She is in M. de Trailles' hands, and he will ruin her."

°°°°"And they do not acknowledge their father!" Eugene repeated.

°°°°"Oh! well, yes, their father, the father, a father," replied the Vicomtesse, "a kind father who gave them each five or six hundred thousand francs, it is said, to secure their happiness by marrying them well; while he only kept eight or ten thousand livres a year for himself, thinking that his daughters would always be his daughters, thinking that in them he would live his life twice over again, that in their houses he should find two homes, where he would be loved and looked up to, and made much of. And in two years' time both his sons-in-law had turned him out of their houses as if he were one of the lowest outcasts."

°°°°Tears came into Eugene's eyes. He was still under the spell of youthful beliefs, he had just left home, pure and sacred feelings had been stirred within him, and this was his first day on the battlefield of civilization in Paris. Genuine feeling is so infectious that for a moment the three looked at each other in silence.

°°°°"Eh, mon Dieu!" said Mme. de Langeais; "yes, it seems very horrible, and yet we see such things every day. Is there not a reason for it? Tell me, dear, have you ever really thought what a son-in-law is? A son-in-law is the man for whom we bring up, you and I, a dear little one, bound to us very closely in innumerable ways; for seventeen years she will be the joy of her family, its 'white soul,' as Lamartine says, and suddenly she will become its scourge. When HE comes and takes her from us, his love from the very beginning is like an axe laid to the root of all the old affection in our darling's heart, and all the ties that bound her to her family are severed. But yesterday our little daughter thought of no one but her mother and father, as we had no thought that was not for her; by to-morrow she will have become a hostile stranger. The tragedy is always going on under our eyes. On the one hand you see a father who has sacrificed himself to his son, and his daughter-in-law shows him the last degree of insolence. On the other hand, it is the son-in-law who turns his wife's mother out of the house. I sometimes hear it said that there is nothing dramatic about society in these days; but the Drama of the Son-in-law is appalling, to say nothing of our marriages, which have come to be very poor farces. I can explain how it all came about in the old vermicelli maker's case. I think I recollect that Foriot----"

°°°°"Goriot, madame."

°°°°"Yes, that Moriot was once President of his Section during the Revolution. He was in the secret of the famous scarcity of grain, and laid the foundation of his fortune in those days by selling flour for ten times its cost. He had as much flour as he wanted. My grandmother's steward sold him immense quantities. No doubt Noriot shared the plunder with the Committee of Public Salvation, as that sort of person always did. I recollect the steward telling my grandmother that she might live at Grandvilliers in complete security, because her corn was as good as a certificate of civism. Well, then, this Loriot, who sold corn to those butchers, has never had but one passion, they say--he idolizes his daughters. He settled one of them under Restaud's roof, and grafted the other into the Nucingen family tree, the Baron de Nucingen being a rich banker who had turned Royalist. You can quite understand that so long as Bonaparte was Emperor, the two sons-in-law could manage to put up with the old Ninety-three; but after the restoration of the Bourbons, M. de Restaud felt bored by the old man's society, and the banker was still more tired of it. His daughters were still fond of him; they wanted 'to keep the goat and the cabbage,' so they used to see Joriot whenever there was no one there, under pretence of affection. 'Come to- day, papa, we shall have you all to ourselves, and that will be much nicer!' and all that sort of thing. As for me, dear, I believe that love has second-sight: poor Ninety-three; his heart must have bled. He saw that his daughters were ashamed of him, that if they loved their husbands his visits must make mischief. So he immolated himself. He made the sacrifice because he was a father; he went into voluntary exile. His daughters were satisfied, so he thought that he had done the best thing he could; but it was a family crime, and father and daughters were accomplices. You see this sort of thing everywhere. What could this old Doriot have been but a splash of mud in his daughters' drawing-rooms? He would only have been in the way, and bored other people, besides being bored himself. And this that happened between father and daughters may happen to the prettiest woman in

°°°°Paris and the man she loves the best; if her love grows tiresome, he will go; he will descend to the basest trickery to leave her. It is the same with all love and friendship. Our heart is a treasury; if you pour out all its wealth at once, you are bankrupt. We show no more mercy to the affection that reveals its utmost extent than we do to another kind of prodigal who has not a penny left. Their father had given them all he had. For twenty years he had given his whole heart to them; then, one day, he gave them all his fortune too. The lemon was squeezed; the girls left the rest in the gutter."

°°°°"The world is very base," said the Vicomtesse, plucking at the threads of her shawl. She did not raise her head as she spoke; the words that Mme. de Langeais had meant for her in the course of her story had cut her to the quick.

°°°°"Base? Oh, no," answered the Duchess; "the world goes its own way, that is all. If I speak in this way, it is only to show that I am not duped by it. I think as you do," she said, pressing the Vicomtesse's hand. "The world is a slough; let us try to live on the heights above it."

°°°°She rose to her feet and kissed Mme. de Beauseant on the forehead as she said: "You look very charming to-day, dear. I have never seen such a lovely color in your cheeks before."

°°°°Then she went out with a slight inclination of the head to the cousin.

°°°°"Father Goriot is sublime!" said Eugene to himself, as he remembered how he had watched his neighbor work the silver vessel into a shapeless mass that night.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant did not hear him; she was absorbed in her own thoughts. For several minutes the silence remained unbroken till the law student became almost paralyzed with embarrassment, and was equally afraid to go or stay or speak a word.

°°°°"The world is basely ungrateful and ill-natured," said the Vicomtesse at last. "No sooner does a trouble befall you than a friend is ready to bring the tidings and to probe your heart with the point of a dagger while calling on you to admire the handle. Epigrams and sarcasms already! Ah! I will defend myself!"

°°°°She raised her head like the great lady that she was, and lightnings flashed from her proud eyes.

°°°°"Ah!" she said, as she saw Eugene, "are you there?"

°°°°"Still," he said piteously.

°°°°"Well, then, M. de Rastignac, deal with the world as it deserves. You are determined to succeed? I will help you. You shall sound the depths of corruption in woman; you shall measure the extent of man's pitiful vanity. Deeply as I am versed in such learning, there were pages in the book of life that I had not read. Now I know all. The more cold-blooded your calculations, the further you will go. Strike ruthlessly; you will be feared. Men and women for you must be nothing more than post-horses; take a fresh relay, and leave the last to drop by the roadside; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition. You will be nothing here, you see, unless a woman interests herself in you; and she must be young and wealthy, and a woman of the world. Yet, if you have a heart, lock it carefully away like a treasure; do not let any one suspect it, or you will be lost; you would cease to be the executioner, you would take the victim's place. And if ever you should love, never let your secret escape you! Trust no one until you are very sure of the heart to which you open your heart. Learn to mistrust every one; take every precaution for the sake of the love which does not exist as yet. Listen, Miguel"-- the name slipped from her so naturally that she did not notice her mistake--"there is something still more appalling than the ingratitude of daughters who have cast off their old father and wish that he were dead, and that is a rivalry between two sisters. Restaud comes of a good family, his wife has been received into their circle; she has been presented at court; and her sister, her wealthy sister, Mme. Delphine de Nucingen, the wife of a great capitalist, is consumed with envy, and ready to die of spleen. There is gulf set between the sisters--indeed, they are sisters no longer--the two women who refuse to acknowledge their father do not acknowledge each other. So Mme. de Nucingen would lap up all the mud that lies between the Rue Saint-Lazare and the Rue de Grenelle to gain admittance to my salon. She fancied that she should gain her end through de Marsay; she has made herself de Marsay's slave, and she bores him. De Marsay cares very little about her. If you will introduce her to me, you will be her darling, her Benjamin; she will idolize you. If, after that, you can love her, do so; if not, make her useful. I will ask her to come once or twice to one of my great crushes, but I will never receive her here in the morning. I will bow to her when I see her, and that will be quite sufficient. You have shut the Comtesse de Restaud's door against you by mentioning Father Goriot's name. Yes, my good friend, you may call at her house twenty times, and every time out of the twenty you will find that she is not at home. The servants have their orders, and will not admit you. Very well, then, now let Father Goriot gain the right of entry into her sister's house for you. The beautiful Mme. de Nucingen will give the signal for a battle. As soon as she singles you out, other women will begin to lose their heads about you, and her enemies and rivals and intimate friends will all try to take you from her. There are women who will fall in love with a man because another woman has chosen him; like the city madams, poor things, who copy our millinery, and hope thereby to acquire our manners. You will have a success, and in Paris success is everything; it is the key of power. If the women credit you with wit and talent, the men will follow suit so long as you do not undeceive them yourself. There will be nothing you may not aspire to; you will go everywhere, and you will find out what the world is--an assemblage of fools and knaves. But you must be neither the one nor the other. I am giving you my name like Ariadne's clue of thread to take with you into the labyrinth; make no unworthy use of it," she said, with a queenly glance and curve of her throat; "give it back to me unsullied. And now, go; leave me. We women also have our battles to fight."

°°°°"And if you should ever need some one who would gladly set a match to a train for you----"

°°°°"Well?" she asked.

°°°°He tapped his heart, smiled in answer to his cousin's smile, and went.

°°°°It was five o'clock, and Eugene was hungry; he was afraid lest he should not be in time for dinner, a misgiving which made him feel that it was pleasant to be borne so quickly across Paris. This sensation of physical comfort left his mind free to grapple with the thoughts that assailed him. A mortification usually sends a young man of his age into a furious rage; he shakes his fist at society, and vows vengeance when his belief in himself is shaken. Just then Rastignac was overwhelmed by the words, "You have shut the Countess' door against you."

°°°°"I shall call!" he said to himself, "and if Mme. de Beauseant is right, if I never find her at home--I . . . well, Mme. de Restaud shall meet me in every salon in Paris. I will learn to fence and have some pistol practice, and kill that Maxime of hers!"

°°°°"And money?" cried an inward monitor. "How about money, where is that to come from?" And all at once the wealth displayed in the Countess de Restaud's drawing-room rose before his eyes. That was the luxury which Goriot's daughter had loved too well, the gilding, the ostentatious splendor, the unintelligent luxury of the parvenu, the riotous extravagance of a courtesan. Then the attractive vision suddenly went under an eclipse as he remembered the stately grandeur of the Hotel de Beauseant. As his fancy wandered among these lofty regions in the great world of Paris, innumerable dark thoughts gathered in his heart; his ideas widened, and his conscience grew more elastic. He saw the world as it is; saw how the rich lived beyond the jurisdiction of law and public opinion, and found in success the ultima ratio mundi.

°°°°"Vautrin is right, success is virtue!" he said to himself.

°°°°Arrived in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, he rushed up to his room for ten francs wherewith to satisfy the demands of the cabman, and went in to dinner. He glanced round the squalid room, saw the eighteen poverty-stricken creatures about to feed like cattle in their stalls, and the sight filled him with loathing. The transition was too sudden, and the contrast was so violent that it could not but act as a powerful stimulant; his ambition developed and grew beyond all social bounds. On the one hand, he beheld a vision of social life in its most charming and refined forms, of quick-pulsed youth, of fair, impassioned faces invested with all the charm of poetry, framed in a marvelous setting of luxury or art; and, on the other hand, he saw a sombre picture, the miry verge beyond these faces, in which passion was extinct and nothing was left of the drama but the cords and pulleys and bare mechanism. Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, the words uttered in anger by the forsaken lady, her petulant offer, came to his mind, and poverty was a ready expositor. Rastignac determined to open two parallel trenches so as to insure success; he would be a learned doctor of law and a man of fashion. Clearly he was still a child! Those two lines are asymptotes, and will never meet.

°°°°"You are very dull, my lord Marquis," said Vautrin, with one of the shrewd glances that seem to read the innermost secrets of another mind.

°°°°"I am not in the humor to stand jokes from people who call me 'my lord Marquis,' " answered Eugene. "A marquis here in Paris, if he is not the veriest sham, ought to have a hundred thousand livres a year at least; and a lodger in the Maison Vauquer is not exactly Fortune's favorite."

°°°°Vautrin's glance at Rastignac was half-paternal, half- contemptuous. "Puppy!" it seemed to say; "I should make one mouthful of him!" Then he answered:

°°°°"You are in a bad humor; perhaps your visit to the beautiful Comtesse de Restaud was not a success."

°°°°"She has shut her door against me because I told her that her father dined at our table," cried Rastignac.

°°°°Glances were exchanged all round the room; Father Goriot looked down.

°°°°"You have sent some snuff into my eye," he said to his neighbor, turning a little aside to rub his hand over his face.

°°°°"Any one who molests Father Goriot will have henceforward to reckon with me," said Eugene, looking at the old man's neighbor; "he is worth all the rest of us put together.--I am not speaking of the ladies," he added, turning in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer.

°°°°Eugene's remarks produced a sensation, and his tone silenced the dinner-table. Vautrin alone spoke. "If you are going to champion Father Goriot, and set up for his responsible editor into the bargain, you had need be a crack shot and know how to handle the foils," he said, banteringly.

°°°°"So I intend," said Eugene.

°°°°"Then you are taking the field today?"

°°°°"Perhaps," Rastignac answered. "But I owe no account of myself to any one, especially as I do not try to find out what other people do of a night."

°°°°Vautrin looked askance at Rastignac.

°°°°"If you do not mean to be deceived by the puppets, my boy, you must go behind and see the whole show, and not peep through holes in the curtain. That is enough," he added, seeing that Eugene was about to fly into a passion. "We can have a little talk whenever you like."

°°°°There was a general feeling of gloom and constraint. Father Goriot was so deeply dejected by the student's remark that he did not notice the change in the disposition of his fellow-lodgers, nor know that he had met with a champion capable of putting an end to the persecution.

°°°°"Then, M. Goriot sitting there is the father of a countess," said Mme. Vauquer in a low voice.

°°°°"And of a baroness," answered Rastignac.

°°°°"That is about all he is capable of," said Bianchon to Rastignac; "I have taken a look at his head; there is only one bump--the bump of Paternity; he must be an ETERNAL FATHER."

°°°°Eugene was too intent on his thoughts to laugh at Bianchon's joke. He determined to profit by Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, and was asking himself how he could obtain the necessary money. He grew grave. The wide savannas of the world stretched before his eyes; all things lay before him, nothing was his. Dinner came to an end, the others went, and he was left in the dining-room.

°°°°"So you have seen my daughter?" Goriot spoke tremulously, and the sound of his voice broke in upon Eugene's dreams. The young man took the elder's hand, and looked at him with something like kindness in his eyes.

°°°°"You are a good and noble man," he said. "We will have some talk about your daughters by and by."

°°°°He rose without waiting for Goriot's answer, and went to his room. There he wrote the following letter to his mother:--

°°°°"My Dear Mother,--Can you nourish your child from your breast again? I am in a position to make a rapid fortune, but I want twelve hundred francs--I must have them at all costs. Say nothing about this to my father; perhaps he might make objections, and unless I have the money, I may be led to put an end to myself, and so escape the clutches of despair. I will tell you everything when I see you. I will not begin to try to describe my present situation; it would take volumes to put the whole story clearly and fully. I have not been gambling, my kind mother, I owe no one a penny; but if you would preserve the life that you gave me, you must send me the sum I mention. As a matter of fact, I go to see the Vicomtesse de Beauseant; she is using her influence for me; I am obliged to go into society, and I have not a penny to lay out on clean gloves. I can manage to exist on bread and water, or go without food, if need be, but I cannot do without the tools with which they cultivate the vineyards in this country. I must resolutely make up my mind at once to make my way, or stick in the mire for the rest of my days. I know that all your hopes are set on me, and I want to realize them quickly. Sell some of your old jewelry, my kind mother; I will give you other jewels very soon. I know enough of our affairs at home to know all that such a sacrifice means, and you must not think that I would lightly ask you to make it; I should be a monster if I could. You must think of my entreaty as a cry forced from me by imperative necessity. Our whole future lies in the subsidy with which I must begin my first campaign, for life in Paris is one continual battle. If you cannot otherwise procure the whole of the money, and are forced to sell our aunt's lace, tell her that I will send her some still handsomer," and so forth.

°°°°He wrote to ask each of his sisters for their savings--would they despoil themselves for him, and keep the sacrifice a secret from the family? To his request he knew that they would not fail to respond gladly, and he added to it an appeal to their delicacy by touching the chord of honor that vibrates so loudly in young and high-strung natures.

°°°°Yet when he had written the letters, he could not help feeling misgivings in spite of his youthful ambition; his heart beat fast, and he trembled. He knew the spotless nobleness of the lives buried away in the lonely manor house; he knew what trouble and what joy his request would cause his sisters, and how happy they would be as they talked at the bottom of the orchard of that dear brother of theirs in Paris. Visions rose before his eyes; a sudden strong light revealed his sisters secretly counting over their little store, devising some girlish stratagem by which the money could be sent to him incognito, essaying, for the first time in their lives, a piece of deceit that reached the sublime in its unselfishness.

°°°°"A sister's heart is a diamond for purity, a deep sea of tenderness!" he said to himself. He felt ashamed of those letters.

°°°°What power there must be in the petitions put up by such hearts; how pure the fervor that bears their souls to Heaven in prayer! What exquisite joy they would find in self-sacrifice! What a pang for his mother's heart if she could not send him all that he asked for! And this noble affection, these sacrifices made at such terrible cost, were to serve as the ladder by which he meant to climb to Delphine de Nucingen. A few tears, like the last grains of incense flung upon the sacred alter fire of the hearth, fell from his eyes. He walked up and down, and despair mingled with his emotion. Father Goriot saw him through the half-open door.

°°°°"What is the matter, sir?" he asked from the threshold.

°°°°"Ah! my good neighbor, I am as much a son and brother as you are a father. You do well to fear for the Comtesse Anastasie; there is one M. Maxime de Trailles, who will be her ruin."

°°°°Father Goriot withdrew, stammering some words, but Eugene failed to catch their meaning.

°°°°The next morning Rastignac went out to post his letters. Up to the last moment he wavered and doubted, but he ended by flinging them into the box. "I shall succeed!" he said to himself. So says the gambler; so says the great captain; but the three words that have been the salvation of some few, have been the ruin of many more.

°°°°A few days after this Eugene called at Mme. de Restaud's house; she was not at home. Three times he tried the experiment, and three times he found her doors closed against him, though he was careful to choose an hour when M. de Trailles was not there. The Vicomtesse was right.

°°°°The student studied no longer. He put in an appearance at lectures simply to answer to his name, and after thus attesting his presence, departed forthwith. He had been through a reasoning process familiar to most students. He had seen the advisability of deferring his studies to the last moment before going up for his examinations; he made up his mind to cram his second and third years' work into the third year, when he meant to begin to work in earnest, and to complete his studies in law with one great effort. In the meantime he had fifteen months in which to navigate the ocean of Paris, to spread the nets and set the lines that would bring him a protectress and a fortune. Twice during that week he saw Mme. de Beauseant; he did not go to her house until he had seen the Marquis d'Ajuda drive away.

°°°°Victory for yet a few more days was with the great lady, the most poetic figure in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; and the marriage of the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto with Mlle. de Rochefide was postponed. The dread of losing her happiness filled those days with a fever of joy unknown before, but the end was only so much the nearer. The Marquis d'Ajuda and the Rochefides agreed that this quarrel and reconciliation was a very fortunate thing; Mme. de Beauseant (so they hoped) would gradually become reconciled to the idea of the marriage, and in the end would be brought to sacrifice d'Ajuda's morning visits to the exigencies of a man's career, exigencies which she must have foreseen. In spite of the most solemn promises, daily renewed, M. d'Ajuda was playing a part, and the Vicomtesse was eager to be deceived. "Instead of taking a leap heroically from the window, she is falling headlong down the staircase," said her most intimate friend, the Duchesse de Langeais. Yet this after-glow of happiness lasted long enough for the Vicomtesse to be of service to her young cousin. She had a half-superstitious affection for him. Eugene had shown her sympathy and devotion at a crisis when a woman sees no pity, no real comfort in any eyes; when if a man is ready with soothing flatteries, it is because he has an interested motive.

°°°°Rastignac made up his mind that he must learn the whole of Goriot's previous history; he would come to his bearings before attempting to board the Maison de Nucingen. The results of his inquiries may be given briefly as follows:--

°°°°In the days before the Revolution, Jean-Joachim Goriot was simply a workman in the employ of a vermicelli maker. He was a skilful, thrifty workman, sufficiently enterprising to buy his master's business when the latter fell a chance victim to the disturbances of 1789. Goriot established himself in the Rue de la Jussienne, close to the Corn Exchange. His plain good sense led him to accept the position of President of the Section, so as to secure for his business the protection of those in power at that dangerous epoch. This prudent step had led to success; the foundations of his fortune were laid in the time of the Scarcity (real or artificial), when the price of grain of all kinds rose enormously in Paris. People used to fight for bread at the bakers' doors; while other persons went to the grocers' shops and bought Italian paste foods without brawling over it. It was during this year that Goriot made the money, which, at a later time, was to give him all the advantage of the great capitalist over the small buyer; he had, moreover, the usual luck of average ability; his mediocrity was the salvation of him. He excited no one's envy, it was not even suspected that he was rich till the peril of being rich was over, and all his intelligence was concentrated, not on political, but on commercial speculations. Goriot was an authority second to none on all questions relating to corn, flour, and "middlings"; and the production, storage, and quality of grain. He could estimate the yield of the harvest, and foresee market prices; he bought his cereals in Sicily, and imported Russian wheat. Any one who had heard him hold forth on the regulations that control the importation and exportation of grain, who had seen his grasp of the subject, his clear insight into the principles involved, his appreciation of weak points in the way that the system worked, would have thought that here was the stuff of which a minister is made. Patient, active, and persevering, energetic and prompt in action, he surveyed his business horizon with an eagle eye. Nothing there took him by surprise; he foresaw all things, knew all that was happening, and kept his own counsel; he was a diplomatist in his quick comprehension of a situation; and in the routine of business he was as patient and plodding as a soldier on the march. But beyond this business horizon he could not see. He used to spend his hours of leisure on the threshold of his shop, leaning against the framework of the door. Take him from his dark little counting-house, and he became once more the rough, slow-witted workman, a man who cannot understand a piece of reasoning, who is indifferent to all intellectual pleasures, and falls asleep at the play, a Parisian Dolibom in short, against whose stupidity other minds are powerless.

°°°°Natures of this kind are nearly all alike; in almost all of them you will find some hidden depth of sublime affection. Two all- absorbing affections filled the vermicelli maker's heart to the exclusion of every other feeling; into them he seemed to put all the forces of his nature, as he put the whole power of his brain into the corn trade. He had regarded his wife, the only daughter of a rich farmer of La Brie, with a devout admiration; his love for her had been boundless. Goriot had felt the charm of a lovely and sensitive nature, which, in its delicate strength, was the very opposite of his own. Is there any instinct more deeply implanted in the heart of man than the pride of protection, a protection which is constantly exerted for a fragile and defenceless creature? Join love thereto, the warmth of gratitude that all generous souls feel for the source of their pleasures, and you have the explanation of many strange incongruities in human nature.

°°°°After seven years of unclouded happiness, Goriot lost his wife. It was very unfortunate for him. She was beginning to gain an ascendency over him in other ways; possibly she might have brought that barren soil under cultivation, she might have widened his ideas and given other directions to his thoughts. But when she was dead, the instinct of fatherhood developed in him till it almost became a mania. All the affection balked by death seemed to turn to his daughters, and he found full satisfaction for his heart in loving them. More or less brilliant proposals were made to him from time to time; wealthy merchants or farmers with daughters vied with each other in offering inducements to him to marry again; but he determined to remain a widower. His father-in-law, the only man for whom he felt a decided friendship, gave out that Goriot had made a vow to be faithful to his wife's memory. The frequenters of the Corn Exchange, who could not comprehend this sublime piece of folly, joked about it among themselves, and found a ridiculous nickname for him. One of them ventured (after a glass over a bargain) to call him by it, and a blow from the vermicelli maker's fist sent him headlong into a gutter in the Rue Oblin. He could think of nothing else when his children were concerned; his love for them made him fidgety and anxious; and this was so well known, that one day a competitor, who wished to get rid of him to secure the field to himself, told Goriot that Delphine had just been knocked down by a cab. The vermicelli maker turned ghastly pale, left the Exchange at once, and did not return for several days afterwards; he was ill in consequence of the shock and the subsequent relief on discovering that it was a false alarm. This time, however, the offender did not escape with a bruised shoulder; at a critical moment in the man's affairs, Goriot drove him into bankruptcy, and forced him to disappear from the Corn Exchange.

°°°°As might have been expected, the two girls were spoiled. With an income of sixty thousand francs, Goriot scarcely spent twelve hundred on himself, and found all his happiness in satisfying the whims of the two girls. The best masters were engaged, that Anastasie and Delphine might be endowed with all the accomplishments which distinguish a good education. They had a chaperon--luckily for them, she was a woman who had good sense and good taste;--they learned to ride; they had a carriage for their use; they lived as the mistress of a rich old lord might live; they had only to express a wish, their father would hasten to give them their most extravagant desires, and asked nothing of them in return but a kiss. Goriot had raised the two girls to the level of the angels; and, quite naturally, he himself was left beneath them. Poor man! he loved them even for the pain that they gave him.

°°°°When the girls were old enough to be married, they were left free to choose for themselves. Each had half her father's fortune as her dowry; and when the Comte de Restaud came to woo Anastasie for her beauty, her social aspirations led her to leave her father's house for a more exalted sphere. Delphine wished for money; she married Nucingen, a banker of German extraction, who became a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire. Goriot remained a vermicelli maker as before. His daughters and his sons-in-law began to demur; they did not like to see him still engaged in trade, though his whole life was bound up with his business. For five years he stood out against their entreaties, then he yielded, and consented to retire on the amount realized by the sale of his business and the savings of the last few years. It was this capital that Mme. Vauquer, in the early days of his residence with her, had calculated would bring in eight or ten thousand livres in a year. He had taken refuge in her lodging- house, driven there by despair when he knew that his daughters were compelled by their husbands not only to refuse to receive him as an inmate in their houses, but even to see him no more except in private.

°°°°This was all the information which Rastignac gained from a M. Muret who had purchased Goriot's business, information which confirmed the Duchesse de Langeais' suppositions, and herewith the preliminary explanation of this obscure but terrible Parisian tragedy comes to an end.

°°°°Towards the end of the first week in December Rastignac received two letters--one from his mother, and one from his eldest sister. His heart beat fast, half with happiness, half with fear, at the sight of the familiar handwriting. Those two little scraps of paper contained life or death for his hopes. But while he felt a shiver of dread as he remembered their dire poverty at home, he knew their love for him so well that he could not help fearing that he was draining their very life-blood. His mother's letter ran as follows:--

°°°°"My Dear Child,--I am sending you the money that you asked for. Make a good use of it. Even to save your life I could not raise so large a sum a second time without your father's knowledge, and there would be trouble about it. We should be obliged to mortgage the land. It is impossible to judge of the merits of schemes of which I am ignorant; but what sort of schemes can they be, that you should fear to tell me about them? Volumes of explanation would not have been needed; we mothers can understand at a word, and that word would have spared me the anguish of uncertainty. I do not know how to hide the painful impression that your letter has made upon me, my dear son. What can you have felt when you were moved to send this chill of dread through my heart? It must have been very painful to you to write the letter that gave me so much pain as I read it. To what courses are you committed? You are going to appear to be something that you are not, and your whole life and success depends upon this? You are about to see a society into which you cannot enter without rushing into expense that you cannot afford, without losing precious time that is needed for your studies. Ah! my dear Eugene, believe your mother, crooked ways cannot lead to great ends. Patience and endurance are the two qualities most needed in your position. I am not scolding you; I do not want any tinge of bitterness to spoil our offering. I am only talking like a mother whose trust in you is as great as her foresight for you. You know the steps that you must take, and I, for my part, know the purity of heart, and how good your intentions are; so I can say to you without a doubt, 'Go forward, beloved!' If I tremble, it is because I am a mother, but my prayers and blessings will be with you at every step. Be very careful, dear boy. You must have a man's prudence, for it lies with you to shape the destinies of five others who are dear to you, and must look to you. Yes, our fortunes depend upon you, and your success is ours. We all pray to God to be with you in all that you do. Your aunt Marcillac has been most generous beyond words in this matter; she saw at once how it was, even down to your gloves. 'But I have a weakness for the eldest!' she said gaily. You must love your aunt very much, dear Eugene. I shall wait till you have succeeded before telling you all that she has done for you, or her money would burn your fingers. You, who are young, do not know what it is to part with something that is a piece of your past! But what would we not sacrifice for your sakes? Your aunt says that I am to send you a kiss on the forehead from her, and that kiss is to bring you luck again and again, she says. She would have written you herself, the dear kind-hearted woman, but she is troubled with the gout in her fingers just now. Your father is very well. The vintage of 1819 has turned out better than we expected. Good-bye, dear boy; I will say nothing about your sisters, because Laure is writing to you, and I must let her have the pleasure of giving you all the home news. Heaven send that you may succeed! Oh! yes, dear Eugene, you must succeed. I have come, through you, to a knowledge of a pain so sharp that I do not think I could endure it a second time. I have come to know what it is to be poor, and to long for money for my children's sake. There, good-bye! Do not leave us for long without news of you; and here, at the last, take a kiss from your mother."

°°°°By the time Eugene had finished the letter he was in tears. He thought of Father Goriot crushing his silver keepsake into a shapeless mass before he sold it to meet his daughter's bill of exchange.

°°°°"Your mother has broken up her jewels for you," he said to himself; "your aunt shed tears over those relics of hers before she sold them for your sake. What right have you to heap execrations on Anastasie? You have followed her example; you have selfishly sacrificed others to your own future, and she sacrifices her father to her lover; and of you two, which is the worse?"

°°°°He was ready to renounce his attempts; he could not bear to take that money. The fires of remorse burned in his heart, and gave him intolerable pain, the generous secret remorse which men seldom take into account when they sit in judgment upon their fellow-men; but perhaps the angels in heaven, beholding it, pardon the criminal whom our justice condemns. Rastignac opened his sister's letter; its simplicity and kindness revived his heart.

°°°°"Your letter came just at the right time, dear brother. Agathe and I had thought of so many different ways of spending our money, that we did not know what to buy with it; and now you have come in, and, like the servant who upset all the watches that belonged to the King of Spain, you have restored harmony; for, really and truly, we did not know which of all the things we wanted we wanted most, and we were always quarreling about it, never thinking, dear Eugene, of a way of spending our money which would satisfy us completely. Agathe jumped for you. Indeed, we have been like two mad things all day, 'to such a prodigious degree' (as aunt would say), that mother said, with her severe expression, 'Whatever can be the matter with you, mesdemoiselles?' I think if we had been scolded a little, we should have been still better pleased. A woman ought to be very glad to suffer for one she loves! I, however, in my inmost soul, was doleful and cross in the midst of all my joy. I shall make a bad wife, I am afraid, I am too fond of spending. I had bought two sashes and a nice little stiletto for piercing eyelet-holes in my stays, trifles that I really did not want, so that I have less than that slow-coach Agathe, who is so economical, and hoards her money like a magpie. She had two hundred francs! And I have only one hundred and fifty! I am nicely punished; I could throw my sash down the well; it will be painful to me to wear it now. Poor dear, I have robbed you. And Agathe was so nice about it. She said, 'Let us send the three hundred and fifty francs in our two names!' But I could not help telling you everything just as it happened.

°°°°"Do you know how we managed to keep your commandments? We took our glittering hoard, we went out for a walk, and when once fairly on the highway we ran all the way to Ruffec, where we handed over the coin, without more ado, to M. Grimbert of the Messageries Royales. We came back again like swallows on the wing. 'Don't you think that happiness has made us lighter?' Agathe said. We said all sorts of things, which I shall not tell you, Monsieur le Parisien, because they were all about you. Oh, we love you dearly, dear brother; it was all summed up in those few words. As for keeping the secret, little masqueraders like us are capable of anything (according to our aunt), even of holding our tongues. Our mother has been on a mysterious journey to Angouleme, and the aunt went with her, not without solemn councils, from which we were shut out, and M. le Baron likewise. They are silent as to the weighty political considerations that prompted their mission, and conjectures are rife in the State of Rastignac. The Infantas are embroidering a muslin robe with open- work sprigs for her Majesty the Queen; the work progresses in the most profound secrecy. There be but two more breadths to finish. A decree has gone forth that no wall shall be built on the side of Verteuil, but that a hedge shall be planted instead thereof. Our subjects may sustain some disappointment of fruit and espaliers, but strangers will enjoy a fair prospect. Should the heir-presumptive lack pocket-handkerchiefs, be it known unto him that the dowager Lady of Marcillac, exploring the recesses of her drawers and boxes (known respectively as Pompeii and Herculaneum), having brought to light a fair piece of cambric whereof she wotted not, the Princesses Agathe and Laure place at their brother's disposal their thread, their needles, and hands somewhat of the reddest. The two young Princes, Don Henri and Don Gabriel, retain their fatal habits of stuffing themselves with grape-jelly, of teasing their sisters, of taking their pleasure by going a-bird-nesting, and of cutting switches for themselves from the osier-beds, maugre the laws of the realm. Moreover, they list not to learn naught, wherefore the Papal Nuncio (called of the commonalty, M. le Cure) threateneth them with excommunication, since that they neglect the sacred canons of grammatical construction for the construction of other canon, deadly engines made of the stems of elder.

°°°°"Farewell, dear brother, never did letter carry so many wishes for your success, so much love fully satisfied. You will have a great deal to tell us when you come home! You will tell me everything, won't you? I am the oldest. From something the aunt let fall, we think you must have had some success.

°°°°"Something was said of a lady, but nothing more was said . . .

°°°°"Of course not, in our family! Oh, by-the-by, Eugene, would you rather that we made that piece of cambric into shirts for you instead of pocket-handkerchiefs? If you want some really nice shirts at once, we ought to lose no time in beginning upon them; and if the fashion is different now in Paris, send us one for a pattern; we want more particularly to know about the cuffs. Good- bye! Good-bye! Take my kiss on the left side of your forehead, on the temple that belongs to me, and to no one else in the world. I am leaving the other side of the sheet for Agathe, who has solemnly promised not to read a word that I have written; but, all the same, I mean to sit by her side while she writes, so as to be quite sure that she keeps her word.--Your loving sister, "Laure de Rastignac."

°°°°"Yes!" said Eugene to himself. "Yes! Success at all costs now! Riches could not repay such devotion as this. I wish I could give them every sort of happiness! Fifteen hundred and fifty francs," he went on after a pause. "Every shot must go to the mark! Laure is right. Trust a woman! I have only calico shirts. Where some one else's welfare is concerned, a young girl becomes as ingenious as a thief. Guileless where she herself is in question, and full of foresight for me,--she is like a heavenly angel forgiving the strange incomprehensible sins of earth."

°°°°The world lay before him. His tailor had been summoned and sounded, and had finally surrendered. When Rastignac met M. de Trailles, he had seen at once how great a part the tailor plays in a young man's career; a tailor is either a deadly enemy or a staunch friend, with an invoice for a bond of friendship; between these two extremes there is, alack! no middle term. In this representative of his craft Eugene discovered a man who understood that his was a sort of paternal function for young men at their entrance into life, who regarded himself as a stepping- stone between a young man's present and future. And Rastignac in gratitude made the man's fortune by an epigram of a kind in which he excelled at a later period of his life.

°°°°"I have twice known a pair of trousers turned out by him make a match of twenty thousand livres a year!"

°°°°Fifteen hundred francs, and as many suits of clothes as he chose to order! At that moment the poor child of the South felt no more doubts of any kind. The young man went down to breakfast with the indefinable air which the consciousness of the possession of money gives to youth. No sooner are the coins slipped into a student's pocket than his wealth, in imagination at least, is piled into a fantastic column, which affords him a moral support. He begins to hold up his head as he walks; he is conscious that he has a means of bringing his powers to bear on a given point; he looks you straight in the face; his gestures are quick and decided; only yesterday he was diffident and shy, any one might have pushed him aside; to-morrow, he will take the wall of a prime minister. A miracle has been wrought in him. Nothing is beyond the reach of his ambition, and his ambition soars at random; he is light-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic; in short, the fledgling bird has discovered that he has wings. A poor student snatches at every chance pleasure much as a dog runs all sorts of risks to steal a bone, cracking it and sucking the marrow as he flies from pursuit; but a young man who can rattle a few runaway gold coins in his pocket can take his pleasure deliberately, can taste the whole of the sweets of secure possession; he soars far above earth; he has forgotten what the word POVERTY means; all Paris is his. Those are days when the whole world shines radiant with light, when everything glows and sparkles before the eyes of youth, days that bring joyous energy that is never brought into harness, days of debts and of painful fears that go hand in hand with every delight. Those who do not know the left bank of the Seine between the Rue Saint-Jacques and the Rue des Saints-Peres know nothing of life.

°°°°"Ah! if the women of Paris but knew," said Rastignac, as he devoured Mme. Vauquer's stewed pears (at five for a penny), "they would come here in search of a lover."

°°°°Just then a porter from the Messageries Royales appeared at the door of the room; they had previously heard the bell ring as the wicket opened to admit him. The man asked for M. Eugene de Rastignac, holding out two bags for him to take, and a form of receipt for his signature. Vautrin's keen glance cut Eugene like a lash.

°°°°"Now you will be able to pay for those fencing lessons and go to the shooting gallery," he said.

°°°°"Your ship has come in," said Mme. Vauquer, eyeing the bags.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau did not dare to look at the money, for fear her eyes should betray her cupidity.

°°°°"You have a kind mother," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"You have a kind mother, sir," echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, mamma has been drained dry," said Vautrin, "and now you can have your fling, go into society, and fish for heiresses, and dance with countesses who have peach blossom in their hair. But take my advice, young man, and don't neglect your pistol practice."

°°°°Vautrin struck an attitude, as if he were facing an antagonist. Rastignac, meaning to give the porter a tip, felt in his pockets and found nothing. Vautrin flung down a franc piece on the table.

°°°°"Your credit is good," he remarked, eyeing the student, and Rastignac was forced to thank him, though, since the sharp encounter of wits at dinner that day, after Eugene came in from calling on Mme. de Beauseant, he had made up his mind that Vautrin was insufferable. For a week, in fact, they had both kept silence in each other's presence, and watched each other. The student tried in vain to account to himself for this attitude.

°°°°An idea, of course, gains in force by the energy with which it is expressed; it strikes where the brain sends it, by a law as mathematically exact as the law that determines the course of a shell from a mortar. The amount of impression it makes is not to be determined so exactly. Sometimes, in an impressible nature, the idea works havoc, but there are, no less, natures so robustly protected, that this sort of projectile falls flat and harmless on skulls of triple brass, as cannon-shot against solid masonry; then there are flaccid and spongy-fibred natures into which ideas from without sink like spent bullets into the earthworks of a redoubt. Rastignac's head was something of the powder-magazine order; the least shock sufficed to bring about an explosion. He was too quick, too young, not to be readily accessible to ideas; and open to that subtle influence of thought and feeling in others which causes so many strange phenomena that make an impression upon us of which we are all unconscious at the time. Nothing escaped his mental vision; he was lynx-eyed; in him the mental powers of perception, which seem like duplicates of the senses, had the mysterious power of swift projection that astonishes us in intellects of a high order--slingers who are quick to detect the weak spot in any armor.

°°°°In the past month Eugene's good qualities and defects had rapidly developed with his character. Intercourse with the world and the endeavor to satisfy his growing desires had brought out his defects. But Rastignac came from the South side of the Loire, and had the good qualities of his countrymen. He had the impetuous courage of the South, that rushes to the attack of a difficulty, as well as the southern impatience of delay or suspense. These traits are held to be defects in the North; they made the fortune of Murat, but they likewise cut short his career. The moral would appear to be that when the dash and boldness of the South side of the Loire meets, in a southern temperament, with the guile of the North, the character is complete, and such a man will gain (and keep) the crown of Sweden.

°°°°Rastignac, therefore, could not stand the fire from Vautrin's batteries for long without discovering whether this was a friend or a foe. He felt as if this strange being was reading his inmost soul, and dissecting his feelings, while Vautrin himself was so close and secretive that he seemed to have something of the profound and unmoved serenity of a sphinx, seeing and hearing all things and saying nothing. Eugene, conscious of that money in his pocket, grew rebellious.

°°°°"Be so good as to wait a moment," he said to Vautrin, as the latter rose, after slowly emptying his coffee-cup, sip by sip.

°°°°"What for?" inquired the older man, as he put on his large- brimmed hat and took up the sword-cane that he was wont to twirl like a man who will face three or four footpads without flinching.

°°°°"I will repay you in a minute," returned Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he spoke, counted out a hundred and forty francs, and pushed them towards Mme. Vauquer. "Short reckonings make good friends" he added, turning to the widow; "that clears our accounts till the end of the year. Can you give me change for a five-franc piece?"

°°°°"Good friends make short reckonings," echoed Poiret, with a glance at Vautrin.

°°°°"Here is your franc," said Rastignac, holding out the coin to the sphinx in the black wig.

°°°°"Any one might think that you were afraid to owe me a trifle," exclaimed this latter, with a searching glance that seemed to read the young man's inmost thoughts; there was a satirical and cynical smile on Vautrin's face such as Eugene had seen scores of times already; every time he saw it, it exasperated him almost beyond endurance.

°°°°"Well . . . so I am," he answered. He held both the bags in his hand, and had risen to go up to his room.

°°°°Vautrin made as if he were going out through the sitting-room, and the student turned to go through the second door that opened into the square lobby at the foot of the staircase.

°°°°"Do you know, Monsieur le Marquis de Rastignacorama, that what you were saying just now was not exactly polite?" Vautrin remarked, as he rattled his sword-cane across the panels of the sitting-room door, and came up to the student.

°°°°Rastignac looked coolly at Vautrin, drew him to the foot of the staircase, and shut the dining-room door. They were standing in the little square lobby between the kitchen and the dining-room; the place was lighted by an iron-barred fanlight above a door that gave access into the garden. Sylvie came out of her kitchen, and Eugene chose that moment to say:

°°°°MONSIEUR Vautrin, I am not a marquis, and my name is not Rastignacorama."

°°°°"They will fight," said Mlle. Michonneau, in an indifferent tone.

°°°°"Fight!" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Not they," replied Mme. Vauquer, lovingly fingering her pile of coins.

°°°°"But there they are under the lime-trees," cried Mlle. Victorine, who had risen so that she might see out into the garden. "Poor young man! he was in the right, after all."

°°°°"We must go upstairs, my pet," said Mme. Couture; "it is no business of ours."

°°°°At the door, however, Mme. Couture and Victorine found their progress barred by the portly form of Sylvie the cook.

°°°°"What ever can have happened?" she said. "M. Vautrin said to M. Eugene, 'Let us have an explanation!' then he took him by the arm, and there they are, out among the artichokes."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking. "Mamma Vauquer," he said smiling, "don't frighten yourself at all. I am only going to try my pistols under the lime-trees."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur," cried Victorine, clasping her hands as she spoke, "why do you want to kill M. Eugene?"

°°°°Vautrin stepped back a pace or two, and gazed at Victorine.

°°°°"Oh! this is something fresh!" he exclaimed in a bantering tone, that brought the color into the poor girl's face. "That young fellow yonder is very nice, isn't he?" he went on. "You have given me a notion, my pretty child; I will make you both happy."

°°°°Mme. Couture laid her hand on the arm of her ward, and drew the girl away, as she said in her ear:

°°°°"Why, Victorine, I cannot imagine what has come over you this morning."

°°°°"I don't want any shots fired in my garden," said Mme. Vauquer. "You will frighten the neighborhood and bring the police up here all in a moment."

°°°°"Come, keep cool, Mamma Vauquer," answered Vautrin. "There, there; it's all right; we will go to the shooting-gallery."

°°°°He went back to Rastignac, laying his hand familiarly on the young man's arm.

°°°°"When I have given you ocular demonstration of the fact that I can put a bullet through the ace on a card five times running at thirty-five paces," he said, "that won't take away your appetite, I suppose? You look to me to be inclined to be a trifle quarrelsome this morning, and as if you would rush on your death like a blockhead."

°°°°"Do you draw back?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Don't try to raise my temperature," answered Vautrin, "it is not cold this morning. Let us go and sit over there," he added, pointing to the green-painted garden seats; "no one can overhear us. I want a little talk with you. You are not a bad sort of youngster, and I have no quarrel with you. I like you, take Trump--(confound it!)--take Vautrin's word for it. What makes me like you? I will tell you by-and-by. Meantime, I can tell you that I know you as well as if I had made you myself, as I will prove to you in a minute. Put down your bags," he continued, pointing to the round table.

°°°°Rastignac deposited his money on the table, and sat down. He was consumed with curiosity, which the sudden change in the manner of the man before him had excited to the highest pitch. Here was a strange being who, a moment ago, had talked of killing him, and now posed as his protector.

°°°°"You would like to know who I really am, what I was, and what I do now," Vautrin went on. "You want to know too much, youngster. Come! come! keep cool! You will hear more astonishing things than that. I have had my misfortunes. Just hear me out first, and you shall have your turn afterwards. Here is my past in three words. Who am I? Vautrin. What do I do? Just what I please. Let us change the subject. You want to know my character. I am good- natured to those who do me a good turn, or to those whose hearts speak to mine. These last may do anything they like with me; they may bruise my shins, and I shall not tell them to 'mind what they are about'; but, nom d'une pipe, the devil himself is not an uglier customer than I can be if people annoy me, or if I don't happen to take to them; and you may just as well know at once that I think no more of killing a man than of that," and he spat before him as he spoke. "Only when it is absolutely necessary to do so, I do my best to kill him properly. I am what you call an artist. I have read Benvenuto Cellini's Memoirs, such as you see me; and, what is more, in Italian: A fine-spirited fellow he was! From him I learned to follow the example set us by Providence, who strikes us down at random, and to admire the beautiful whenever and wherever it is found. And, setting other questions aside, is it not a glorious part to play, when you pit yourself against mankind, and the luck is on your side? I have thought a good deal about the constitution of your present social Dis- order. A duel is downright childish, my boy! utter nonsense and folly! When one of two living men must be got out of the way, none but an idiot would leave chance to decide which it is to be; and in a duel it is a toss-up--heads or tails--and there you are! Now I, for instance, can hit the ace in the middle of a card five times running, send one bullet after another through the same hole, and at thirty-five paces, moreover! With that little accomplishment you might think yourself certain of killing your man, mightn't you. Well, I have fired, at twenty paces, and missed, and the rogue who had never handled a pistol in his life-- look here!"--(he unbuttoned his waistcoat and exposed his chest, covered, like a bear's back, with a shaggy fell; the student gave a startled shudder)--"he was a raw lad, but he made his mark on me," the extraordinary man went on, drawing Rastignac's fingers over a deep scar on his breast. But that happened when I myself was a mere boy; I was one-and-twenty then (your age), and I had some beliefs left--in a woman's love, and in a pack of rubbish that you will be over head and ears in directly. You and I were to have fought just now, weren't we? You might have killed me. Suppose that I were put under the earth, where would you be? You would have to clear out of this, go to Switzerland, draw on papa's purse--and he has none too much in it as it is. I mean to open your eyes to your real position, that is what I am going to do: but I shall do it from the point of view of a man who, after studying the world very closely, sees that there are but two alternatives--stupid obedience or revolt. I obey nobody; is that clear? Now, do you know how much you will want at the pace you are going? A million; and promptly, too, or that little head of ours will be swaying to and fro in the drag-nets at Saint-Cloud, while we are gone to find out whether or no there is a Supreme Being. I will put you in the way of that million."

°°°°He stopped for a moment and looked at Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! you do not look so sourly at papa Vautrin now! At the mention of the million you look like a young girl when somebody has said, 'I will come for you this evening!' and she betakes herself to her toilette as a cat licks its whiskers over a saucer of milk. All right. Come, now, let us go into the question, young man; all between ourselves, you know. We have a papa and mamma down yonder, a great-aunt, two sisters (aged eighteen and seventeen), two young brothers (one fifteen, and the other ten), that is about the roll-call of the crew. The aunt brings up the two sisters; the cure comes and teaches the boys Latin. Boiled chestnuts are oftener on the table than white bread. Papa makes a suit of clothes last a long while; if mamma has a different dress winter and summer, it is about as much as she has; the sisters manage as best they can. I know all about it; I have lived in the south.

°°°°"That is how things are at home. They send you twelve hundred francs a year, and the whole property only brings in three thousand francs all told. We have a cook and a manservant; papa is a baron, and we must keep up appearances. Then we have our ambitions; we are connected with the Beauseants, and we go afoot through the streets; we want to be rich, and we have not a penny; we eat Mme. Vauquer's messes, and we like grand dinners in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; we sleep on a truckle-bed, and dream of a mansion! I do not blame you for wanting these things. What sort of men do the women run after? Men of ambition. Men of ambition have stronger frames, their blood is richer in iron, their hearts are warmer than those of ordinary men. Women feel that when their power is greatest, they look their best, and that those are their happiest hours; they like power in men, and prefer the strongest even if it is a power that may be their own destruction. I am going to make an inventory of your desires in order to put the question at issue before you. Here it is:--

°°°°"We are as hungry as a wolf, and those newly-cut teeth of ours are sharp; what are we to do to keep the pot boiling? In the first place, we have the Code to browse upon; it is not amusing, and we are none the wiser for it, but that cannot be helped. So far so good. We mean to make an advocate of ourselves with a prospect of one day being made President of a Court of Assize, when we shall send poor devils, our betters, to the galleys with a T.F.* [*Travaux forces.] on their shoulders, so that the rich may be convinced that they can sleep in peace. There is no fun in that; and you are a long while coming to it; for, to begin with, there are two years of nauseous drudgery in Paris, we see all the lollipops that we long for out of our reach. It is tiresome to want things and never to have them. If you were a pallid creature of the mollusk order, you would have nothing to fear, but it is different when you have the hot blood of a lion and are ready to get into a score of scrapes every day of your life. This is the ghastliest form of torture known in this inferno of God's making, and you will give in to it. Or suppose that you are a good boy, drink nothing stronger than milk, and bemoan your hard lot; you, with your generous nature, will endure hardships that would drive a dog mad, and make a start, after long waiting, as deputy to some rascal or other in a hole of a place where the Government will fling you a thousand francs a year like the scraps that are thrown to the butcher's dog. Bark at thieves, plead the cause of the rich, send men of heart to the guillotine, that is your work! Many thanks! If you have no influence, you may rot in your provincial tribunal. At thirty you will be a Justice with twelve hundred francs a year (if you have not flung off the gown for good before then). By the time you are forty you may look to marry a miller's daughter, an heiress with some six thousand livres a year. Much obliged! If you have influence, you may possibly be a Public Prosecutor by the time you are thirty; with a salary of a thousand crowns, you could look to marry the mayor's daughter. Some petty piece of political trickery, such as mistaking Villele for Manuel in a bulletin (the names rhyme, and that quiets your conscience), and you will probably be a Procureur General by the time you are forty, with a chance of becoming a deputy. Please to observe, my dear boy, that our conscience will have been a little damaged in the process, and that we shall endure twenty years of drudgery and hidden poverty, and that our sisters are wearing Dian's livery. I have the honor to call your attention to another fact: to wit, that there are but twenty Procureurs Generaux at a time in all France, while there are some twenty thousand of you young men who aspire to that elevated position; that there are some mountebanks among you who would sell their family to screw their fortunes a peg higher. If this sort of thing sickens you, try another course. The Baron de Rastignac thinks of becoming an advocate, does he? There's a nice prospect for you! Ten years of drudgery straight away. You are obliged to live at the rate of a thousand francs a month; you must have a library of law books, live in chambers, go into society, go down on your knees to ask a solicitor for briefs, lick the dust off the floor of the Palais de Justice. If this kind of business led to anything, I should not say no; but just give me the names of five advocates here in Paris who by the time that they are fifty are making fifty thousand francs a year! Bah! I would sooner turn pirate on the high seas than have my soul shrivel up inside me like that. How will you find the capital? There is but one way, marry a woman who has money. There is no fun in it. Have you a mind to marry? You hang a stone around your neck; for if you marry for money, what becomes of our exalted notions of honor and so forth? You might as well fly in the face of social conventions at once. Is it nothing to crawl like a serpent before your wife, to lick her mother's feet, to descend to dirty actions that would sicken swine--faugh!--never mind if you at least make your fortune. But you will be as doleful as a dripstone if you marry for money. It is better to wrestle with men than to wrangle at home with your wife. You are at the crossway of the roads of life, my boy; choose your way.

°°°°"But you have chosen already. You have gone to see your cousin of Beauseant, and you have had an inkling of luxury; you have been to Mme. de Restaud's house, and in Father Goriot's daughter you have seen a glimpse of the Parisienne for the first time. That day you came back with a word written on your forehead. I knew it, I could read it--'SUCCESS!' Yes, success at any price. 'Bravo,' said I to myself, 'here is the sort of fellow for me.' You wanted money. Where was it all to come from? You have drained your sisters' little hoard (all brothers sponge more or less on their sisters). Those fifteen hundred francs of yours (got together, God knows how! in a country where there are more chestnuts than five-franc pieces) will slip away like soldiers after pillage. And, then, what will you do? Shall you begin to work? Work, or what you understand by work at this moment, means, for a man of Poiret's calibre, an old age in Mamma Vauquer's lodging-house. There are fifty thousand young men in your position at this moment, all bent as you are on solving one and the same problem--how to acquire a fortune rapidly. You are but a unit in that aggregate. You can guess, therefore, what efforts you must make, how desperate the struggle is. There are not fifty thousand good positions for you; you must fight and devour one another like spiders in a pot. Do you know how a man makes his way here? By brilliant genius or by skilful corruption. You must either cut your way through these masses of men like a cannon ball, or steal among them like a plague. Honesty is nothing to the purpose. Men bow before the power of genius; they hate it, and try to slander it, because genius does not divide the spoil; but if genius persists, they bow before it. To sum it all up in a phrase, if they fail to smother genius in the mud, they fall on their knees and worship it. Corruption is a great power in the world, and talent is scarce. So corruption is the weapon of superfluous mediocrity; you will be made to feel the point of it everywhere. You will see women who spend more than ten thousand francs a year on dress, while their husband's salary (his whole income) is six thousand francs. You will see officials buying estates on twelve thousand francs a year. You will see women who sell themselves body and soul to drive in a carriage belonging to the son of a peer of France, who has a right to drive in the middle rank at Longchamp. You have seen that poor simpleton of a Goriot obliged to meet a bill with his daughter's name at the back of it, though her husband has fifty thousand francs a year. I defy you to walk a couple of yards anywhere in Paris without stumbling on some infernal complication. I'll bet my head to a head of that salad that you will stir up a hornet's nest by taking a fancy to the first young, rich, and pretty woman you meet. They are all dodging the law, all at loggerheads with their husbands. If I were to begin to tell you all that vanity or necessity (virtue is not often mixed up in it, you may be sure), all that vanity and necessity drive them to do for lovers, finery, housekeeping, or children, I should never come to an end. So an honest man is the common enemy.

°°°°"But do you know what an honest man is? Here, in Paris, an honest man is the man who keeps his own counsel, and will not divide the plunder. I am not speaking now of those poor bond-slaves who do the work of the world without a reward for their toil--God Almighty's outcasts, I call them. Among them, I grant you, is virtue in all the flower of its stupidity, but poverty is no less their portion. At this moment, I think I see the long faces those good folk would pull if God played a practical joke on them and stayed away at the Last Judgment.

°°°°"Well, then, if you mean to make a fortune quickly, you must either be rich to begin with, or make people believe that you are rich. It is no use playing here except for high stakes; once take to low play, it is all up with you. If in the scores of professions that are open to you, there are ten men who rise very rapidly, people are sure to call them thieves. You can draw your own conclusions. Such is life. It is no cleaner than a kitchen; it reeks like a kitchen; and if you mean to cook your dinner, you must expect to soil your hands; the real art is in getting them clean again, and therein lies the whole morality of our epoch. If I take this tone in speaking of the world to you, I have the right to do so; I know it well. Do you think that I am blaming it? Far from it; the world has always been as it is now. Moralists' strictures will never change it. Mankind are not perfect, but one age is more or less hypocritical than another, and then simpletons say that its morality is high or low. I do not think that the rich are any worse than the poor; man is much the same, high or low, or wherever he is. In a million of these human cattle there may be half a score of bold spirits who rise above the rest, above the laws; I am one of them. And you, if you are cleverer than your fellows, make straight to your end, and hold your head high. But you must lay your account with envy and slander and mediocrity, and every man's hand will be against you. Napoleon met with a Minister of War, Aubry by name, who all but sent him to the colonies.

°°°°"Feel your pulse. Think whether you can get up morning after morning, strengthened in yesterday's purpose. In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline. Listen attentively. You see, I have an idea of my own. My idea is to live a patriarchal life on a vast estate, say a hundred thousand acres, somewhere in the Southern States of America. I mean to be a planter, to have slaves, to make a few snug millions by selling my cattle, timber, and tobacco; I want to live an absolute monarch, and to do just as I please; to lead such a life as no one here in these squalid dens of lath and plaster ever imagines. I am a great poet; I do not write my poems, I feel them, and act them. At this moment I have fifty thousand francs, which might possibly buy forty negroes. I want two hundred thousand francs, because I want to have two hundred negroes to carry out my notions of the patriarachal life properly. Negroes, you see, are like a sort of family ready grown, and there are no inquisitive public prosecutors out there to interfere with you. That investment in ebony ought to mean three or four million francs in ten years' time. If I am successful, no one will ask me who I am. I shall be Mr. Four Millions, an American citizen. I shall be fifty years old by then, and sound and hearty still; I shall enjoy life after my own fashion. In two words, if I find you an heiress with a million, will you give me two hundred thousand francs? Twenty per cent commission, eh? Is that too much? Your little wife will be very much in love with you. Once married, you will show signs of uneasiness and remorse; for a couple of weeks you will be depressed. Then, some night after sundry grimacings, comes the confession, between two kisses, 'Two hundred thousand francs of debts, my darling!' This sort of farce is played every day in Paris, and by young men of the highest fashion. When a young wife has given her heart, she will not refuse her purse. Perhaps you are thinking that you will lose the money for good? Not you. You will make two hundred thousand francs again by some stroke of business. With your capital and your brains you should be able to accumulate as large a fortune as you could wish. ERGO, in six months you will have made your own fortune, and our old friend Vautrin's, and made an amiable woman very happy, to say nothing of your people at home, who must blow on their fingers to warm them, in the winter, for lack of firewood. You need not be surprised at my proposal, nor at the demand I make. Forty-seven out of every sixty great matches here in Paris are made after just such a bargain as this. The Chamber of Notaries compels my gentleman to----"

°°°°"What must I do?" said Rastignac, eagerly interrupting Vautrin's speech.

°°°°"Next to nothing," returned the other, with a slight involuntary movement, the suppressed exultation of the angler when he feels a bite at the end of his line. "Follow me carefully! The heart of a girl whose life is wretched and unhappy is a sponge that will thirstily absorb love; a dry sponge that swells at the first drop of sentiment. If you pay court to a young girl whose existence is a compound of loneliness, despair, and poverty, and who has no suspicion that she will come into a fortune, good Lord! it is quint and quatorze at piquet; it is knowing the numbers of the lottery before-hand; it is speculating in the funds when you have news from a sure source; it is building up a marriage on an indestructible foundation. The girl may come in for millions, and she will fling them, as if they were so many pebbles, at your feet. 'Take it, my beloved! Take it, Alfred, Adolphe, Eugene!' or whoever it was that showed his sense by sacrificing himself for her. And as for sacrificing himself, this is how I understand it. You sell a coat that is getting shabby, so that you can take her to the Cadran bleu, treat her to mushrooms on toast, and then go to the Ambigu-Comique in the evening; you pawn your watch to buy her a shawl. I need not remind you of the fiddle-faddle sentimentality that goes down so well with all women; you spill a few drops of water on your stationery, for instance; those are the tears you shed while far away from her. You look to me as if you were perfectly acquainted with the argot of the heart. Paris, you see, is like a forest in the New World, where you have to deal with a score of varieties of savages--Illinois and Hurons, who live on the proceed of their social hunting. You are a hunter of millions; you set your snares; you use lures and nets; there are many ways of hunting. Some hunt heiresses, others a legacy; some fish for souls, yet others sell their clients, bound hand and foot. Every one who comes back from the chase with his game- bag well filled meets with a warm welcome in good society. In justice to this hospitable part of the world, it must be said that you have to do with the most easy and good-natured of great cities. If the proud aristocracies of the rest of Europe refuse admittance among their ranks to a disreputable millionaire, Paris stretches out a hand to him, goes to his banquets, eats his dinners, and hobnobs with his infamy."

°°°°"But where is such a girl to be found?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Under your eyes; she is yours already."

°°°°"Mlle. Victorine?"

°°°°"Precisely."

°°°°"And what was that you said?"

°°°°"She is in love with you already, your little Baronne de Rastignac!"

°°°°"She has not a penny," Eugene continued, much mystified.

°°°°"Ah! now we are coming to it! Just another word or two, and it will all be clear enough. Her father, Taillefer, is an old scoundrel; it is said that he murdered one of his friends at the time of the Revolution. He is one of your comedians that sets up to have opinions of his own. He is a banker--senior partner in the house of Frederic Taillefer and Company. He has one son, and means to leave all he has to the boy, to the prejudice of Victorine. For my part, I don't like to see injustice of this sort. I am like Don Quixote, I have a fancy for defending the weak against the strong. If it should please God to take that youth away from him, Taillefer would have only his daughter left; he would want to leave his money to some one or other; an absurd notion, but it is only human nature, and he is not likely to have any more children, as I know. Victorine is gentle and amiable; she will soon twist her father round her fingers, and set his head spinning like a German top by plying him with sentiment! She will be too much touched by your devotion to forget you; you will marry her. I mean to play Providence for you, and Providence is to do my will. I have a friend whom I have attached closely to myself, a colonel in the Army of the Loire, who has just been transferred into the garde royale. He has taken my advice and turned ultra-royalist; he is not one of those fools who never change their opinions. Of all pieces of advice, my cherub, I would give you this--don't stick to your opinions any more than to your words. If any one asks you for them, let him have them-- at a price. A man who prides himself on going in a straight line through life is an idiot who believes in infallibility. There are no such things as principles; there are only events, and there are no laws but those of expediency: a man of talent accepts events and the circumstances in which he finds himself, and turns everything to his own ends. If laws and principles were fixed and invariable, nations would not change them as readily as we change our shirts. The individual is not obliged to be more particular than the nation. A man whose services to France have been of the very slightest is a fetich looked on with superstitious awe because he has always seen everything in red; but he is good, at the most, to be put into the Museum of Arts and Crafts, among the automatic machines, and labeled La Fayette; while the prince at whom everybody flings a stone, the man who despises humanity so much that he spits as many oaths as he is asked for in the face of humanity, saved France from being torn in pieces at the Congress of Vienna; and they who should have given him laurels fling mud at him. Oh! I know something of affairs, I can tell you; I have the secrets of many men! Enough. When I find three minds in agreement as to the application of a principle, I shall have a fixed and immovable opinion--I shall have to wait a long while first. In the Tribunals you will not find three judges of the same opinion on a single point of law. To return to the man I was telling you of. He would crucify Jesus Christ again, if I bade him. At a word from his old chum Vautrin he will pick a quarrel with a scamp that will not send so much as five francs to his sister, poor girl, and" (here Vautrin rose to his feet and stood like a fencing-master about to lunge)--"turn him off into the dark!" he added.

°°°°"How frightful!" said Eugene. "You do not really mean it? M. Vautrin, you are joking!"

°°°°"There! there! Keep cool!" said the other. "Don't behave like a baby. But if you find any amusement in it, be indignant, flare up! Say that I am a scoundrel, a rascal, a rogue, a bandit; but do not call me a blackleg nor a spy! There, out with it, fire away! I forgive you; it is quite natural at your age. I was like that myself once. Only remember this, you will do worse things yourself some day. You will flirt with some pretty woman and take her money. You have thought of that, of course," said Vautrin, "for how are you to succeed unless love is laid under contribution? There are no two ways about virtue, my dear student; it either is, or it is not. Talk of doing penance for your sins! It is a nice system of business, when you pay for your crime by an act of contrition! You seduce a woman that you may set your foot on such and such a rung of the social ladder; you sow dissension among the children of a family; you descend, in short, to every base action that can be committed at home or abroad, to gain your own ends for your own pleasure or your profit; and can you imagine that these are acts of faith, hope, or charity? How is it that a dandy, who in a night has robbed a boy of half his fortune, gets only a couple of months in prison; while a poor devil who steals a banknote for a thousand francs, with aggravating circumstances, is condemned to penal servitude? Those are your laws. Not a single provision but lands you in some absurdity. That man with yellow gloves and a golden tongue commits many a murder; he sheds no blood, but he drains his victim's veins as surely; a desperado forces open a door with a crowbar, dark deeds both of them! You yourself will do every one of those things that I suggest to you to-day, bar the bloodshed. Do you believe that there is any absolute standard in this world? Despise mankind and find out the meshes that you can slip through in the net of the Code. The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out, because it was properly executed."

°°°°"Silence, sir! I will not hear any more; you make me doubt myself. At this moment my sentiments are all my science."

°°°°"Just as you please, my fine fellow; I did think you were so weak-minded," said Vautrin, "I shall say no more about it. One last word, however," and he looked hard at the student--"you have my secret," he said.

°°°°"A young man who refuses your offer knows that he must forget it."

°°°°"Quite right, quite right; I am glad to hear you say so. Somebody else might not be so scrupulous, you see. Keep in mind what I want to do for you. I will give you a fortnight. The offer is still open."

°°°°"What a head of iron the man has!" said Eugene to himself, as he watched Vautrin walk unconcernedly away with his cane under his arm. "Yet Mme. de Beauseant said as much more gracefully; he has only stated the case in cruder language. He would tear my heart with claws of steel. What made me think of going to Mme. de Nucingen? He guessed my motives before I knew them myself. To sum it up, that outlaw has told me more about virtue than all I have learned from men and books. If virtue admits of no compromises, I have certainly robbed my sisters," he said, throwing down the bags on the table.

°°°°He sat down again and fell, unconscious of his surroundings, into deep thought.

°°°°"To be faithful to an ideal of virtue! A heroic martyrdom! Pshaw! every one believes in virtue, but who is virtuous? Nations have made an idol of Liberty, but what nation on the face of the earth is free? My youth is still like a blue and cloudless sky. If I set myself to obtain wealth or power, does it mean that I must make up my mind to lie, and fawn, and cringe, and swagger, and flatter, and dissemble? To consent to be the servant of others who have likewise fawned, and lied, and flattered? Must I cringe to them before I can hope to be their accomplice? Well, then, I decline. I mean to work nobly and with a single heart. I will work day and night; I will owe my fortune to nothing but my own exertions. It may be the slowest of all roads to success, but I shall lay my head on the pillow at night untroubled by evil thoughts. Is there a greater thing than this--to look back over your life and know that it is stainless as a lily? I and my life are like a young man and his betrothed. Vautrin has put before me all that comes after ten years of marriage. The devil! my head is swimming. I do not want to think at all; the heart is a sure guide."

°°°°Eugene was roused from his musings by the voice of the stout Sylvie, who announced that the tailor had come, and Eugene therefore made his appearance before the man with the two money bags, and was not ill pleased that it should be so. When he had tried on his dress suit, he put on his new morning costume, which completely metamorphosed him.

°°°°"I am quite equal to M. de Trailles," he said to himself. "In short, I look like a gentleman."

°°°°"You asked me, sir, if I knew the houses where Mme. de Nucingen goes," Father Goriot's voice spoke from the doorway of Eugene's room."

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Very well then, she is going to the Marechale Carigliano's ball on Monday. If you can manage to be there, I shall hear from you whether my two girls enjoyed themselves, and how they were dressed, and all about it in fact."

°°°°"How did you find that out, my good Goriot?" said Eugene, putting a chair by the fire for his visitor.

°°°°"Her maid told me. I hear all about their doings from Therese and Constance," he added gleefully.

°°°°The old man looked like a lover who is still young enough to be made happy by the discovery of some little stratagem which brings him information of his lady-love without her knowledge.

°°°°"YOU will see them both!" he said, giving artless expression to a pang of jealousy.

°°°°"I do not know," answered Eugene. "I will go to Mme. de Beauseant and ask her for an introduction to the Marechale."

°°°°Eugene felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought of appearing before the Vicomtesse, dressed as henceforward he always meant to be. The "abysses of the human heart," in the moralists' phrase, are only insidious thoughts, involuntary promptings of personal interest. The instinct of enjoyment turns the scale; those rapid changes of purpose which have furnished the text for so much rhetoric are calculations prompted by the hope of pleasure. Rastignac beholding himself well dressed and impeccable as to gloves and boots, forgot his virtuous resolutions. Youth, moreover, when bent upon wrongdoing does not dare to behold himself in the mirror of consciousness; mature age has seen itself; and therein lies the whole difference between these two phases of life.

°°°°A friendship between Eugene and his neighbor, Father Goriot, had been growing up for several days past. This secret friendship and the antipathy that the student had begun to entertain for Vautrin arose from the same psychological causes. The bold philosopher who shall investigate the effects of mental action upon the physical world will doubtless find more than one proof of the material nature of our sentiments in other animals. What physiognomist is as quick to discern character as a dog is to discover from a stranger's face whether this is a friend or no? Those by-words--"atoms," "affinities"--are facts surviving in modern languages for the confusion of philosophic wiseacres who amuse themselves by winnowing the chaff of language to find its grammatical roots. We FEEL that we are loved. Our sentiments make themselves felt in everything, even at a great distance. A letter is a living soul, and so faithful an echo of the voice that speaks in it, that finer natures look upon a letter as one of love's most precious treasures. Father Goriot's affection was of the instinctive order, a canine affection raised to a sublime pitch; he had scented compassion in the air, and the kindly respect and youthful sympathy in the student's heart. This friendship had, however, scarcely reached the stage at which confidences are made. Though Eugene had spoken of his wish to meet Mme. de Nucingen, it was not because he counted on the old man to introduce him to her house, for he hoped that his own audacity might stand him in good stead. All that Father Goriot had said as yet about his daughters had referred to the remarks that the student had made so freely in public on that day of the two visits.

°°°°"How could you think that Mme. de Restaud bore you a grudge for mentioning my name?" he had said on the day following that scene at dinner. "My daughters are very fond of me; I am a happy father; but my sons-in-law have behaved badly to me, and rather than make trouble between my darlings and their husbands, I choose to see my daughters secretly. Fathers who can see their daughters at any time have no idea of all the pleasure that all this mystery gives me; I cannot always see mine when I wish, do you understand? So when it is fine I walk out in the Champs- Elysees, after finding out from their waiting-maids whether my daughters mean to go out. I wait near the entrance; my heart beats fast when the carriages begin to come; I admire them in their dresses, and as they pass they give me a little smile, and it seems as if everything was lighted up for me by a ray of bright sunlight. I wait, for they always go back the same way, and then I see them again; the fresh air has done them good and brought color into their cheeks; all about me people say, 'What a beautiful woman that is!' and it does my heart good to hear them.

°°°°"Are they not my own flesh and blood? I love the very horses that draw them; I envy the little lap-dog on their knees. Their happiness is my life. Every one loves after his own fashion, and mine does no one any harm; why should people trouble their heads about me? I am happy in my own way. Is there any law against going to see my girls in the evening when they are going out to a ball? And what a disappointment it is when I get there too late, and am told that 'Madame has gone out!' Once I waited till three o'clock in the morning for Nasie; I had not seen her for two whole days. I was so pleased, that it was almost too much for me! Please do not speak of me unless it is to say how good my daughters are to me. They are always wanting to heap presents upon me, but I will not have it. 'Just keep your money,' I tell them. 'What should I do with it? I want nothing.' And what am I, sir, after all? An old carcase, whose soul is always where my daughters are. When you have seen Mme. de Nucingen, tell me which you like the most," said the old man after a moment's pause, while Eugene put the last touches to his toilette. The student was about to go out to walk in the Garden of the Tuileries until the hour when he could venture to appear in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room.

°°°°That walk was a turning-point in Eugene's career. Several women noticed him; he looked so handsome, so young, and so well dressed. This almost admiring attention gave a new turn to his thoughts. He forgot his sisters and the aunt who had robbed herself for him; he no longer remembered his own virtuous scruples. He had seen hovering above his head the fiend so easy to mistake for an angel, the Devil with rainbow wings, who scatters rubies, and aims his golden shafts at palace fronts, who invests women with purple, and thrones with a glory that dazzles the eyes of fools till they forget the simple origins of royal dominion; he had heard the rustle of that Vanity whose tinsel seems to us to be the symbol of power. However cynical Vautrin's words had been, they had made an impression on his mind, as the sordid features of the old crone who whispers, "A lover, and gold in torrents," remain engraven on a young girl's memory.

°°°°Eugene lounged about the walks till it was nearly five o'clock, then he went to Mme. de Beauseant, and received one of the terrible blows against which young hearts are defenceless. Hitherto the Vicomtesse had received him with the kindly urbanity, the bland grace of manner that is the result of fine breeding, but is only complete when it comes from the heart.

°°°°Today Mme. de Beauseant bowed constrainedly, and spoke curtly:

°°°°"M. de Rastignac, I cannot possibly see you, at least not at this moment. I am engaged . . ."

°°°°An observer, and Rastignac instantly became an observer, could read the whole history, the character and customs of caste, in the phrase, in the tones of her voice, in her glance and bearing. He caught a glimpse of the iron hand beneath the velvet glove-- the personality, the egoism beneath the manner, the wood beneath the varnish. In short, he heard that unmistakable I THE KING that issues from the plumed canopy of the throne, and finds its last echo under the crest of the simplest gentleman.

°°°°Eugene had trusted too implicitly to the generosity of a woman; he could not believe in her haughtiness. Like all the unfortunate, he had subscribed, in all good faith, the generous compact which should bind the benefactor to the recipient, and the first article in that bond, between two large-hearted natures, is a perfect equality. The kindness which knits two souls together is as rare, as divine, and as little understood as the passion of love, for both love and kindness are the lavish generosity of noble natures. Rastignac was set upon going to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball, so he swallowed down this rebuff.

°°°°"Madame," he faltered out, "I would not have come to trouble you about a trifling matter; be so kind as to permit me to see you later, I can wait."

°°°°"Very well, come and dine with me," she said, a little confused by the harsh way in which she had spoken, for this lady was as genuinely kind-hearted as she was high-born.

°°°°Eugene was touched by this sudden relenting, but none the less he said to himself as he went away, "Crawl in the dust, put up with every kind of treatment. What must the rest of the world be like when one of the kindest of women forgets all her promises of befriending me in a moment, and tosses me aside like an old shoe? So it is every one for himself? It is true that her house is not a shop, and I have put myself in the wrong by needing her help. You should cut your way through the world like a cannon ball, as Vautrin said."

°°°°But the student's bitter thoughts were soon dissipated by the pleasure which he promised himself in this dinner with the Vicomtesse. Fate seemed to determine that the smallest accidents in his life should combine to urge him into a career, which the terrible sphinx of the Maison Vauquer had described as a field of battle where you must either slay or be slain, and cheat to avoid being cheated. You leave your conscience and your heart at the barriers, and wear a mask on entering into this game of grim earnest, where, as in ancient Sparta, you must snatch your prize without being detected if you would deserve the crown.

°°°°On his return he found the Vicomtesse gracious and kindly, as she had always been to him. They went together to the dining-room, where the Vicomte was waiting for his wife. In the time of the Restoration the luxury of the table was carried, as is well known, to the highest degree, and M. de Beauseant, like many jaded men of the world, had few pleasures left but those of good cheer; in this matter, in fact, he was a gourmand of the schools of Louis XVIII. and of the Duc d'Escars, and luxury was supplemented by splendor. Eugene, dining for the first time in a house where the traditions of grandeur had descended through many generations, had never seen any spectacle like this that now met his eyes. In the time of the Empire, balls had always ended with a supper, because the officers who took part in them must be fortified for immediate service, and even in Paris might be called upon to leave the ballroom for the battlefield. This arrangement had gone out of fashion under the Monarchy, and Eugene had so far only been asked to dances. The self-possession which pre-eminently distinguished him in later life already stood him in good stead, and he did not betray his amazement. Yet as he saw for the first time the finely wrought silver plate, the completeness of every detail, the sumptuous dinner, noiselessly served, it was difficult for such an ardent imagination not to prefer this life of studied and refined luxury to the hardships of the life which he had chosen only that morning.

°°°°His thoughts went back for a moment to the lodging-house, and with a feeling of profound loathing, he vowed to himself that at New Year he would go; prompted at least as much by a desire to live among cleaner surroundings as by a wish to shake off Vautrin, whose huge hand he seemed to feel on his shoulder at that moment. When you consider the numberless forms, clamorous or mute, that corruption takes in Paris, common-sense begins to wonder what mental aberration prompted the State to establish great colleges and schools there, and assemble young men in the capital; how it is that pretty women are respected, or that the gold coin displayed in the money-changer's wooden saucers does not take to itself wings in the twinkling of an eye; and when you come to think further, how comparatively few cases of crime there are, and to count up the misdemeanors committed by youth, is there not a certain amount of respect due to these patient Tantaluses who wrestle with themselves and nearly always come off victorious? The struggles of the poor student in Paris, if skilfully drawn, would furnish a most dramatic picture of modern civilization.

°°°°In vain Mme. de Beauseant looked at Eugene as if asking him to speak; the student was tongue-tied in the Vicomte's presence.

°°°°"Are you going to take me to the Italiens this evening?" the Vicomtesse asked her husband.

°°°°"You cannot doubt that I should obey you with pleasure," he answered, and there was a sarcastic tinge in his politeness which Eugene did not detect, "but I ought to go to meet some one at the Varietes."

°°°°"His mistress," said she to herself.

°°°°"Then, is not Ajuda coming for you this evening?" inquired the Vicomte.

°°°°"No," she answered, petulantly.

°°°°"Very well, then, if you really must have an arm, take that of M. de Rastignac."

°°°°The Vicomtess turned to Eugene with a smile.

°°°°"That would be a very compromising step for you," she said.

°°°°" 'A Frenchman loves danger, because in danger there is glory,' to quote M. de Chateaubriand," said Rastignac, with a bow.

°°°°A few moments later he was sitting beside Mme. de Beauseant in a brougham, that whirled them through the streets of Paris to a fashionable theatre. It seemed to him that some fairy magic had suddenly transported him into a box facing the stage. All the lorgnettes of the house were pointed at him as he entered, and at the Vicomtesse in her charming toilette. He went from enchantment to enchantment.

°°°°"You must talk to me, you know," said Mme. de Beauseant. "Ah! look! There is Mme. de Nucingen in the third box from ours. Her sister and M. de Trailles are on the other side."

°°°°The Vicomtesse glanced as she spoke at the box where Mlle. de Rochefide should have been; M. d'Ajuda was not there, and Mme. de Beauseant's face lighted up in a marvelous way.

°°°°"She is charming," said Eugene, after looking at Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"She has white eyelashes."

°°°°"Yes, but she has such a pretty slender figure!"

°°°°"Her hands are large."

°°°°"Such beautiful eyes!"

°°°°"Her face is long."

°°°°"Yes, but length gives distinction."

°°°°"It is lucky for her that she has some distinction in her face. Just see how she fidgets with her opera-glass! The Goriot blood shows itself in every movement," said the Vicomtesse, much to Eugene's astonishment.

°°°°Indeed, Mme. de Beauseant seemed to be engaged in making a survey of the house, and to be unconscious of Mme. Nucingen's existence; but no movement made by the latter was lost upon the Vicomtesse. The house was full of the loveliest women in Paris, so that Delphine de Nucingen was not a little flattered to receive the undivided attention of Mme. de Beauseant's young, handsome, and well-dressed cousin, who seemed to have no eyes for any one else.

°°°°"If you look at her so persistently, you will make people talk, M. de Rastignac. You will never succeed if you fling yourself at any one's head like that."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Eugene, "you have protected me indeed so far, and now if you would complete your work, I only ask of you a favor which will cost you but little, and be of very great service to me. I have lost my heart."

°°°°"Already!"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"And to that woman!"

°°°°"How could I aspire to find any one else to listen to me?" he asked, with a keen glance at his cousin. "Her Grace the Duchesse de Carigliano is a friend of the Duchesse de Berri," he went on, after a pause; "you are sure to see her, will you be so kind as to present me to her, and to take me to her ball on Monday? I shall meet Mme. de Nucingen there, and enter into my first skirmish."

°°°°"Willingly," she said. "If you have a liking for her already, your affairs of the heart are like to prosper. That is de Marsay over there in the Princesse Galathionne's box. Mme. de Nucingen is racked with jealousy. There is no better time for approaching a woman, especially if she happens to be a banker's wife. All those ladies of the Chaussee-d'Antin love revenge."

°°°°"Then, what would you do yourself in such a case?"

°°°°"I should suffer in silence."

°°°°At this point the Marquis d'Ajuda appeared in Mme. de Beauseant's box.

°°°°"I have made a muddle of my affairs to come to you," he said, "and I am telling you about it, so that it may not be a sacrifice."

°°°°Eugene saw the glow of joy on the Vicomtesse's face, and knew that this was love, and learned the difference between love and the affectations of Parisian coquetry. He admired his cousin, grew mute, and yielded his place to M. d'Ajuda with a sigh.

°°°°"How noble, how sublime a woman is when she loves like that!" he said to himself. "And HE could forsake her for a doll! Oh! how could any one forsake her?"

°°°°There was a boy's passionate indignation in his heart. He could have flung himself at Mme. de Beauseant's feet; he longed for the power of the devil if he could snatch her away and hide her in his heart, as an eagle snatches up some white yeanling from the plains and bears it to its eyrie. It was humiliating to him to think that in all this gallery of fair pictures he had not one picture of his own. "To have a mistress and an almost royal position is a sign of power," he said to himself. And he looked at Mme. de Nucingen as a man measures another who has insulted him.

°°°°The Vicomtesse turned to him, and the expression of her eyes thanked him a thousand times for his discretion. The first act came to an end just then.

°°°°"Do you know Mme. de Nucingen well enough to present M. de Rastignac to her?" she asked of the Marquis d'Ajuda.

°°°°"She will be delighted," said the Marquis. The handsome Portuguese rose as he spoke and took the student's arm, and in another moment Eugene found himself in Mme. de Nucingen's box.

°°°°"Madame," said the Marquis, "I have the honor of presenting to you the Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac; he is a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's. You have made so deep an impression upon him, that I thought I would fill up the measure of his happiness by bringing him nearer to his divinity."

°°°°Words spoken half jestingly to cover their somewhat disrespectful import; but such an implication, if carefully disguised, never gives offence to a woman. Mme. de Nucingen smiled, and offered Eugene the place which her husband had just left.

°°°°"I do not venture to suggest that you should stay with me, monsieur," she said. "Those who are so fortunate as to be in Mme. de Beauseant's company do not desire to leave it."

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, lowering his voice, "I think that to please my cousin I should remain with you. Before my lord Marquis came we were speaking of you and of your exceedingly distinguished appearance," he added aloud.

°°°°M. d'Ajuda turned and left them.

°°°°"Are you really going to stay with me, monsieur?" asked the Baroness. "Then we shall make each other's acquaintance. Mme. de Restaud told me about you, and has made me anxious to meet you."

°°°°"She must be very insincere, then, for she has shut her door on me."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Madame, I will tell you honestly the reason why; but I must crave your indulgence before confiding such a secret to you. I am your father's neighbor; I had no idea that Mme. de Restaud was his daughter. I was rash enough to mention his name; I meant no harm, but I annoyed your sister and her husband very much. You cannot think how severely the Duchesse de Langeais and my cousin blamed this apostasy on a daughter's part, as a piece of bad taste. I told them all about it, and they both burst out laughing. Then Mme. de Beauseant made some comparison between you and your sister, speaking in high terms of you, and saying how very fond you were of my neighbor, M. Goriot. And, indeed, how could you help loving him? He adores you so passionately that I am jealous already. We talked about you this morning for two hours. So this evening I was quite full of all that your father had told me, and while I was dining with my cousin I said that you could not be as beautiful as affectionate. Mme. de Beauseant meant to gratify such warm admiration, I think, when she brought me here, telling me, in her gracious way, that I should see you."

°°°°"Then, even now, I owe you a debt of gratitude, monsieur," said the banker's wife. "We shall be quite old friends in a little while."

°°°°"Although a friendship with you could not be like an ordinary friendship," said Rastignac; "I should never wish to be your friend."

°°°°Such stereotyped phrases as these, in the mouths of beginners, possess an unfailing charm for women, and are insipid only when read coldly; for a young man's tone, glance and attitude give a surpassing eloquence to the banal phrases. Mme. de Nucingen thought that Rastignac was adorable. Then, woman-like, being at a loss how to reply to the student's outspoken admiration, she answered a previous remark.

°°°°"Yes, it is very wrong of my sister to treat our poor father as she does," she said; "he has been a Providence to us. It was not until M. de Nucingen positively ordered me only to receive him in the mornings that I yielded the point. But I have been unhappy about it for a long while; I have shed many tears over it. This violence to my feelings, with my husband's brutal treatment, have been two causes of my unhappy married life. There is certainly no woman in Paris whose lot seems more enviable than mine, and yet, in reality, there is not one so much to be pitied. You will think I must be out of my senses to talk to you like this; but you know my father, and I cannot regard you as a stranger."

°°°°"You will find no one," said Eugene, "who longs as eagerly as I do to be yours. What do all women seek? Happiness." (He answered his own question in low, vibrating tones.) "And if happiness for a woman means that she is to be loved and adored, to have a friend to whom she can pour out her wishes, her fancies, her sorrows and joys; to whom she can lay bare her heart and soul, and all her fair defects and her gracious virtues, without fear of a betrayal; believe me, the devotion and the warmth that never fails can only be found in the heart of a young man who, at a bare sign from you, would go to his death, who neither knows nor cares to know anything as yet of the world, because you will be all the world to him. I myself, you see (you will laugh at my simplicity), have just come from a remote country district; I am quite new to this world of Paris; I have only known true and loving hearts; and I made up my mind that here I should find no love. Then I chanced to meet my cousin, and to see my cousin's heart from very near; I have divined the inexhaustible treasures of passion, and, like Cherubino, I am the lover of all women, until the day comes when I find THE woman to whom I may devote myself. As soon as I saw you, as soon as I came into the theatre this evening, I felt myself borne towards you as if by the current of a stream. I had so often thought of you already, but I had never dreamed that you would be so beautiful! Mme. de Beauseant told me that I must not look so much at you. She does not know the charm of your red lips, your fair face, nor see how soft your eyes are. . . . I also am beginning to talk nonsense; but let me talk."

°°°°Nothing pleases a woman better than to listen to such whispered words as these; the most puritanical among them listens even when she ought not to reply to them; and Rastignac, having once begun, continued to pour out his story, dropping his voice, that she might lean and listen; and Mme. de Nucingen, smiling, glanced from time to time at de Marsay, who still sat in the Princesse Galathionne's box.

°°°°Rastignac did not leave Mme. de Nucingen till her husband came to take her home.

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, "I shall have the pleasure of calling upon you before the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball."

°°°°"If Matame infites you to come," said the Baron, a thickset Alsatian, with indications of a sinister cunning in his full-moon countenance, "you are quide sure of being well receifed."

°°°°"My affairs seem to be in a promising way," said Eugene to himself.--" 'Can you love me?' I asked her, and she did not resent it. The bit is in the horse's mouth, and I have only to mount and ride;" and with that he went to pay his respects to Mme. de Beauseant, who was leaving the theatre on d'Ajuda's arm.

°°°°The student did not know that the Baroness' thoughts had been wandering; that she was even then expecting a letter from de Marsay, one of those letters that bring about a rupture that rends the soul; so, happy in his delusion, Eugene went with the Vicomtesse to the peristyle, where people were waiting till their carriages were announced.

°°°°"That cousin of yours is hardly recognizable for the same man," said the Portuguese laughingly to the Vicomtesse, when Eugene had taken leave of them. "He will break the bank. He is as supple as an eel; he will go a long way, of that I am sure. Who else could have picked out a woman for him, as you did, just when she needed consolation?"

°°°°"But it is not certain that she does not still love the faithless lover," said Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°The student meanwhile walked back from the Theatre-Italien to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, making the most delightful plans as he went. He had noticed how closely Mme. de Restaud had scrutinized him when he sat beside Mme. de Nucingen, and inferred that the Countess' doors would not be closed in the future. Four important houses were now open to him--for he meant to stand well with the Marechale; he had four supporters in the inmost circle of society in Paris. Even now it was clear to him that, once involved in this intricate social machinery, he must attach himself to a spoke of the wheel that was to turn and raise his fortunes; he would not examine himself too curiously as to the methods, but he was certain of the end, and conscious of the power to gain and keep his hold.

°°°°"If Mme. de Nucingen takes an interest in me, I will teach her how to manage her husband. That husband of hers is a great speculator; he might put me in the way of making a fortune by a single stroke."

°°°°He did not say this bluntly in so many words; as yet, indeed, he was not sufficient of a diplomatist to sum up a situation, to see its possibilities at a glance, and calculate the chances in his favor. These were nothing but hazy ideas that floated over his mental horizon; they were less cynical than Vautrin's notions; but if they had been tried in the crucible of conscience, no very pure result would have issued from the test. It is by a succession of such like transactions that men sink at last to the level of the relaxed morality of this epoch, when there have never been so few of those who square their courses with their theories, so few of those noble characters who do not yield to temptation, for whom the slightest deviation from the line of rectitude is a crime. To these magnificent types of uncompromising Right we owe two masterpieces--the Alceste of Moliere, and, in our own day, the characters of Jeanie Deans and her father in Sir Walter Scott's novel. Perhaps a work which should chronicle the opposite course, which should trace out all the devious courses through which a man of the world, a man of ambitions, drags his conscience, just steering clear of crime that he may gain his end and yet save appearances, such a chronicle would be no less edifying and no less dramatic.

°°°°Rastignac went home. He was fascinated by Mme. de Nucingen; he seemed to see her before him, slender and graceful as a swallow. He recalled the intoxicating sweetness of her eyes, her fair hair, the delicate silken tissue of the skin, beneath which it almost seemed to him that he could see the blood coursing; the tones of her voice still exerted a spell over him; he had forgotten nothing; his walk perhaps heated his imagination by sending a glow of warmth through his veins. He knocked unceremoniously at Goriot's door.

°°°°"I have seen Mme. Delphine, neighbor," said he.

°°°°"Where?"

°°°°"At the Italiens."

°°°°"Did she enjoy it?. . . . Just come inside," and the old man left his bed, unlocked the door, and promptly returned again.

°°°°It was the first time that Eugene had been in Father Goriot's room, and he could not control his feeling of amazement at the contrast between the den in which the father lived and the costume of the daughter whom he had just beheld. The window was curtainless, the walls were damp, in places the varnished wall- paper had come away and gave glimpses of the grimy yellow plaster beneath. The wretched bed on which the old man lay boasted but one thin blanket, and a wadded quilt made out of large pieces of Mme. Vauquer's old dresses. The floor was damp and gritty. Opposite the window stood a chest of drawers made of rosewood, one of the old-fashioned kind with a curving front and brass handles, shaped like rings of twisted vine stems covered with flowers and leaves. On a venerable piece of furniture with a wooden shelf stood a ewer and basin and shaving apparatus. A pair of shoes stood in one corner; a night-table by the bed had neither a door nor marble slab. There was not a trace of a fire in the empty grate; the square walnut table with the crossbar against which Father Goriot had crushed and twisted his posset- dish stood near the hearth. The old man's hat was lying on a broken-down bureau. An armchair stuffed with straw and a couple of chairs completed the list of ramshackle furniture. From the tester of the bed, tied to the ceiling by a piece of rag, hung a strip of some cheap material in large red and black checks. No poor drudge in a garret could be worse lodged than Father Goriot in Mme. Vauquer's lodging-house. The mere sight of the room sent a chill through you and a sense of oppression; it was like the worst cell in a prison. Luckily, Goriot could not see the effect that his surroundings produced on Eugene as the latter deposited his candle on the night-table. The old man turned round, keeping the bedclothes huddled up to his chin.

°°°°"Well," he said, "and which do you like the best, Mme. de Restaud or Mme. de Nucingen?"

°°°°"I like Mme. Delphine the best," said the law student, "because she loves you the best."

°°°°At the words so heartily spoken the old man's hand slipped out from under the bedclothes and grasped Eugene's.

°°°°"Thank you, thank you," he said, gratefully. "Then what did she say about me?"

°°°°The student repeated the Baroness' remarks with some embellishments of his own, the old man listening the while as though he heard a voice from Heaven.

°°°°"Dear child!" he said. "Yes, yes, she is very fond of me. But you must not believe all that she tells you about Anastasie. The two sisters are jealous of each other, you see, another proof of their affection. Mme. de Restaud is very fond of me too. I know she is. A father sees his children as God sees all of us; he looks into the very depths of their hearts; he knows their intentions; and both of them are so loving. Oh! if I only had good sons-in-law, I should be too happy, and I dare say there is no perfect happiness here below. If I might live with them-- simply hear their voices, know that they are there, see them go and come as I used to do at home when they were still with me; why, my heart bounds at the thought. . . . Were they nicely dressed?"

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene. "But, M. Goriot, how is it that your daughters have such fine houses, while you live in such a den as this?"

°°°°"Dear me, why should I want anything better?" he replied, with seeming carelessness. "I can't quite explain to you how it is; I am not used to stringing words together properly, but it all lies there----" he said, tapping his heart. "My real life is in my two girls, you see; and so long as they are happy, and smartly dressed, and have soft carpets under their feet, what does it matter what clothes I wear or where I lie down of a night? I shall never feel cold so long as they are warm; I shall never feel dull if they are laughing. I have no troubles but theirs. When you, too, are a father, and you hear your children's little voices, you will say to yourself, 'That has all come from me.' You will feel that those little ones are akin to every drop in your veins, that they are the very flower of your life (and what else are they?); you will cleave so closely to them that you seem to feel every movement that they make. Everywhere I hear their voices sounding in my ears. If they are sad, the look in their eyes freezes my blood. Some day you will find out that there is far more happiness in another's happiness than in your own. It is something that I cannot explain, something within that sends a glow of warmth all through you. In short, I live my life three times over. Shall I tell you something funny? Well, then, since I have been a father, I have come to understand God. He is everywhere in the world, because the whole world comes from Him. And it is just the same with my children, monsieur. Only, I love my daughters better than God loves the world, for the world is not so beautiful as God Himself is, but my children are more beautiful than I am. Their lives are so bound up with mine that I felt somehow that you would see them this evening. Great Heaven! If any man would make my little Delphine as happy as a wife is when she is loved, I would black his boots and run on his errands. That miserable M. de Marsay is a cur; I know all about him from her maid. A longing to wring his neck comes over me now and then. He does not love her! does not love a pearl of a woman, with a voice like a nightingale and shaped like a model. Where can her eyes have been when she married that great lump of an Alsatian? They ought both of them to have married young men, good-looking and good-tempered--but, after all, they had their own way."

°°°°Father Goriot was sublime. Eugene had never yet seen his face light up as it did now with the passionate fervor of a father's love. It is worthy of remark that strong feeling has a very subtle and pervasive power; the roughest nature, in the endeavor to express a deep and sincere affection, communicates to others the influence that has put resonance into the voice, and eloquence into every gesture, wrought a change in the very features of the speaker; for under the inspiration of passion the stupidest human being attains to the highest eloquence of ideas, if not of language, and seems to move in some sphere of light. In the old man's tones and gesture there was something just then of the same spell that a great actor exerts over his audience. But does not the poet in us find expression in our affections?

°°°°"Well," said Eugene, "perhaps you will not be sorry to hear that she is pretty sure to break with de Marsay before long. That sprig of fashion has left her for the Princesse Galathionne. For my part, I fell in love with Mme. Delphine this evening."

°°°°"Stuff!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"I did indeed, and she did not regard me with aversion. For a whole hour we talked of love, and I am to go to call on her on Saturday, the day after to-morrow."

°°°°"Oh! how I should love you, if she should like you. You are kind- hearted; you would never make her miserable. If you were to forsake her, I would cut your throat at once. A woman does not love twice, you see! Good heavens! what nonsense I am talking, M. Eugene! It is cold; you ought not to stay here. MON DIEU! so you have heard her speak? What message did she give you for me?"

°°°°"None at all," said Eugene to himself; aloud he answered, "She told me to tell you that your daughter sends you a good kiss."

°°°°"Good-night, neighbor! Sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you! I have mine already made for me by that message from her. May God grant you all your desires! You have come in like a good angel on me to-night, and brought with you the air that my daughter breathes."

°°°°"Poor old fellow!" said Eugene as he lay down. "It is enough to melt a heart of stone. His daughter no more thought of him than of the Grand Turk."

°°°°Ever after this conference Goriot looked upon his neighbor as a friend, a confidant such as he had never hoped to find; and there was established between the two the only relationship that could attach this old man to another man. The passions never miscalculate. Father Goriot felt that this friendship brought him closer to his daughter Delphine; he thought that he should find a warmer welcome for himself if the Baroness should care for Eugene. Moreover, he had confided one of his troubles to the younger man. Mme. de Nucingen, for whose happiness he prayed a thousand times daily, had never known the joys of love. Eugene was certainly (to make use of his own expression) one of the nicest young men that he had ever seen, and some prophetic instinct seemed to tell him that Eugene was to give her the happiness which had not been hers. These were the beginnings of a friendship that grew up between the old man and his neighbor; but for this friendship the catastrophe of the drama must have remained a mystery.

°°°°The affection with which Father Goriot regarded Eugene, by whom he seated himself at breakfast, the change in Goriot's face, which as a rule, looked as expressionless as a plaster cast, and a few words that passed between the two, surprised the other lodgers. Vautrin, who saw Eugene for the first time since their interview, seemed as if he would fain read the student's very soul. During the night Eugene had had some time in which to scan the vast field which lay before him; and now, as he remembered yesterday's proposal, the thought of Mlle. Taillefer's dowry came, of course, to his mind, and he could not help thinking of Victorine as the most exemplary youth may think of an heiress. It chanced that their eyes met. The poor girl did not fail to see that Eugene looked very handsome in his new clothes. So much was said in the glance, thus exchanged, that Eugene could not doubt but that he was associated in her mind with the vague hopes that lie dormant in a girl's heart and gather round the first attractive newcomer. "Eight hundred thousand francs!" a voice cried in his ears, but suddenly he took refuge in the memories of yesterday evening, thinking that his extemporized passion for Mme. de Nucingen was a talisman that would preserve him from this temptation.

°°°°"They gave Rossini's Barber of Seville at the Italiens yesterday evening," he remarked. "I never heard such delicious music. Good gracious! how lucky people are to have a box at the Italiens!"

°°°°Father Goriot drank in every word that Eugene let fall, and watched him as a dog watches his master's slightest movement.

°°°°"You men are like fighting cocks," said Mme. Vauquer; "you do what you like."

°°°°"How did you get back?" inquired Vautrin.

°°°°"I walked," answered Eugene.

°°°°"For my own part," remarked the tempter, "I do not care about doing things by halves. If I want to enjoy myself that way, I should prefer to go in my carriage, sit in my own box, and do the thing comfortably. Everything or nothing; that is my motto."

°°°°"And a good one, too," commented Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Perhaps you will see Mme. de Nucingen to-day," said Eugene, addressing Goriot in an undertone. "She will welcome you with open arms, I am sure; she would want to ask you for all sorts of little details about me. I have found out that she will do anything in the world to be known by my cousin Mme. de Beauseant; don't forget to tell her that I love her too well not to think of trying to arrange this."

°°°°Rastignac went at once to the Ecole de Droit. He had no mind to stay a moment longer than was necessary in that odious house. He wasted his time that day; he had fallen a victim to that fever of the brain that accompanies the too vivid hopes of youth. Vautrin's arguments had set him meditating on social life, and he was deep in these reflections when he happened on his friend Bianchon in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

°°°°"What makes you look so solemn?" said the medical student, putting an arm through Eugene's as they went towards the Palais.

°°°°"I am tormented by temptations."

°°°°"What kind? There is a cure for temptation."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Yielding to it."

°°°°"You laugh, but you don't know what it is all about. Have you read Rousseau?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Do you remember that he asks the reader somewhere what he would do if he could make a fortune by killing an old mandarin somewhere in China by mere force of wishing it, and without stirring from Paris?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Well, then?"

°°°°"Pshaw! I am at my thirty-third mandarin."

°°°°"Seriously, though. Look here, suppose you were sure that you could do it, and had only to give a nod. Would you do it?"

°°°°"Is he well stricken in years, this mandarin of yours? Pshaw! after all, young or old, paralytic, or well and sound, my word for it. . . . Well, then. Hang it, no!"

°°°°"You are a good fellow, Bianchon. But suppose you loved a woman well enough to lose your soul in hell for her, and that she wanted money for dresses and a carriage, and all her whims, in fact?"

°°°°"Why, here you are taking away my reason, and want me to reason!"

°°°°"Well, then, Bianchon, I am mad; bring me to my senses. I have two sisters as beautiful and innocent as angels, and I want them to be happy. How am I to find two hundred thousand francs apiece for them in the next five years? Now and then in life, you see, you must play for heavy stakes, and it is no use wasting your luck on low play."

°°°°"But you are only stating the problem that lies before every one at the outset of his life, and you want to cut the Gordian knot with a sword. If that is the way of it, dear boy, you must be an Alexander, or to the hulks you go. For my own part, I am quite contented with the little lot I mean to make for myself somewhere in the country, when I mean to step into my father's shoes and plod along. A man's affections are just as fully satisfied by the smallest circle as they can be by a vast circumference. Napoleon himself could only dine once, and he could not have more mistresses than a house student at the Capuchins. Happiness, old man, depends on what lies between the sole of your foot and the crown of your head; and whether it costs a million or a hundred louis, the actual amount of pleasure that you receive rests entirely with you, and is just exactly the same in any case. I am for letting that Chinaman live."

°°°°"Thank you, Bianchon; you have done me good. We will always be friends."

°°°°"I say," remarked the medical student, as they came to the end of a broad walk in the Jardin des Plantes, "I saw the Michonneau and Poiret a few minutes ago on a bench chatting with a gentleman whom I used to see in last year's troubles hanging about the Chamber of Deputies; he seems to me, in fact, to be a detective dressed up like a decent retired tradesman. Let us keep an eye on that couple; I will tell you why some time. Good-bye; it is nearly four o'clock, and I must be in to answer to my name."

°°°°When Eugene reached the lodging-house, he found Father Goriot waiting for him.

°°°°"Here," cried the old man, "here is a letter from her. Pretty handwriting, eh?"

°°°°Eugene broke the seal and read:--

°°°°"Sir,--I have heard from my father that you are fond of Italian music. I shall be delighted if you will do me the pleasure of accepting a seat in my box. La Fodor and Pellegrini will sing on Saturday, so I am sure that you will not refuse me. M. de Nucingen and I shall be pleased if you will dine with us; we shall be quite by ourselves. If you will come and be my escort, my husband will be glad to be relieved from his conjugal duties. Do not answer, but simply come.--Yours sincerely, D. DE N."

°°°°"Let me see it," said Father Goriot, when Eugene had read the letter. "You are going, aren't you?" he added, when he had smelled the writing-paper. "How nice it smells! Her fingers have touched it, that is certain."

°°°°"A woman does not fling herself at a man's head in this way," the student was thinking. "She wants to use me to bring back de Marsay; nothing but pique makes a woman do a thing like this."

°°°°"Well," said Father Goriot, "what are you thinking about?"

°°°°Eugene did not know the fever or vanity that possessed some women in those days; how should he imagine that to open a door in the Faubourg Saint-Germain a banker's wife would go to almost any length. For the coterie of the Faubourg Saint-Germain was a charmed circle, and the women who moved in it were at that time the queens of society; and among the greatest of these Dames du Petit-Chateau, as they were called, were Mme. de Beauseant and her friends the Duchesse de Langeais and the Duchesse de Maufrigneause. Rastignac was alone in his ignorance of the frantic efforts made by women who lived in the Chausee-d'Antin to enter this seventh heaven and shine among the brightest constellations of their sex. But his cautious disposition stood him in good stead, and kept his judgment cool, and the not altogether enviable power of imposing instead of accepting conditions.

°°°°"Yes, I am going," he replied.

°°°°So it was curiosity that drew him to Mme. de Nucingen; while, if she had treated him disdainfully, passion perhaps might have brought him to her feet. Still he waited almost impatiently for to-morrow, and the hour when he could go to her. There is almost as much charm for a young man in a first flirtation as there is in first love. The certainty of success is a source of happiness to which men do not confess, and all the charm of certain women lies in this. The desire of conquest springs no less from the easiness than from the difficulty of triumph, and every passion is excited or sustained by one or the other of these two motives which divide the empire of love. Perhaps this division is one result of the great question of temperaments; which, after all, dominates social life. The melancholic temperament may stand in need of the tonic of coquetry, while those of nervous or sanguine complexion withdraw if they meet with a too stubborn resistance. In other words, the lymphatic temperament is essentially despondent, and the rhapsodic is bilious.

°°°°Eugene lingered over his toilette with an enjoyment of all its little details that is grateful to a young man's self-love, though he will not own to it for fear of being laughed at. He thought, as he arranged his hair, that a pretty woman's glances would wander through the dark curls. He indulged in childish tricks like any young girl dressing for a dance, and gazed complacently at his graceful figure while he smoothed out the creases of his coat.

°°°°"There are worse figures, that is certain," he said to himself.

°°°°Then he went downstairs, just as the rest of the household were sitting down to dinner, and took with good humor the boisterous applause excited by his elegant appearance. The amazement with which any attention to dress is regarded in a lodging-house is a very characteristic trait. No one can put on a new coat but every one else must say his say about it.

°°°°"Clk! clk! clk!" cried Bianchon, making the sound with his tongue against the roof of his mouth, like a driver urging on a horse.

°°°°"He holds himself like a duke and a peer of France," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Are you going a-courting?" inquired Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried the artist.

°°°°"My compliments to my lady your wife," from the employe at the Museum.

°°°°"Your wife; have you a wife?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, in compartments, water-tight and floats, guaranteed fast color, all prices from twenty-five to forty sous, neat check patterns in the latest fashion and best taste, will wash, half- linen, half-cotton, half-wool; a certain cure for toothache and other complaints under the patronage of the Royal College of Physicians! children like it! a remedy for headache, indigestion, and all other diseases affecting the throat, eyes, and ears!" cried Vautrin, with a comical imitation of the volubility of a quack at a fair. "And how much shall we say for this marvel, gentlemen? Twopence? No. Nothing of the sort. All that is left in stock after supplying the Great Mogul. All the crowned heads of Europe, including the Gr-r-rand Duke of Baden, have been anxious to get a sight of it. Walk up! walk up! gentlemen! Pay at the desk as you go in! Strike up the music there! Brooum, la, la, trinn! la, la, boum! boum! Mister Clarinette, there you are out of tune!" he added gruffly; "I will rap your knuckles for you!"

°°°°"Goodness! what an amusing man!" said Mme. Vauquer to Mme. Couture; "I should never feel dull with him in the house."

°°°°This burlesque of Vautrin's was the signal for an outburst of merriment, and under cover of jokes and laughter Eugene caught a glance from Mlle. Taillefer; she had leaned over to say a few words in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"The cab is at the door," announced Sylvie.

°°°°"But where is he going to dine?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"With Madame la Baronne de Nucingen."

°°°°"M. Goriot's daughter," said the law student.

°°°°At this, all eyes turned to the old vermicelli maker; he was gazing at Eugene with something like envy in his eyes.

°°°°Rastignac reached the house in the Rue Saint-Lazare, one of those many-windowed houses with a mean-looking portico and slender columns, which are considered the thing in Paris, a typical banker's house, decorated in the most ostentatious fashion; the walls lined with stucco, the landings of marble mosaic. Mme. de Nucingen was sitting in a little drawing-room; the room was painted in the Italian fashion, and decorated like a restaurant. The Baroness seemed depressed. The effort that she made to hide her feelings aroused Eugene's interest; it was plain that she was not playing a part. He had expected a little flutter of excitement at his coming, and he found her dispirited and sad. The disappointment piqued his vanity.

°°°°"My claim to your confidence is very small, madame," he said, after rallying her on her abstracted mood; "but if I am in the way, please tell me so frankly; I count on your good faith."

°°°°"No, stay with me," she said; "I shall be all alone if you go. Nucingen is dining in town, and I do not want to be alone; I want to be taken out of myself."

°°°°"But what is the matter?"

°°°°"You are the very last person whom I should tell," she exclaimed.

°°°°"Then I am connected in some way in this secret. I wonder what it is?"

°°°°"Perhaps. Yet, no," she went on; "it is a domestic quarrel, which ought to be buried in the depths of the heart. I am very unhappy; did I not tell you so the day before yesterday? Golden chains are the heaviest of all fetters."

°°°°When a woman tells a young man that she is very unhappy, and when the young man is clever, and well dressed, and has fifteen hundred francs lying idle in his pocket, he is sure to think as Eugene said, and he becomes a coxcomb.

°°°°"What can you have left to wish for?" he answered. "You are young, beautiful, beloved, and rich."

°°°°"Do not let us talk of my affairs," she said shaking her head mournfully. "We will dine together tete-a-tete, and afterwards we will go to hear the most exquisite music. Am I to your taste?" she went on, rising and displaying her gown of white cashmere, covered with Persian designs in the most superb taste.

°°°°"I wish that you were altogether mine," said Eugene; "you are charming."

°°°°"You would have a forlorn piece of property," she said, smiling bitterly. "There is nothing about me that betrays my wretchedness; and yet, in spite of appearances, I am in despair. I cannot sleep; my troubles have broken my night's rest; I shall grow ugly."

°°°°"Oh! that is impossible," cried the law student; "but I am curious to know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface."

°°°°"Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me," she said. "Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else, for pity's sake," she added. "Let me show you my rooms."

°°°°"No; let us stay here," answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen's hand in his. She surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

°°°°"Listen," said Rastignac; "if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end to them, even if I have to kill half-a- dozen men; or I shall go, never to return."

°°°°"Very well," she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of despair, "I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes," she said to herself, "I have no other resource left."

°°°°She rang the bell.

°°°°"Are the horses put in for the master?" she asked of the servant.

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve dinner at seven o'clock."

°°°°"Now, come with me," she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in the banker's carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be dreaming.

°°°°"To the Palais-Royal," she said to the coachman; "stop near the Theatre-Francais."

°°°°She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

°°°°"Another moment and she will escape me," he said to himself.

°°°°When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

°°°°"Is it true that you love me?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes," he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the uneasiness that he felt.

°°°°"You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"Are you ready to do my bidding?"

°°°°"Blindly."

°°°°"Have you ever been to a gaming-house?" she asked in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Never."

°°°°"Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse," she said. "Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my troubles when you come back."

°°°°"Devil take me, I'm sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am about, but I will obey you," he added, with inward exultation, as he thought, "She has gone too far to draw back-- she can refuse me nothing now!"

°°°°Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand clothes-dealer, and hurried to number 9, which happened to be the nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his stakes.

°°°°"If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it turns up, you will win thirty-six louis," said a respectable- looking, white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

°°°°Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number 21 (his own age). There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had won.

°°°°"Take your money off, sir," said the old gentleman; "you don't often win twice running by that system."

°°°°Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once more.

°°°°"You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own," the old gentleman said in his ear. "Take my advice and go away with your winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable, you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck."

°°°°Rastignac's head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the white-haired man's possession, and went down-stairs with his seven thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his luck.

°°°°"So, that is over; and now where will you take me?" he asked, as soon as the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild embrace.

°°°°"You have saved me!" she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

°°°°"I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then," she went on, "I wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over disgracefully. If, at a woman's utmost need, SOMEBODY heaps gold upon her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever! But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept money in such a way? MON DIEU! is it not natural to share everything with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how, then, can our interests be separate?

°°°°"You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I longed to escape, to run away . . . where, I did not know. Half the women in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture. Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think of me as a woman whom he has paid." She tried to conceal her tears from him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

°°°°"It is hideous, is it not," she cried, "to speak in a breath of money and affection. You cannot love me after this," she added.

°°°°The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great, and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution of society, had thrown Eugene's thoughts into confusion; he uttered soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

°°°°"You will not remember this against me?" she asked; "promise me that you will not."

°°°°"Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so," he said. She took his hand and held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep gratitude.

°°°°"I am free and happy once more, thanks to you," she said. "Oh! I have felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this," she went on, as she took only six of the banknotes. "In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns, for I really ought to go halves with you."

°°°°Eugene's maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, "I am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy," he took the money.

°°°°"It shall be a last stake in reserve," he said, "in case of misfortune."

°°°°"That was what I was dreading to hear," she cried, turning pale. "Oh, if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you! I should die of sorrow!"

°°°°They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin's cynical words began to ring in his ears.

°°°°"Seat yourself there," said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside the fire. "I have a difficult letter to write," she added. "Tell me what to say."

°°°°"Say nothing," Eugene answered her. "Put the bills in an envelope, direct it, and send it by your maid."

°°°°"Why, you are a love of a man," she said. "Ah! see what it is to have been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through," she went on, smiling at him.

°°°°"She is charming," thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

°°°°"Do you like it?" she asked, as she rang for the maid.

°°°°"Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me."

°°°°Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

°°°°Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of the table which he had admired in his cousin's house.

°°°°"Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens afterwards," she said.

°°°°"I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am a poor student, and I have my way to make."

°°°°"Oh! you will succeed," she said laughing. "You will see. All that you wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy."

°°°°It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris, believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

°°°°Eugene took the Baroness' hand in his, and by some light pressure of the fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

°°°°"That was gratitude," she said, "for devotion that I did not dare to hope for, but now it would be a promise."

°°°°"And will you give me no promise, ingrate?"

°°°°He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a discontented air that delighted her.

°°°°"I shall see you at the ball on Monday," she said.

°°°°As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections. He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible excuses for appropriating it.

°°°°He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the stairhead he saw a light in Goriot's room; the old man had lighted a candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and go to his room without "telling him all about his daughter," to use his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without reserve.

°°°°"Then they think that I am ruined!" cried Father Goriot, in an agony of jealousy and desperation. "Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a year! MON DIEU! Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why did not YOU come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I had hold of them, I would wring their necks. MON DIEU! CRYING! Did you say she was crying?"

°°°°"With her head on my waistcoat," said Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! give it to me," said Father Goriot. "What! my daughter's tears have fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me have it. By the terms of her marriage- contract, she ought to have the use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth."

°°°°"Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the waistcoat."

°°°°Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student's hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

°°°°"You will succeed," the old man said. "God is just, you see. I know an honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to save one tear to either of them."

°°°°"An honest man!" said Eugene to himself as he lay down. "Upon my word, I think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey the voice of conscience." Perhaps none but believers in God do good in secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

°°°°The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant, who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball. The Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there. Delphine's dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene's eyes; she was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who can guess all that passes in a woman's mind. Who has not refrained from giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure; he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room; all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

°°°°Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

°°°°The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in a diabolical fashion.

°°°°"And do you suppose," cried that cold-blooded logician, "that a young man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, in the Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way, I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but, after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be out of place here, where we only aim at the purely patriarchalorama. If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend," Vautrin continued, with half-paternal jocularity, "you must have three horses, a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further. Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good- bye to your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe going to carry your billets-doux for you? Do you mean to employ the stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom of your elders!" he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each syllable. "Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously, and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way."

°°°°Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by which he had sought to corrupt the student's mind.

°°°°Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve in the small hours. He rose at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew. He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money, and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

°°°°One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in their youth and in the almost frantic eagerness with which youth grasps at pleasure. They are reckless with anything obtained on credit, while everything for which they must pay in ready money is made to last as long as possible; if they cannot have all that they want, they make up for it, it would seem, by squandering what they have. To state the matter simply--a student is far more careful of his hat than of his coat, because the latter being a comparatively costly article of dress, it is in the nature of things that a tailor should be a creditor; but it is otherwise with the hatter; the sums of money spent with him are so modest, that he is the most independent and unmanageable of his tribe, and it is almost impossible to bring him to terms. The young man in the balcony of a theatre who displays a gorgeous waistcoat for the benefit of the fair owners of opera glasses, has very probably no socks in his wardrobe, for the hosier is another of the genus of weevils that nibble at the purse. This was Rastignac's condition. His purse was always empty for Mme. Vauquer, always full at the demand of vanity; there was a periodical ebb and flow in his fortunes, which was seldom favorable to the payment of just debts. If he was to leave that unsavory and mean abode, where from time to time his pretensions met with humiliation, the first step was to pay his hostess for a month's board and lodging, and the second to purchase furniture worthy of the new lodgings he must take in his quality of dandy, a course that remained impossible. Rastignac, out of his winnings at cards, would pay his jeweler exorbitant prices for gold watches and chains, and then, to meet the exigencies of play, would carry them to the pawnbroker, that discreet and forbidding- looking friend of youth; but when it was a question of paying for board or lodging, or for the necessary implements for the cultivation of his Elysian fields, his imagination and pluck alike deserted him. There was no inspiration to be found in vulgar necessity, in debts contracted for past requirements. Like most of those who trust to their luck, he put off till the last moment the payment of debts that among the bourgeoisie are regarded as sacred engagements, acting on the plan of Mirabeau, who never settled his baker's bill until it underwent a formidable transformation into a bill of exchange.

°°°°It was about this time when Rastignac was down on his luck and fell into debt, that it became clear to the law student's mind that he must have some more certain source of income if he meant to live as he had been doing. But while he groaned over the thorny problems of his precarious situation, he felt that he could not bring himself to renounce the pleasures of this extravagant life, and decided that he must continue it at all costs. His dreams of obtaining a fortune appeared more and more chimerical, and the real obstacles grew more formidable. His initiation into the secrets of the Nucingen household had revealed to him that if he were to attempt to use this love affair as a means of mending his fortunes, he must swallow down all sense of decency, and renounce all the generous ideas which redeem the sins of youth. He had chosen this life of apparent splendor, but secretly gnawed by the canker worm of remorse, a life of fleeting pleasure dearly paid for by persistent pain; like Le Distrait of La Bruyere, he had descended so far as to make his bed in a ditch; but (also like Le Distrait) he himself was uncontaminated as yet by the mire that stained his garments.

°°°°"So we have killed our mandarin, have we?" said Bianchon one day as they left the dinner table.

°°°°"Not yet," he answered, "but he is at his last gasp."

°°°°The medical student took this for a joke, but it was not a jest. Eugene had dined in the house that night for the first time for a long while, and had looked thoughtful during the meal. He had taken his place beside Mlle. Taillefer, and stayed through the dessert, giving his neighbor an expressive glance from time to time. A few of the boarders discussed the walnuts at the table, and others walked about the room, still taking part in the conversation which had begun among them. People usually went when they chose; the amount of time that they lingered being determined by the amount of interest that the conversation possessed for them, or by the difficulty of the process of digestion. In winter-time the room was seldom empty before eight o'clock, when the four women had it all to themselves, and made up for the silence previously imposed upon them by the preponderating masculine element. This evening Vautrin had noticed Eugene's abstractedness, and stayed in the room, though he had seemed to be in a hurry to finish his dinner and go. All through the talk afterwards he had kept out of the sight of the law student, who quite believed that Vautrin had left the room. He now took up his position cunningly in the sitting-room instead of going when the last boarders went. He had fathomed the young man's thoughts, and felt that a crisis was at hand. Rastignac was, in fact, in a dilemma, which many another young man must have known.

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen might love him, or might merely be playing with him, but in either case Rastignac had been made to experience all the alternations of hope and despair of genuine passion, and all the diplomatic arts of a Parisienne had been employed on him. After compromising herself by continually appearing in public with Mme. de Beauseant's cousin she still hesitated, and would not give him the lover's privileges which he appeared to enjoy. For a whole month she had so wrought on his senses, that at last she had made an impression on his heart. If in the earliest days the student had fancied himself to be master, Mme. de Nucingen had since become the stronger of the two, for she had skilfully roused and played upon every instinct, good or bad, in the two or three men comprised in a young student in Paris. This was not the result of deep design on her part, nor was she playing a part, for women are in a manner true to themselves even through their grossest deceit, because their actions are prompted by a natural impulse. It may have been that Delphine, who had allowed this young man to gain such an ascendency over her, conscious that she had been too demonstrative, was obeying a sentiment of dignity, and either repented of her concessions, or it pleased her to suspend them. It is so natural to a Parisienne, even when passion has almost mastered her, to hesitate and pause before taking the plunge; to probe the heart of him to whom she intrusts her future. And once already Mme. de Nucingen's hopes had been betrayed, and her loyalty to a selfish young lover had been despised. She had good reason to be suspicious. Or it may have been that something in Eugene's manner (for his rapid success was making a coxcomb of him) had warned her that the grotesque nature of their position had lowered her somewhat in his eyes. She doubtless wished to assert her dignity; he was young, and she would be great in his eyes; for the lover who had forsaken her had held her so cheap that she was determined that Eugene should not think her an easy conquest, and for this very reason--he knew that de Marsay had been his predecessor. Finally, after the degradation of submission to the pleasure of a heartless young rake, it was so sweet to her to wander in the flower-strewn realms of love, that it was not wonderful that she should wish to dwell a while on the prospect, to tremble with the vibrations of love, to feel the freshness of the breath of its dawn. The true lover was suffering for the sins of the false. This inconsistency is unfortunately only to be expected so long as men do not know how many flowers are mown down in a young woman's soul by the first stroke of treachery.

°°°°Whatever her reasons may have been, Delphine was playing with Rastignac, and took pleasure in playing with him, doubtless because she felt sure of his love, and confident that she could put an end to the torture as soon as it was her royal pleasure to do so. Eugene's self-love was engaged; he could not suffer his first passage of love to end in a defeat, and persisted in his suit like a sportsman determined to bring down at least one partridge to celebrate his first Feast of Saint-Hubert. The pressure of anxiety, his wounded self-love, his despair, real or feigned, drew him nearer and nearer to this woman. All Paris credited him with this conquest, and yet he was conscious that he had made no progress since the day when he saw Mme. de Nucingen for the first time. He did not know as yet that a woman's coquetry is sometimes more delightful than the pleasure of secure possession of her love, and was possessed with helpless rage. If, at this time, while she denied herself to love, Eugene gathered the springtide spoils of his life, the fruit, somewhat sharp and green, and dearly bought, was no less delicious to the taste. There were moments when he had not a sou in his pockets, and at such times he thought in spite of his conscience of Vautrin's offer and the possibility of fortune by a marriage with Mlle. Taillefer. Poverty would clamor so loudly that more than once he was on the point of yielding to the cunning temptations of the terrible sphinx, whose glance had so often exerted a strange spell over him.

°°°°Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau went up to their rooms; and Rastignac, thinking that he was alone with the women in the dining-room, sat between Mme. Vauquer and Mme. Couture, who was nodding over the woolen cuffs that she was knitting by the stove, and looked at Mlle. Taillefer so tenderly that she lowered her eyes.

°°°°"Can you be in trouble, M. Eugene?" Victorine said after a pause.

°°°°"Who has not his troubles?" answered Rastignac. "If we men were sure of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should have no troubles."

°°°°For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible to mistake its meaning.

°°°°"You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to- day, but are you sure that it will never change?"

°°°°A smile flitted over the poor girl's lips; it seemed as if a ray of light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

°°°°"Ah! but suppose," he said, "that you should be rich and happy to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of poverty?"

°°°°A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

°°°°"Even if he were very poor?"

°°°°Again the same mute answer.

°°°°"What nonsense are you talking, you two?" exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Never mind," answered Eugene; "we understand each other."

°°°°"So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?" The words were uttered in Vautrin's deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door as he spoke.

°°°°"Oh! how you startled me!" Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed together.

°°°°"I might make a worse choice," said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin's voice had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

°°°°"No bad jokes, gentlemen!" said Mme. Couture. "My dear, let us go upstairs."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene and Vautrin were left alone.

°°°°"I felt sure you would come round to it," said the elder man with the coolness that nothing seemed to shake. "But stay a moment! I have as much delicacy as anybody else. Don't make up your mind on the spur of the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like."

°°°°The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes, which he fluttered before the student's eyes. Eugene was in a most painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis to the Marquis d'Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud's house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

°°°°"You must see," said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor, "that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself under any obligation to you."

°°°°"Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise," answered the tempter. "You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion, and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women. Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you? Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account," Vautrin went on, and a smile stole over his lips. "Take these bits of paper and write across this," he added, producing a piece of stamped paper, "Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day twelvemonth, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful. In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of strength, my boy."

°°°°"What manner of man are you?" cried Eugene. "Were you created to torment me?"

°°°°"Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes, and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your first fright will go off like a conscript's terror on the battlefield. You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, 'Here are a hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,' and you could sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won't compromise you in any way, and you hesitate. 'Tis an effeminate age."

°°°°Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for it.

°°°°"Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally," Vautrin continued. "I mean to leave this country in a few months' time for America, and set about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do; I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look at. What is a man's life to me? Not THAT," he said, and he snapped his thumb-nail against his teeth. "A man, in short, is everything to me, or just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret; you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin, but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A sentiment-- what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part, I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is my passion. I knew Venice Preserved by heart. Have you met many men plucky enough when a comrade says, 'Let us bury a dead body!' to go and do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!"

°°°°Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student's repudiation, he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying their blameworthy actions to themselves.

°°°°"He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is certain," said Eugene to himself.

°°°°He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of Vautrin's ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for his own ends, raised him in the student's eyes; but the thought of a compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de Restaud's.

°°°°For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid Messieurs de Trailles and d'Ajuda, played at whist for part of the evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to consider that his luck was heaven's reward for his perseverance in the right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin whether the bill he had given was still in the other's possession; and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand francs with a not unnatural relief.

°°°°"Everything is going on well," said Vautrin.

°°°°"But I am not your accomplice," said Eugene.

°°°°"I know, I know," Vautrin broke in. "You are still acting like a child. You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset."

°°°°Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not without good reason, his own suspicions.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," this M. Gondureau was saying, "I do not see any cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of Police----"

°°°°"Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter," said Gondureau.

°°°°Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by that word "police," and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers, confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where the BONUS flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature (an illegible scrawl) and by his title--"His Excellency Monseigneur le Ministre," five words which produce as much effect as the il Bondo Cani of the Calife de Bagdad, five words which in the eyes of this low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a moment? Pronounce the words "His Excellency," and these poor folk will forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests. Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences, annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the deus ex machina, the magical words "His Excellency," so as to dazzle Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

°°°°"If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister . . . Ah! that is quite another thing," said Poiret.

°°°°"You seem to be guided by this gentleman's opinion, and you hear what he says," said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau. "Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the nickname Trompe-la-Mort."

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort?" said Pioret. "Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves that nickname."

°°°°"Well, yes," said the detective. "They call him so because he has been so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----"

°°°°"Then is he a man of honor?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man's crime upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler, who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been unexceptionable."

°°°°"But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, why should he want me?" asked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Oh yes," said Poiret, "if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as to tell us, really knows for a certainty----"

°°°°"Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed Trompe-la- Mort, is in the confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing their affairs, which want a MAN OF MARK to see about them."

°°°°"Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?" asked Poiret. "This gentleman calls himself a MAN OF MARK because he is a MARKED MAN-- branded, you know."

°°°°"This so-called Vautrin," said the detective, "receives the money belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for their benefit."

°°°°"Their mistresses! You mean their wives," remarked Poiret.

°°°°"No, sir. A convict's wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We call them concubines."

°°°°"Then they all live in a state of concubinage?"

°°°°"Naturally."

°°°°"Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow. Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society."

°°°°"But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues, my dear sir----"

°°°°"Of course not, sir; but still----"

°°°°"Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie," said Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"You see how it is, mademoiselle," Gondureau continued. "The Government may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the Society of the Ten Thousand----"

°°°°"Ten Thousand Thieves!" cried Pioret in alarm.

°°°°"No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they won't touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society. If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds, we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again; they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, "What is there to hinder Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?"

°°°°"Oh!" said the detective, "a man is told off to follow him everywhere he goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions."

°°°°"You are quite right, sir," said Poiret, "utterly disgraced he would be."

°°°°"But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without more ado," remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but," he added in her ear, "keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.-- Trompe-la-Mort, when he came back here," he went on aloud "slipped into the skin of an honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning, that he is! You don't catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of consequence, who transacts a good deal of business."

°°°°"Naturally," said Poiret to himself.

°°°°"And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of the real Vautrin, he would put every one's back up among the business men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about."

°°°°"Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman," said Mlle. Michonneau briskly.

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him," said the detective. "I will tell you a secret--he does not like them."

°°°°"Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to identify him for two thousand francs."

°°°°"Nothing simpler," said the stranger. "I will send you a little bottle containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder, and PRESTO! the letters will appear."

°°°°"Why, that is just nothing at all," said Poiret.

°°°°"Well, do you agree?" said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

°°°°"But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all," said Mlle. Michonneau; "am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"What will you give me then?"

°°°°"Five hundred francs."

°°°°"It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir."

°°°°"I assure you," said Poiret, "that mademoiselle has a great deal of conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very intelligent."

°°°°"Well, now," Mlle. Michonneau went on, "make it three thousand francs if he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man."

°°°°"Done!" said Gondureau, "but on the condition that the thing is settled to-morrow."

°°°°"Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first."

°°°°"You are a sly one," said the detective as he rose to his feet. "Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M. Gondureau."

°°°°Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier's lecture, overheard the sufficiently striking nickname of Trompe-la-Mort, and caught the celebrated chief detective's "Done!"

°°°°"Why didn't you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a year," said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Why didn't I?" she asked. "Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without paying, and that would be an abominable sell."

°°°°"And suppose you did warn him," Poiret went on, "didn't that gentleman say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything."

°°°°"Anyhow," thought Mlle. Michonneau, "I can't abide him. He says nothing but disagreeable things to me."

°°°°"But you can do better than that," Poiret resumed. "As that gentleman said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief. Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into the bargain!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau's musings did not permit her to listen very closely to the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret's lips like water dripping from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

°°°°By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau versus Dame Morin, when he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

°°°°As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"I knew how it would end," remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. "They have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week past."

°°°°"Yes," he answered. "So she was found guilty."

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. Morin."

°°°°"I am talking about Mlle. Victorine," said Mlle, Michonneau, as she entered Poiret's room with an absent air, "and you answer, 'Mme. Morin.' Who may Mme. Morin be?"

°°°°"What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?" demanded Poiret.

°°°°"Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!"

°°°°That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel's voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac's face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately; he had said to himself that a woman's happiness should atone for this venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face; the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice broke in upon their bliss.

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity,"

°°°°he sang mockingly.

°°°°Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand, the light touch of Rastignac's hair against her cheek, a word whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student's warm breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love's sake in the most famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

°°°°"The thing is arranged," Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. "Our two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half- past eight in the morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father's fortune and affections. A funny way of putting it, isn't it? Taillefer's youngster is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know."

°°°°Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders likewise appeared.

°°°°"That is just as I intended." Vautrin said. "You know quite well what you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you."

°°°°He made as though he would take Eugene's hand, but Rastignac hastily withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

°°°°"Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes of virtue about us!" murmured Vautrin. "But Papa Doliban has three millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride's white dress, even in your own eyes."

°°°°Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, "You look melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me."

°°°°The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

°°°°"Let us go up to your room," the worthy soul remarked, when he had asked Sylvie for the law student's key. "This morning," he resumed, "you thought that SHE did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting ME! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move into it in three days' time. Don't split upon me. She wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn't bear to keep the secret from you. You will be in the Rue d'Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that won't run away."

°°°°Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student's back was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney- piece and set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac's arms stamped in gold on the leather.

°°°°"My dear boy," said the kind soul, "I have been up to the eyes in this business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?"

°°°°"What is it?"

°°°°"There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn't that so? I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say to myself, 'He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.' If I were ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs- Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my little girl again, so light- hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, 'I am very happy, papa!' When they say 'father' stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me 'papa,' it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else."

°°°°The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

°°°°"It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!" he said, raising his head after a pause. "All the time we were going about together she chatted away about you. 'He is so nice-looking, papa; isn't he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?' Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no sign, and he was dying of impatience.

°°°°Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were written:

°°°°"I want you to think of me every hour, BECAUSE . . .   "DELPHINE."

°°°°That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as well as for his daughter's sake.

°°°°"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera- dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me with you, will you not?"

°°°°"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

°°°°"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you! Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

°°°°"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to her this evening, will you not?"

°°°°"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

°°°°"Can I be of any use?"

°°°°"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening; it is a matter of life and death."

°°°°"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance; "are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were saying down below? . . . TONNERRE DE DIEU! you have no notion what a tap A LA GORIOT is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh! the thing is impossible!"

°°°°"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

°°°°"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

°°°°"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to- morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

°°°°"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

°°°°"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting in an appearance----"

°°°°Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing at the threshold of his door and singing:

°°°°"Oh! Richard, oh my king!   All the world abandons thee!   Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

°°°°The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a . . . tra la la."

°°°°"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is waiting for you."

°°°°"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my Bordeaux."

°°°°"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste, hasn't she? Eh?"

°°°°Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and, all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

°°°°Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with consternation.

°°°°"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as merry as a skylark."

°°°°"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

°°°°"Bargain?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on, seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.

°°°°"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules," said the young painter.

°°°°"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

°°°°"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

°°°°"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

°°°°"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and the cheese."

°°°°"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach besides."

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme. Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

°°°°"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

°°°°Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

°°°°"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this, Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right- hand side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

°°°°"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a hundred chestnuts."

°°°°"Oh! oh!"

°°°°"Booououh!"

°°°°"Prrr!"

°°°°These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a set firework.

°°°°"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called Vautrin.

°°°°"Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for it, I have some currant cordial."

°°°°"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered the medical student.

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for it," he added.

°°°°"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little cakes."

°°°°"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out the biscuits."

°°°°The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously struck up with the following variations:

°°°°"Scissors to grind!"

°°°°"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

°°°°"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

°°°°"China to mend!"

°°°°"Boat ahoy!"

°°°°"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

°°°°"Old clo'!"

°°°°"Cherries all ripe!"

°°°°But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

°°°°A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

°°°°"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs. When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer, telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the bread is ready for the oven; to- morrow we will eat it up and whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? . . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

°°°°Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

°°°°"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the widow.

°°°°These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

°°°°"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

°°°°"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two ladies----"

°°°°"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your young lady."

°°°°"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

°°°°"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

°°°°He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead, and began to sing:

°°°°"Sleep, little darlings;   I watch while you slumber."

°°°°"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

°°°°"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. " 'Tis your duty as a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "the young fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife-- there's your fortune for you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I go out and call a cab--all my own self."

°°°°And he started out, singing as he went:

°°°°"Oh! sun! divine sun!   Ripening the pumpkins every one."

°°°°"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over. HE never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't lose what he hadn't got-- Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

°°°°Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just as he was, like a package, across the bed.

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know what dissipation is."

°°°°"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

°°°°"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such things----"

°°°°"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

°°°°"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer. It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

°°°°"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

°°°°"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

°°°°"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

°°°°"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress as she spoke.

°°°°Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.

°°°°"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

°°°°The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face, so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet, austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught something of the golden glory of heaven.

°°°°"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing her fingers through Eugene's hair.

°°°°"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

°°°°There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

°°°°"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though you had nothing on."

°°°°"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

°°°°"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint- Pierre (good soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme. Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now, don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will idolize you."

°°°°The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady; "we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments with all the care of an antiquary."

°°°°"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine. "Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them."

°°°°"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M. Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

°°°°"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

°°°°"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two women were alone together.

°°°°"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady; "just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

°°°°"Oh! mamma."

°°°°"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in for."

°°°°"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life," said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

°°°°"MON DIEU! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

°°°°With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room, Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned, and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

°°°°That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

°°°°But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the scent.

°°°°"A delusion," he said. "Collin's sorbonne is the most dangerous that has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the Place de Greve."

°°°°As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible expressions borrowed from thieves' Latin, thieves, of all people, being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking-- his council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth after the axe has done its work.

°°°°"Collin is playing us off," he continued. "When we come across a man like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la- Mort's paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent crime than to punish it."

°°°°"And you do a service to our country," said Poiret.

°°°°"Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you are," said the head of the department. "Yes, of course, we are serving our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle. I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get it back for you."

°°°°"Well, now," Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, "there are idiots who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as saying 'Good-day.' "

°°°°The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like apparition of the sham Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her boarders so long as she lived.

°°°°In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till close upon eleven o'clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin's first bottle of wine), was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme. Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o'clock, and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested, therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup belonging to Vautrin--it was standing with the others in the bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business. The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen. It ran thus:--

°°°°"I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my friend. Till two o'clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity's sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line will be enough. Say, 'I will hasten to you,' or else, 'I am ill.' But if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have happened? . . ."

°°°°"Yes, indeed, what has happened?" exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any more. "What time is it?"

°°°°"Half-past eleven," said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his coffee.

°°°°The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M. Taillefer's servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," he cried, "your father is asking for you-- something terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious."

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" exclaimed Vautrin. "How can people brawl when they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people have bad manners, and that is a fact."

°°°°"Sir!" cried Eugene.

°°°°"Well, what then, you big baby!" said Vautrin, swallowing down his coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. "Are there not duels every morning in Paris?" added Vautrin.

°°°°"I will go with you, Victorine," said Mme. Couture, and the two women hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance that said--"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me tears!"

°°°°"Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"I am all sorts of things," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Queer, isn't it?" said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession of commonplaces suited to the occasion. "Death takes us off without asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have other complaints that men don't suffer from. We bear children, and it takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her father will have to acknowledge her now!"

°°°°"There!" said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, "yesterday she had not a penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune."

°°°°"I say, M. Eugene!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "you have landed on your feet!"

°°°°At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the crumpled letter still in his hand.

°°°°"You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to be like the rest of them?" he asked.

°°°°"Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine," said Eugene, turning to Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised the onlookers at this scene.

°°°°Father Goriot caught the student's hand and grasped it warmly. He could have kissed it.

°°°°"Oh, ho!" said Vautrin, "the Italians have a good proverb--Col tempo."

°°°°"Is there any answer?" said Mme. de Nucingen's messenger, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Say that I will come directly."

°°°°The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he could not be prudent.

°°°°"What is to be done?" he exclaimed aloud. "There are no proofs!"

°°°°Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, "Luck comes to us while we sleep, young man," and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck dead.

°°°°"So there is a Divine Justice!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?"

°°°°"A stroke!" cried Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor," called the widow. "Oh, M. Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel."

°°°°Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.

°°°°"Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist's and ask for something that's good for the apoplexy."

°°°°Christophe likewise went.

°°°°"Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs."

°°°°Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow staircase, and laid upon his bed.

°°°°"I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter," said M. Goriot.

°°°°"Selfish old thing!" cried Mme. Vauquer. "Yes, go; I wish you may die like a dog."

°°°°"Just go and see if you can find some ether," said Mlle. Michonneau to Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the sick man's clothes.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress of the situation.

°°°°"Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be of some use in sparing my modesty," she said to Poiret, "instead of standing there like a stock."

°°°°Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

°°°°"There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily," exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on the shirt again.--"Ouf! How heavy he is," he added, as he laid the convict down.

°°°°"Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!" said the old maid briskly; her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of the furniture with greedy eyes. "Could we find some excuse for opening that desk?"

°°°°"It mightn't be quite right," responded Poiret to this.

°°°°"Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it doesn't belong to any one now. But we haven't time, there is the Vauquer."

°°°°"Here is the ether," said that lady. "I must say that this is an eventful day. Lord! that man can't have had a stroke; he is as white as curds."

°°°°"White as curds?" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"And his pulse is steady," said the widow, laying her hand on his breast.

°°°°"Steady?" said the astonished Poiret.

°°°°"He is all right."

°°°°"Do you think so?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look, mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears a wig. They say that red- haired people are either the worst or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?"

°°°°"Good to hang," said Poiret.

°°°°"Round a pretty woman's neck, you mean," said Mlle Michonneau, hastily. "Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman's duty to nurse you men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take yourself off," she added. "Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of dear M. Vautrin.

°°°°Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the room by his master.

°°°°Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself might be implicated. Vautrin's coolness still further dismayed him.

°°°°"Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?" Rastignac asked himself.

°°°°He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

°°°°"Well?" shouted Bianchon, "you have seen the Pilote?"

°°°°The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local journals.

°°°°"There is a wonderful history in it," said the house student of the Hopital Cochin. "Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?"

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----"

°°°°"You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master Taillefer's money!"

°°°°"Are all the devils of hell at my heels?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand," said Bianchon, "and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish."

°°°°"Just go to Mother Vauquer's," said Rastignac; "that scoundrel Vautrin has dropped down like one dead."

°°°°"Aha!" said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, "you confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself."

°°°°The law student's long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot's confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue d'Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.

°°°°"Such a love is my anchor of safety," he said to himself. "How the old man's heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!"

°°°°He took out his watch and admired it.

°°°°"I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?"

°°°°Rastignac's battle with himself went on for a long while; and though the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison Vauquer through the gathering dusk.

°°°°Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau's officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer's duel. They were anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the probable change in Victorine's prospects. Father Goriot alone was absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the same look that had read his thoughts before--the look that had such power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.

°°°°"Well, dear boy," said the escaped convict, "I am likely to cheat death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors."

°°°°"A bull you might say," cried the widow.

°°°°"You really might be sorry to see me still alive," said Vautrin in Rastignac's ear, thinking that he guessed the student's thoughts. "You must be mighty sure of yourself."

°°°°"Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort," said Bianchon; "and, upon my word, that name would do very well for you."

°°°°Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle. Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature had dropped from the convict's face; from the unmistakable ferocity of that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the sitting-room.

°°°°"In the name of the King and the Law!" said an officer, but the words were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.

°°°°Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men, who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden, and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin's face was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair, the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines, his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor. Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.

°°°°"You are not in the politest of humors to-day," he remarked to the chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his head.

°°°°"Gentlemen," he said, "put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call on those present to witness that I make no resistance."

°°°°A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally sudden cessation.

°°°°"There's a sell for you, master crusher," the convict added, looking at the famous director of police.

°°°°"Come, strip!" said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.

°°°°"Why?" asked Collin. "There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and surrender."

°°°°He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to overwhelm his audience.

°°°°"Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle," he went on, addressing a little, white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table; and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to draw up a document. "I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin, otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years' penal servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my nickname.--If I had as much as raised my hand," he went on, addressing the other lodgers, "those three sneaking wretches yonder would have drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer's domestic hearth. The rogues have laid their heads together to set a trap for me."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.

°°°°"Good Lord!" she cried, "this does give one a turn; and me at the Gaite with him only last night!" she said to Sylvie.

°°°°"Summon your philosophy, mamma," Collin resumed. "Is it a misfortune to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me." His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his eyes.--"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept any time you like! Do you understand?" And he sang:

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity."

°°°°"Don't you trouble yourself," he went on; "I can get in my money. They are too much afraid of me to swindle me."

°°°°The convicts' prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur, its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the speaker's discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno, wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own evil thoughts.

°°°°"Who betrayed me?" said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"It was you, old cat!" he said. "That sham stroke of apoplexy was your doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs," he shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession of his effects. "The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here," he said tapping his forehead. "Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?" he said, turning to the chief. "It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?" he asked of the police officers. "A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money," he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. "These folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?" he asked proudly. "There is some good there," he said tapping his heart; "I have never betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut," he said to the old maid, "they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them sick. Rake in your gains."

°°°°He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers' faces.

°°°°"What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before? A convict of Collin's stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and I am a match for them all."

°°°°"Ye gods!" cried the painter, "what a magnificent sketch one might make of him!"

°°°°"Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master of ceremonies to the widow" (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given by prisoners to the guillotine), "be a good fellow, and tell me if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don't want him to suffer for some one else, that would not be fair."

°°°°But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Collin, addressing the lodgers, "they will take me away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me to send you figs from Provence."

°°°°He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at Rastignac.

°°°°"Good-bye, Eugene," he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange transition from his previous rough and stern manner. "If you should be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend," and, in spite of his shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, "One, two!" like a fencing-master, and lunged. "If anything goes wrong, apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service."

°°°°The strange speaker's manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the pantomime.

°°°°As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house, Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress' temples with vinegar, looked round at the bewildered lodgers.

°°°°"Well," said she, "he was a man, he was, for all that."

°°°°Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead- alive, mummy-like figure, crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, "If that creature is going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out."

°°°°In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save Poiret, was of the medical student's opinion, so that the latter, strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

°°°°"You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us," he said; "speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at once."

°°°°"At once!" echoed Poiret in amazement.

°°°°Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in her ear.

°°°°"I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here as any one else," she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

°°°°"Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Monsieur is taking Collin's part" she said, with a questioning, malignant glance at the law student; "it is not difficult to guess why."

°°°°Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

°°°°"Let her alone!" cried the boarders.

°°°°Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

°°°°"Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas," said the painter, turning to Mme. Vauquer. "If you don't show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are."

°°°°At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in them.

°°°°"Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness," she cried, interrupting herself, "I can't help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is moving----"

°°°°"Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux's in the Place Sorbonne," cried Bianchon.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Come, now," she said; "you would not be the ruin of my establishment, would you, eh? There's a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening."

°°°°"Never a bit of it!" cried the boarders. "She must go, and go this minute!"

°°°°"But the poor lady has had no dinner," said Poiret, with piteous entreaty.

°°°°"She can go and dine where she likes," shouted several voices.

°°°°"Turn her out, the spy!"

°°°°"Turn them both out! Spies!"

°°°°"Gentlemen," cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love gives to the ovine male, "respect the weaker sex."

°°°°"Spies are of no sex!" said the painter.

°°°°"A precious sexorama!"

°°°°"Turn her into the streetorama!"

°°°°"Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house, it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We have paid our money, and we are not going," said Poiret, putting on his cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer was remonstrating.

°°°°"Naughty boy!" said the painter, with a comical look; "run away, naughty little boy!"

°°°°"Look here," said Bianchon; "if you do not go, all the rest of us will," and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room- door.

°°°°"Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?" cried Mme. Vauquer. "I am a ruined woman. You can't stay here; they will go further, do something violent."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

°°°°"She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn't."

°°°°These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions, borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low voice in her hostess' ear, and then--"I shall go to Mme. Buneaud's," she said, with a threatening look.

°°°°"Go where you please, mademoiselle," said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. "Go and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the food is cheap and nasty."

°°°°The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out laughing at the sight of him.

°°°°"Hist!--st!--st! Poiret," shouted the painter. "Hallo! I say, Poiret, hallo!" The employe from the Museum began to sing:

°°°°"Partant pour la Syrie,   Le jeune et beau Dunois . . ."

°°°°"Get along with you; you must be dying to go, trahit sua quemque voluptas!" said Bianchon.

°°°°"Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil," said the tutor.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret's arm, with an appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together, the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause, followed by peals of laughter.

°°°°"Bravo, Poiret!"

°°°°"Who would have thought it of old Poiret!"

°°°°"Apollo Poiret!"

°°°°"Mars Poiret!"

°°°°"Intrepid Poiret!"

°°°°A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

°°°°"The house might as well be burned down at once," cried she, "if there are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three o'clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those ladies at that poor man's expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me to send their things, because they are going to live with her father. M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone! . . ."

°°°°She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

°°°°"Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think," she cried.

°°°°Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

°°°°"What! another windfall for somebody!" was Sylvie's comment.

°°°°But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

°°°°"Goriot in a cab!" cried the boarders; "the world is coming to an end."

°°°°The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man's arm.

°°°°"Come," he said, with gladness in his eyes.

°°°°"Then you haven't heard the news?" said Eugene. "Vautrin was an escaped convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead."

°°°°"Very well, but what business is it of ours?" replied Father Goriot. "I am going to dine with my daughter in YOUR HOUSE, do you understand? She is expecting you. Come!"

°°°°He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

°°°°"Now, let us have dinner," cried the painter, and every one drew his chair to the table.

°°°°"Well, I never," said the portly Sylvie. "Nothing goes right to- day! The haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it is, more's the pity!"

°°°°Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day's events; but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels, jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day. Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope was the portly Sylvie.

°°°°That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in the cab. The old man's voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears like words spoken in a dream.

°°°°"It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don't know what pretty ways she has; at table she will look after me, 'Here, papa, just try this, it is nice.' And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her."

°°°°"It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down."

°°°°"Upside down?" repeated Father Goriot. "Why, the world has never been so right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood would be as sweet as honey."

°°°°"I feel as if I were coming back to life again," said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, hurry up there!" cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in front. "Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the place I told you of in ten minutes time."

°°°°With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous celerity.

°°°°"How that fellow crawls!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"But where are you taking me?" Eugene asked him.

°°°°"To your own house," said Goriot.

°°°°The cab stopped in the Rue d'Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning to bachelor ways.

°°°°"Come along upstairs," he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard, and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen's maid. Eugene found himself in a charming set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description, the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

°°°°"So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to understand!"

°°°°Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just witnessed was too much for Rastignac's over- wrought nerves, after the day's strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was almost overcome by it.

°°°°"I felt sure myself that he loved you," murmured Father Goriot, while Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring about this final transformation scene.

°°°°"But you must see your rooms," said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed, down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of Delphine's apartment.

°°°°"There is no bed," said Rastignac.

°°°°"No, monsieur," she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene, looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

°°°°"You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for ever," he said in her ear. "Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret."

°°°°"Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose," growled the father.

°°°°"You know quite well that 'we' means you."

°°°°"Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a good idea of mine to say to you, 'There are some nice rooms to let in the Rue d'Artois; let us furnish them for him?' And she would not hear of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers else."

°°°°"Was that how it happened?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----"

°°°°Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low though the sound was.

°°°°The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was wanting there.

°°°°"Have we guessed your wishes rightly?" she asked, as they returned to the drawing-room for dinner.

°°°°"Yes," he said, "only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----"

°°°°"Ah! ah! you say me nay already," she said with arch imperiousness, and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman's way of laughing away scruples.

°°°°But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self- questioning, and Vautrin's arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into abandoning his high- minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled his mind.

°°°°"Do you really mean to refuse?" said Mme. de Nucingen. "And do you know what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying my affection? If you love me, if I-- love you, why should you shrink back from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment, you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this. . . . Ah!" she cried, as Eugene's passionate glance was turned on her, "and you are making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you. Speak!-- Father," she said after a pause, "make him listen to reason. Can he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?"

°°°°Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

°°°°"Child that you are!" she cried again, catching Eugene's hand. "You are just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man finds insurmountable; a woman's hand opens the way and you shrink back! Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to repay me my loan of today? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your garret must be if it is like papa's room! See, dinner is waiting all this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don't you answer?" she said, shaking his hand. "MON DIEU! papa, make up his mind for him, or I will go away and never see him any more."

°°°°"I will make up your mind," said Goriot, coming down from the clouds. "Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews, isn't it?"

°°°°"There is positively no help for it," said Eugene.

°°°°"All right, I will give you credit," said the other, drawing out a cheap leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. "I have turned Jew myself; I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you can return it some time or other."

°°°°Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot's warmly.

°°°°"Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?"

°°°°"Oh! my poor father," said Mme. de Nucingen, "how did you do it?"

°°°°"Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you, and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to myself, 'She will never be able to pay for them.' The attorney says that those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year, and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, 'How happy they are going to be!' and--well, now, are you not happy?"

°°°°"Oh papa! papa!" cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright and radiant.

°°°°"Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel for you now?"

°°°°"Why, children, why Delphinette!" cried Goriot, who had not felt his daughter's heart beat against his breast for ten years, "do you want me to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are quits already." And the old man strained her to his breast with such fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

°°°°"Oh! you are hurting me!" she said.

°°°°"I am hurting you!" He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men. Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his fingers had grasped too roughly.

°°°°"Oh! no, no," he cried. "I have not hurt you, have I?" and his smile seemed to repeat the question. "YOU have hurt me with that cry just now.--The things cost rather more than that," he said in her ear, with another gentle kiss, "but I had to deceive him about it, or he would have been angry."

°°°°Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration which shapes the beliefs of youth.

°°°°"I will be worthy of all this," he cried.

°°°°"Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said," and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law student on the forehead.

°°°°"He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you," said Father Goriot. "Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus."

°°°°"Oh! why did you tell her?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"Eugene," Delphine said in his ear, "I have one regret now this evening. Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!"

°°°°"This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!" cried Goriot. "God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer through you, and I can still say, 'In this short month of February I had more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.'--Look at me, Fifine!" he said to his daughter. "She is very beautiful, is she not? Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell instead. Come, let us have dinner," he added, scarcely knowing what he said, "everything is ours."

°°°°"Poor dear father!"

°°°°He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a kiss on the plaits of hair. "If you only knew, little one, how happy you can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me, say that you will!"

°°°°"Yes, dear father."

°°°°"Say it again."

°°°°"Yes, I will, my kind father."

°°°°"Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed my own wishes. Let us have dinner."

°°°°The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot's spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter's feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more tender.

°°°°"You see!" Delphine said with a look at Eugene, "so long as my father is with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes."

°°°°Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

°°°°"And when will the rooms be ready?" asked Eugene, looking round. "We must all leave them this evening, I suppose."

°°°°"Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me," she answered, with an eloquent glance. "It is our night at the Italiens."

°°°°"I shall go to the pit," said her father.

°°°°It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen's carriage was waiting for her, and Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing that the father's self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her father's adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future of love.

°°°°They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso's lamentations as recorded in Byron's poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force of truth they fall far short of the widow's cry from the depths.

°°°°"Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life, now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people! The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and Christophe will have to go!"

°°°°The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said, "Madame," questioningly.

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Sylvie, "he is like a dog."

°°°°"In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a little dog."

°°°°"Lord!" said Sylvie, flinging up her head, "those old maids are up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"There's that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict," the widow went on. "Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I can't bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny on the nail too."

°°°°"And open-handed he was!" said Christophe.

°°°°"There is some mistake," said Sylvie.

°°°°"Why, no there isn't! he said so himself!" said Mme. Vauquer. "And to think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it's like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap; we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again; there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred, will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that is just what it is!"

°°°°"And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear," cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Don't speak of her, she is a wicked woman!" said Mme. Vauquer. "She is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed and murdered people in her time. SHE ought to be put in jail for life instead of that poor dear----"

°°°°Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

°°°°"Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers," said the widow, sighing.

°°°°But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d'Antin.

°°°°"Sylvie!" cried the widow, "this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There's a weight on my chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow, Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen," and she went.

°°°°"What is the matter now?" Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

°°°°"Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a bit. It's the first time she has cried since I've been with her."

°°°°By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had "made up her mind to it." True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A lover's farewell glance at his lady-love's window is not more mournful than Mme. Vauquer's survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take his (Rastignac's) place; that the official from the Museum had often expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture's rooms; and that in a very few days her household would be on the old footing.

°°°°"God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here. There'll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you'll see," and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining- room. "Whose turn will it be, I wonder?"

°°°°"It is just as well that we are moving out," said Eugene to Father Goriot in a low voice.

°°°°"Madame," said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, "I have not seen Mistigris these three days."

°°°°"Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if HE has gone and left us, I----"

°°°°The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this dreadful portent.

°°°°By twelve o'clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse's great ball, which had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was slipped in with the card.

°°°°"I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to   interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the   card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make   the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud's sister. Pray introduce that   charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your   affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.   "VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT."

°°°°"Well," said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, "Mme. de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de Nucingen."

°°°°He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of Paris--will never have a rival.

°°°°Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country, it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love exist there without that wealth?

°°°°If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water, without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls, waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look with pity upon those of earth.

°°°°Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it. In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one man, but of a whole nation.

°°°°But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a brilliant future.

°°°°So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

°°°°"Madame is in her room," Therese came to tell him. The woman's voice made him start.

°°°°He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid the blossom.

°°°°"Well," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "here you are."

°°°°"Guess what I bring for you," said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He took possession of her arm to kiss her hand

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

°°°°"And I owe this happiness to you--to THEE" (she whispered the more intimate word in his ear); "but Therese is in my dressing- room, let us be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes to me through YOU--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint- Germain, it is because I shall meet you there."

°°°°"Mme. de Beauseant's note seems to say very plainly that she does not expect to see the BARON de Nucingen at her ball; don't you think so?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, yes," said the Baroness as she returned the letter. "Those women have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go. My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully dressed.--Eugene," she went on, lowering her voice, "she will go to dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a woman's character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband's mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant's ball in tissue of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I mean to be perfectly happy."

°°°°At one o'clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In the midst of their lovers' farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to come, she said in a troubled voice, "I am very fearful, superstitious. Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe."

°°°°"Child!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?" she asked, laughingly.

°°°°Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left its sweetness on the lips.

°°°°"Well?" cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene; "I will tell you everything to-morrow."

°°°°"Everything, will you not?" cried the old man. "Go to bed. To- morrow our happy life will begin."

°°°°Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging- house, and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it; but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran lightly upstairs.

°°°°It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d'Artois at four o'clock; but Rastignac's name had been called early on the list at the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this, Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin's signature lying in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot's room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him; but after the first few words, the conversation between the father and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his attention.

°°°°"Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe to talk?" she added.

°°°°"Yes, there is no one in the house," said her father faintly.

°°°°"What is the matter with you?" asked Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!" said the old man. "You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d'Artois."

°°°°"Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the subject with him. Wasn't that what you told me to tell him?"

°°°°"Yes, quite right," answered Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then," Delphine continued, "he told me all about his affairs. He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations; they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes, on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy (in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him."

°°°°"Do you really believe that silly rubbish?" . . . cried her father. "It was all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No, no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them, and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that's holiest in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked! and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers. If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don't give way, don't make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he can't do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once; I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know for certain that your fortune is secure."

°°°°"Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile, it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we drive him to despair, I am lost."

°°°°"Why, then, the man is a rogue?"

°°°°"Well, yes, father," she said, flinging herself into a chair, "I wanted to keep it from you to spare your feelings," and she burst into tears; "I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his stalking- horse."

°°°°"But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons- in-law of that sort," cried her father; "why, I would guillotine him myself if there was no headsman to do it."

°°°°"No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says, stripped of all his circumlocutions--'Take your choice, you and no one else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through myself.' Is that plain speaking? He MUST have my assistance. He is assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to be Eugene's wife in all but name. 'I connive at your errors, and you allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!' Is that sufficiently explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get possession of those bills?"

°°°°Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on his knees.

°°°°"Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child! forgive me!" cried the old man.

°°°°"Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame," said Delphine. "We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us! Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa," she said, kissing him.

°°°°"Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your husband's winding."

°°°°"No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me, well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters. No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant's ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene! . . . Come, let us see his room."

°°°°But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve, and the sound of Mme. de Restaud's voice came from the staircase. "Is my father in?" she asked of Sylvie.

°°°°This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

°°°°"Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?" said Delphine, when she heard her sister speak. "It looks as though some strange things had happened in that family."

°°°°"What sort of things?" asked Goriot. "This is like to be the death of me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune."

°°°°"Good-morning, father," said the Countess from the threshold. "Oh! Delphine, are you here?"

°°°°Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister's presence.

°°°°"Good-morning, Nasie," said the Baroness. "What is there so extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day."

°°°°"Since when?"

°°°°"If you came yourself you would know."

°°°°"Don't tease, Delphine," said the Countess fretfully. "I am very miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!"

°°°°"What is it, Nasie?" cried Goriot. "Tell us all about it, child! How white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will love you even better, if that were possible."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. "We are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see."

°°°°The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

°°°°"This will kill me!" said their father. "There," he went on, stirring the smouldering fire, "come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it, Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----"

°°°°"Well, then, my husband knows everything," said the Countess. "Just imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime's some time ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that. About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled. He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively. Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard; for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I had eaten up all that you had----"

°°°°"No," said Goriot; "I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet."

°°°°The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when the father's love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice, revealed the depths of his despair.

°°°°"I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell," and the Countess burst into tears.

°°°°Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister's shoulder, and cried too.

°°°°"Then it is all true," she said.

°°°°Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her, kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

°°°°"I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie," she said.

°°°°"My angels," murmured Goriot faintly. "Oh, why should it be trouble that draws you together?"

°°°°This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

°°°°"To save Maxime's life," she said, "to save all my own happiness, I went to the money-lender you know of, a man of iron forged in hell-fire; nothing can melt him; I took all the family diamonds that M. de Restaud is so proud of--his and mine too--and sold them to that M. Gobseck. SOLD THEM! Do you understand? I saved Maxime, but I am lost. Restaud found it all out."

°°°°"How? Who told him? I will kill him," cried Goriot.

°°°°"Yesterday he sent to tell me to come to his room. I went. . . . 'Anastasie,' he said in a voice--oh! such a voice; that was enough, it told me everything--'where are your diamonds?'--'In my room----'--'No,' he said, looking straight at me, 'there they are on that chest of drawers----' and he lifted his handkerchief and showed me the casket. 'Do you know where they came from?' he said. I fell at his feet. . . . I cried; I besought him to tell me the death he wished to see me die."

°°°°"You said that!" cried Goriot. "By God in heaven, whoever lays a hand on either of you so long as I am alive may reckon on being roasted by slow fires! Yes, I will cut him in pieces like . . ."

°°°°Goriot stopped; the words died away in his throat.

°°°°"And then, dear, he asked something worse than death of me. Oh! heaven preserve all other women from hearing such words as I heard then!"

°°°°"I will murder that man," said Goriot quietly. "But he has only one life, and he deserves to die twice.--And then, what next?" he added, looking at Anastasie.

°°°°"Then," the Countess resumed, "there was a pause, and he looked at me. 'Anastasie,' he said, 'I will bury this in silence; there shall be no separation; there are the children. I will not kill M. de Trailles. I might miss him if we fought, and as for other ways of getting rid of him, I should come into collision with the law. If I killed him in your arms, it would bring dishonor on THOSE children. But if you do not want to see your children perish, nor their father nor me, you must first of all submit to two conditions. Answer me. Have I a child of my own?' I answered, 'Yes,'--'Which?'--'Ernest, our eldest boy.'--'Very well,' he said, 'and now swear to obey me in this particular from this time forward.' I swore. 'You will make over your property to me when I require you to do so.' "

°°°°"Do nothing of the kind!" cried Goriot. "Aha! M. de Restaud, you could not make your wife happy; she has looked for happiness and found it elsewhere, and you make her suffer for your own ineptitude? He will have to reckon with me. Make yourself easy, Nasie. Aha! he cares about his heir! Good, very good. I will get hold of the boy; isn't he my grandson? What the blazes! I can surely go to see the brat! I will stow him away somewhere; I will take care of him, you may be quite easy. I will bring Restaud to terms, the monster! I shall say to him, 'A word or two with you! If you want your son back again, give my daughter her property, and leave her to do as she pleases.' "

°°°°"Father!"

°°°°"Yes. I am your father, Nasie, a father indeed! That rogue of a great lord had better not ill-treat my daughter. Tonnerre! What is it in my veins? There is the blood of a tiger in me; I could tear those two men to pieces! Oh! children, children! so this is what your lives are! Why, it is death! . . . What will become of you when I shall be here no longer? Fathers ought to live as long as their children. Ah! Lord God in heaven! how ill Thy world is ordered! Thou hast a Son, if what they tell us is true, and yet Thou leavest us to suffer so through our children. My darlings, my darlings! to think that trouble only should bring you to me, that I should only see you with tears on your faces! Ah! yes, yes, you love me, I see that you love me. Come to me and pour out your griefs to me; my heart is large enough to hold them all. Oh! you might rend my heart in pieces, and every fragment would make a father's heart. If only I could bear all your sorrows for you! . . . Ah! you were so happy when you were little and still with me. . . ."

°°°°"We have never been happy since," said Delphine. "Where are the old days when we slid down the sacks in the great granary?"

°°°°"That is not all, father," said Anastasie in Goriot's ear. The old man gave a startled shudder. "The diamonds only sold for a hundred thousand francs. Maxime is hard pressed. There are twelve thousand francs still to pay. He has given me his word that he will be steady and give up play in future. His love is all that I have left in the world. I have paid such a fearful price for it that I should die if I lose him now. I have sacrificed my fortune, my honor, my peace of mind, and my children for him. Oh! do something, so that at the least Maxime may be at large and live undisgraced in the world, where he will assuredly make a career for himself. Something more than my happiness is at stake; the children have nothing, and if he is sent to Sainte-Pelagie all his prospects will be ruined."

°°°°"I haven't the money, Nasie. I have NOTHING--nothing left. This is the end of everything. Yes, the world is crumbling into ruin, I am sure. Fly! Save yourselves! Ah!--I have still my silver buckles left, and half-a-dozen silver spoons and forks, the first I ever had in my life. But I have nothing else except my life annuity, twelve hundred francs . . ."

°°°°"Then what has become of your money in the funds?"

°°°°"I sold out, and only kept a trifle for my wants. I wanted twelve thousand francs to furnish some rooms for Delphine."

°°°°"In your own house?" asked Mme. de Restaud, looking at her sister.

°°°°"What does it matter where they were?" asked Goriot. "The money is spent now."

°°°°"I see how it is," said the Countess. "Rooms for M. de Rastignac. Poor Delphine, take warning by me!"

°°°°"M. de Rastignac is incapable of ruining the woman he loves, dear."

°°°°"Thanks! Delphine. I thought you would have been kinder to me in my troubles, but you never did love me."

°°°°"Yes, yes, she loves you, Nasie," cried Goriot; "she was saying so only just now. We were talking about you, and she insisted that you were beautiful, and that she herself was only pretty!"

°°°°"Pretty!" said the Countess. "She is as hard as a marble statue."

°°°°"And if I am?" cried Delphine, flushing up, "how have you treated me? You would not recognize me; you closed the doors of every house against me; you have never let an opportunity of mortifying me slip by. And when did I come, as you were always doing, to drain our poor father, a thousand francs at a time, till he is left as you see him now? That is all your doing, sister! I myself have seen my father as often as I could. I have not turned him out of the house, and then come and fawned upon him when I wanted money. I did not so much as know that he had spent those twelve thousand francs on me. I am economical, as you know; and when papa has made me presents, it has never been because I came and begged for them."

°°°°"You were better off than I. M. de Marsay was rich, as you have reason to know. You always were as slippery as gold. Good-bye; I have neither sister nor----"

°°°°"Oh! hush, hush, Nasie!" cried her father.

°°°°"Nobody else would repeat what everybody has ceased to believe. You are an unnatural sister!" cried Delphine.

°°°°"Oh, children, children! hush! hush! or I will kill myself before your eyes."

°°°°"There, Nasie, I forgive you," said Mme. de Nucingen; "you are very unhappy. But I am kinder than you are. How could you say THAT just when I was ready to do anything in the world to help you, even to be reconciled with my husband, which for my own sake I---- Oh! it is just like you; you have behaved cruelly to me all through these nine years."

°°°°"Children, children, kiss each other!" cried the father. "You are angels, both of you."

°°°°"No. Let me alone," cried the Countess shaking off the hand that her father had laid on her arm. "She is more merciless than my husband. Any one might think she was a model of all the virtues herself!"

°°°°"I would rather have people think that I owed money to M. de Marsay than own that M. de Trailles had cost me more than two hundred thousand francs," retorted Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"DELPHINE!" cried the Countess, stepping towards her sister.

°°°°"I shall tell you the truth about yourself if you begin to slander me," said the Baroness coldly.

°°°°"Delphine! you are a ----"

°°°°Father Goriot sprang between them, grasped the Countess' hand, and laid his own over her mouth.

°°°°"Good heavens, father! What have you been handling this morning?" said Anastasie.

°°°°"Ah! well, yes, I ought not to have touched you," said the poor father, wiping his hands on his trousers, "but I have been packing up my things; I did not know that you were coming to see me."

°°°°He was glad that he had drawn down her wrath upon himself.

°°°°"Ah!" he sighed, as he sat down, "you children have broken my heart between you. This is killing me. My head feels as if it were on fire. Be good to each other and love each other! This will be the death of me! Delphine! Nasie! come, be sensible; you are both in the wrong. Come, Dedel," he added, looking through his tears at the Baroness, "she must have twelve thousand francs, you see; let us see if we can find them for her. Oh, my girls, do not look at each other like that!" and he sank on his knees beside Delphine. "Ask her to forgive you--just to please me," he said in her ear. "She is more miserable than you are. Come now, Dedel."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Delphine, alarmed at the wild extravagant grief in her father's face, "I was in the wrong, kiss me----"

°°°°"Ah! that is like balm to my heart," cried Father Goriot. "But how are we to find twelve thousand francs? I might offer myself as a substitute in the army----"

°°°°"Oh! father dear!" they both cried, flinging their arms about him. "No, no!"

°°°°"God reward you for the thought. We are not worth it, are we, Nasie?" asked Delphine.

°°°°"And besides, father dear, it would only be a drop in the bucket," observed the Countess.

°°°°"But is flesh and blood worth nothing?" cried the old man in his despair. "I would give body and soul to save you, Nasie. I would do a murder for the man who would rescue you. I would do, as Vautrin did, go to the hulks, go----" he stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and put both hands to his head. "Nothing left!" he cried, tearing his hair. "If I only knew of a way to steal money, but it is so hard to do it, and then you can't set to work by yourself, and it takes time to rob a bank. Yes, it is time I was dead; there is nothing left me to do but to die. I am no good in the world; I am no longer a father! No. She has come to me in her extremity, and, wretch that I am, I have nothing to give her. Ah! you put your money into a life annuity, old scoundrel; and had you not daughters? You did not love them. Die, die in a ditch, like the dog that you are! Yes, I am worse than a dog; a beast would not have done as I have done! Oh! my head . . . it throbs as if it would burst."

°°°°"Papa!" cried both the young women at once, "do, pray, be reasonable!" and they clung to him to prevent him from dashing his head against the wall. There was a sound of sobbing.

°°°°Eugene, greatly alarmed, took the bill that bore Vautrin's signature, saw that the stamp would suffice for a larger sum, altered the figures, made it into a regular bill for twelve thousand francs, payable to Goriot's order, and went to his neighbor's room.

°°°°"Here is the money, madame," he said, handing the piece of paper to her. "I was asleep; your conversation awoke me, and by this means I learned all that I owed to M. Goriot. This bill can be discounted, and I shall meet it punctually at the due date."

°°°°The Countess stood motionless and speechless, but she held the bill in her fingers.

°°°°"Delphine," she said, with a white face, and her whole frame quivering with indignation, anger, and rage, "I forgave you everything; God is my witness that I forgave you, but I cannot forgive this! So this gentleman was there all the time, and you knew it! Your petty spite has let you to wreak your vengeance on me by betraying my secrets, my life, my children's lives, my shame, my honor! There, you are nothing to me any longer. I hate you. I will do all that I can to injure you. I will . . ."

°°°°Anger paralyzed her; the words died in her dry parched throat.

°°°°"Why, he is my son, my child; he is your brother, your preserver!" cried Goriot. "Kiss his hand, Nasie! Stay, I will embrace him myself," he said, straining Eugene to his breast in a frenzied clasp. "Oh my boy! I will be more than a father to you; if I had God's power, I would fling worlds at your feet. Why don't you kiss him, Nasie? He is not a man, but an angel, a angel out of heaven."

°°°°"Never mind her, father; she is mad just now."

°°°°"Mad! am I? And what are you?" cried Mme. de Restaud.

°°°°"Children, children, I shall die if you go on like this," cried the old man, and he staggered and fell on the bed as if a bullet had struck him.--"They are killing me between them," he said to himself.

°°°°The Countess fixed her eyes on Eugene, who stood stock still; all his faculties were numbed by this violent scene.

°°°°"Sir? . . ." she said, doubt and inquiry in her face, tone, and bearing; she took no notice now of her father nor of Delphine, who was hastily unfastening his waistcoat.

°°°°"Madame," said Eugene, answering the question before it was asked, "I will meet the bill, and keep silence about it."

°°°°"You have killed our father, Nasie!" said Delphine, pointing to Goriot, who lay unconscious on the bed. The Countess fled.

°°°°"I freely forgive her," said the old man, opening his eyes; "her position is horrible; it would turn an older head than hers. Comfort Nasie, and be nice to her, Delphine; promise it to your poor father before he dies," he asked, holding Delphine's hand in a convulsive clasp.

°°°°"Oh! what ails you, father?" she cried in real alarm.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing," said Goriot; "it will go off. There is something heavy pressing on my forehead, a little headache. . . . Ah! poor Nasie, what a life lies before her!"

°°°°Just as he spoke, the Countess came back again and flung herself on her knees before him. "Forgive me!" she cried.

°°°°"Come," said her father, "you are hurting me still more."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Countess said, turning to Rastignac, "misery made me unjust to you. You will be a brother to me, will you not?" and she held out her hand. Her eyes were full of tears as she spoke.

°°°°"Nasie," cried Delphine, flinging her arms round her sister, "my little Nasie, let us forget and forgive."

°°°°"No, no," cried Nasie; "I shall never forget!"

°°°°"Dear angels," cried Goriot, "it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won't it?"

°°°°"I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?"

°°°°"There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No, after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in future."

°°°°Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

°°°°"Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper," said Mme. de Nucingen, "but she has a good heart."

°°°°"She came back for the endorsement," said Eugene in Delphine's ear.

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her," he answered, raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did not venture to express.

°°°°"Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent."

°°°°"How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"I should like to go to sleep," he replied.

°°°°Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

°°°°"This evening at the Italiens," she said to Eugene, "and you can let me know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go into your room.--Oh! how frightful!" she cried on the threshold. "Why, you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps of gold."

°°°°A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot's bedside; to all appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, "They are not happy!" Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they were spoken went to his daughter's heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

°°°°"Ah! Delphine!" he said.

°°°°"How are you now?" she asked.

°°°°"Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently. Don't stay with me, children; go, go and be happy."

°°°°Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room, and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

°°°°"Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin," said Eugene.

°°°°Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him next to the old lodger.

°°°°"What is wrong with him?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning."

°°°°"Is there any cure for it?"

°°°°"None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on? There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way."

°°°°"Yes, there was," said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had struck blow on blow at their father's heart.

°°°°"But Delphine at any rate loves her father," he said to himself.

°°°°That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

°°°°"Do not be anxious about him," she said, however, as soon as Eugene began, "our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear. At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake. To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me; what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh! no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in life when everything turns to bitterness."

°°°°Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression on him.

°°°°Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love, they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme. de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

°°°°"What are you thinking about?" she asked.

°°°°"I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me."

°°°°She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more words, and she feared for her self- control.

°°°°"Eugene," she said, changing the conversation, "I wonder whether you know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant's to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d'Ajuda have agreed to keep the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be there. People are wondering what will happen?"

°°°°"The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill Mme. de Beauseant."

°°°°"Oh, no," said Delphine, smiling, "you do not know that kind of woman. Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for your sake."

°°°°"Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set in circulation here."

°°°°"We shall know the truth to-morrow."

°°°°Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d'Artois. Yesterday evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o'clock in the morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot's existence. The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four o'clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

°°°°"Aha!" said the painter as Eugene came in, "Father Goriot has broken down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of its brightest ornaments."

°°°°Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

°°°°"Hey! Monsieur Eugene!"

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you," shouted Sylvie.

°°°°"It is this, sir," said the widow. "You and M. Goriot should by rights have moved out on the 15th of February. That was three days ago; to-day is the 18th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied."

°°°°"Why can't you trust him?"

°°°°"Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died, those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won't fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and forks he has left, I don't know why. He had got himself up to look quite young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks; he looked quite young again."

°°°°"I will be responsible," said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he foresaw the end.

°°°°He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot's room. The old man was tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

°°°°"Good-evening, father," said Eugene.

°°°°The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

°°°°"How is SHE?"

°°°°"She is quite well. But how are you?"

°°°°"There is nothing much the matter."

°°°°"Don't tire him," said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the room.

°°°°"Well?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in; I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are acting."

°°°°"Is it possible to move him?"

°°°°"Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as quiet as possible----"

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," said Eugene, "we will nurse him between us."

°°°°"I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him."

°°°°"And what did he say?"

°°°°"He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went, and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his strength. One of his daughters has been here."

°°°°"Was it the Countess?" asked Eugene. "A tall, dark-haired woman, with large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Leave him to me for a bit," said Rastignac. "I will make him confess; he will tell me all about it."

°°°°"And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is still some hope left."

°°°°"All right."

°°°°"How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow," said Father Goriot when they were alone. "They are going to a grand ball."

°°°°"What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this evening that you have to stop in bed?"

°°°°"Nothing."

°°°°"Did not Anastasie come to see you?" demanded Rastignac.

°°°°"Yes," said Father Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then, don't keep anything from me. What more did she want of you?"

°°°°"Oh, she was very miserable," he answered, gathering up all his strength to speak. "It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds, Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie's waiting-woman advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie's maid saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair. She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that heartless scoundrel and say, 'I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker; pay her for me!' She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there too in a superb toilette, and Anastasie ought not to be outshone by her younger sister. And then--she was drowned in tears, poor girl! I felt so humbled yesterday when I had not the twelve thousand francs, that I would have given the rest of my miserable life to wipe out that wrong. You see, I could have borne anything once, but latterly this want of money has broken my heart. Oh! I did not do it by halves; I titivated myself up a bit, and went out and sold my spoons and forks and buckles for six hundred francs; then I went to old Daddy Gobseck, and sold a year's interest on my annuity for four hundred francs down. Pshaw! I can live on dry bread, as I did when I was a young man; if I have done it before, I can do it again. My Nasie shall have one happy evening, at any rate. She shall be smart. The banknote for a thousand francs is under my pillow; it warms me to have it lying there under my head, for it is going to make my poor Nasie happy. She can turn that bad girl Victoire out of the house. A servant that cannot trust her mistress, did any one ever hear the like! I shall be quite well to-morrow. Nasie is coming at ten o'clock. They must not think that I am ill, or they will not go to the ball; they will stop and take care of me. To-morrow Nasie will come and hold me in her arms as if I were one of her children; her kisses will make me well again. After all, I might have spent the thousand francs on physic; I would far rather give them to my little Nasie, who can charm all the pain away. At any rate, I am some comfort to her in her misery; and that makes up for my unkindness in buying an annuity. She is in the depths, and I cannot draw her out of them now. Oh! I will go into business again, I will buy wheat in Odessa; out there, wheat fetches a quarter of the price it sells for here. There is a law against the importation of grain, but the good folk who made the law forgot to prohibit the introduction of wheat products and food stuffs made from corn. Hey! hey! . . . That struck me this morning. There is a fine trade to be done in starch."

°°°°Eugene, watching the old man's face, thought that his friend was light-headed.

°°°°"Come," he said, "do not talk any more, you must rest----" Just then Bianchon came up, and Eugene went down to dinner.

°°°°The two students sat up with him that night, relieving each other in turn. Bianchon brought up his medical books and studied; Eugene wrote letters home to his mother and sisters. Next morning Bianchon thought the symptoms more hopeful, but the patient's condition demanded continual attention, which the two students alone were willing to give--a task impossible to describe in the squeamish phraseology of the epoch. Leeches must be applied to the wasted body, the poultices and hot foot-baths, and other details of the treatment required the physical strength and devotion of the two young men. Mme. de Restaud did not come; but she sent a messenger for the money.

°°°°"I expected she would come herself; but it would have been a pity for her to come, she would have been anxious about me," said the father, and to all appearances he was well content.

°°°°At seven o'clock that evening Therese came with a letter from Delphine.

°°°°"What are you doing, dear friend? I have been loved for a very   little while, and I am neglected already? In the confidences of   heart and heart, I have learned to know your soul--you are too   noble not to be faithful for ever, for you know that love with   all its infinite subtle changes of feeling is never the same.   Once you said, as we were listening to the Prayer in Mose in   Egitto, 'For some it is the monotony of a single note; for   others, it is the infinite of sound.' Remember that I am   expecting you this evening to take me to Mme. de Beauseant's   ball. Every one knows now that the King signed M. d'Ajuda's   marriage-contract this morning, and the poor Vicomtesse knew   nothing of it until two o'clock this afternoon. All Paris will   flock to her house, of course, just as a crowd fills the Place de   Greve to see an execution. It is horrible, is it not, to go out   of curiosity to see if she will hide her anguish, and whether she   will die courageously? I certainly should not go, my friend, if I   had been at her house before; but, of course, she will not   receive society any more after this, and all my efforts would be   in vain. My position is a very unusual one, and besides, I am   going there partly on your account. I am waiting for you. If you   are not beside me in less than two hours, I do not know whether I   could forgive such treason."

°°°°Rastignac took up a pen and wrote:

°°°°"I am waiting till the doctor comes to know if there is any hope   of your father's life. He is lying dangerously ill. I will come   and bring you the news, but I am afraid it may be a sentence of   death. When I come you can decide whether you can go to the   ball.--Yours a thousand times."

°°°°At half-past eight the doctor arrived. He did not take a very hopeful view of the case, but thought that there was no immediate danger. Improvements and relapses might be expected, and the good man's life and reason hung in the balance.

°°°°"It would be better for him to die at once," the doctor said as he took leave.

°°°°Eugene left Goriot to Bianchon's care, and went to carry the sad news to Mme. de Nucingen. Family feeling lingered in her, and this must put an end for the present to her plans of amusement.

°°°°"Tell her to enjoy her evening as if nothing had happened," cried Goriot. He had been lying in a sort of stupor, but he suddenly sat upright as Eugene went out.

°°°°Eugene, half heartbroken, entered Delphine's. Her hair had been dressed; she wore her dancing slippers; she had only to put on her ball-dress; but when the artist is giving the finishing stroke to his creation, the last touches require more time than the whole groundwork of the picture.

°°°°"Why, you are not dressed!" she cried.

°°°°"Madame, your father----"

°°°°"My father again!" she exclaimed, breaking in upon him. "You need not teach me what is due to my father, I have known my father this long while. Not a word, Eugene. I will hear what you have to say when you are dressed. My carriage is waiting, take it, go round to your rooms and dress, Therese has put out everything in readiness for you. Come back as soon as you can; we will talk about my father on the way to Mme. de Beauseant's. We must go early; if we have to wait our turn in a row of carriages, we shall be lucky if we get there by eleven o'clock."

°°°°"Madame----"

°°°°"Quick! not a word!" she cried, darting into her dressing-room for a necklace.

°°°°"Do go, Monsieur Eugene, or you will vex madame," said Therese, hurrying him away; and Eugene was too horror-stricken by this elegant parricide to resist.

°°°°He went to his rooms and dressed, sad, thoughtful, and dispirited. The world of Paris was like an ocean of mud for him just then; and it seemed that whoever set foot in that black mire must needs sink into it up to the chin.

°°°°"Their crimes are paltry," said Eugene to himself. "Vautrin was greater."

°°°°He had seen society in its three great phases--Obedience, Struggle, and Revolt; the Family, the World, and Vautrin; and he hesitated in his choice. Obedience was dull, Revolt impossible, Struggle hazardous. His thoughts wandered back to the home circle. He thought of the quiet uneventful life, the pure happiness of the days spent among those who loved him there. Those loving and beloved beings passed their lives in obedience to the natural laws of the hearth, and in that obedience found a deep and constant serenity, unvexed by torments such as these. Yet, for all his good impulses, he could not bring himself to make profession of the religion of pure souls to Delphine, nor to prescribe the duties of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was capable of stepping over her father's corpse to go to the ball; and within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the courage to leave her to go alone.

°°°°"She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it," he said to himself. Then he turned the doctor's dictum over in his mind; he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of traitorous excuses for Delphine's conduct. She did not know how ill her father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations; and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family life that excuse the apparent offence.

°°°°Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his, and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, "how is my father?"

°°°°"Very dangerously ill," he answered; "if you will grant me a proof of your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way."

°°°°"Very well," she said. "Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice, and don't preach to me. Come."

°°°°They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

°°°°"What is it now?" she asked.

°°°°"I can hear the death-rattle in your father's throat," he said almost angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of Mme. de Restaud's vanity and cruelty, of her father's final act of self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie's golden embroideries. Delphine cried.

°°°°"I shall look frightful," she thought. She dried her tears.

°°°°"I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside," she said aloud.

°°°°"Ah! now you are as I would have you," exclaimed Rastignac.

°°°°The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the Vicomtesse.

°°°°The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

°°°°Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a last audience of one of its sovereigns.

°°°°"I was afraid that you would not come," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°"Madame," he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a reproach, "I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here."

°°°°"Good," she said, and she took his hand. "You are perhaps the only one I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a woman."

°°°°She took Rastignac's arm, and went towards a sofa in the card- room.

°°°°"I want you to go to the Marquis," she said. "Jacques, my footman, will go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one shall bring me word."

°°°°She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

°°°°Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d'Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide, feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave a casket to the student, saying as he did so, "They are all there."

°°°°He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes, and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

°°°°"Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene." He grasped Rastignac's hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him. Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the Vicomtesse's room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey. He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

°°°°"Ah! my friend! . . ." said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid her hand on Rastignac's shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin's uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it in the fire, and watched it burn.

°°°°"They are dancing," she said. "They all came very early; but death will be long in coming. Hush! my friend," and she laid a finger on Rastignac's lips, seeing that he was about to speak. "I shall never see Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o'clock this morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my arrangements; since three o'clock this afternoon I have been busy signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I could send to . . ."

°°°°She broke off.

°°°°"He was sure to be . . ."

°°°°Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are impossible to utter.

°°°°"And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service this evening," she said. "I should like to give you some pledge of friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay," she said, glancing about her, "there is this box that has held my gloves. Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer. Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to you in the Rue d'Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my tears. One last look round first."

°°°°She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and took the student's arm.

°°°°"Let us go!" she said.

°°°°This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene's arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her husband's eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten Rastignac's sad thougths; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

°°°°"Come," she said, "I must not deprive you of a pleasure."

°°°°Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover's feet the homage she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move henceforth.

°°°°"What do you think of Nasie?" she asked him.

°°°°"She has discounted everything, even her own father's death," said Rastignac.

°°°°Towards four o'clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M. de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, "It is a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among us."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an exclamation broke from her.

°°°°"I saw how it was, Clara," said Mme. de Langeais. "You are going from among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you have heard me, until we have understood each other."

°°°°She took her friend's arm, and they went together into the next room. There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

°°°°"I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself. You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words. One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night; do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night, Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail, I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?"

°°°°"Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!" called the Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was waiting there.

°°°°The student knelt to kiss his cousin's hand.

°°°°"Good-bye, Antoinette!" said Mme. de Beauseant. "May you be happy."--She turned to the student. "You are young," she said; "you have some beliefs still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of this world."

°°°°It was nearly five o'clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

°°°°"There is no hope for poor Father Goriot," said Bianchon, as Rastignac came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then he turned to his friend. "Dear fellow, you are content with the modest career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world, nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden away under the covering of gems and gold."

°°°°At two o'clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

°°°°"Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours," he said; "but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result, nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he had not a farthing of his own. What have you?"

°°°°"I have twenty francs left," said Rastignac; "but I will take them to the roulette table, I shall be sure to win."

°°°°"And if you lose?"

°°°°"Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for money."

°°°°"And suppose they refuse?" Bianchon retorted. "The most pressing thing just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides, Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him till I come back."

°°°°The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying. Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot's face, so livid, distorted, and feeble.

°°°°"How are you, papa?" he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came into his eyes.

°°°°"Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?"

°°°°"No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the smell was something horrible.

°°°°"MON DIEU!" said Rastignac. "To think of those daughters of his."

°°°°"One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this," said the house student, pointing to a large white jar. "If he begins to groan, and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon, a pupil of Gall's came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised; whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here," said Bianchon, touching the back of the head, "very strange things have been known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives."

°°°°"Did they enjoy themselves?" It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had recognized Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters," said Bianchon. "Scores of times last night he said to me, 'They are dancing now! She has her dress.' He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take it, calling with that tone in his voice, for 'Delphine! my little Delphine! and Nasie!' Upon my word," said the medical student, "it was enough to make any one burst out crying."

°°°°"Delphine," said the old man, "she is there, isn't she? I knew she was there," and his eyes sought the door.

°°°°"I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready," said Bianchon. "They ought to go on at once."

°°°°Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was shocking to see.

°°°°"Noble natures cannot dwell in this world," he said; "Mme de Beauseant has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and feelings?"

°°°°Pictures of yesterday's ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

°°°°"I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to the base of the spine, and send round for us."

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," exclaimed Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view," said the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

°°°°"So!" said Eugene. "Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old man for his own sake?"

°°°°"You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning," returned Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. "Doctors who have seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my dear fellow, I can see the patient still."

°°°°He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

°°°°"Ah! dear boy, is that you?" said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

°°°°"Do you feel better?" asked the law student, taking his hand.

°°°°"Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man here, who has burned up all my bark fuel."

°°°°"I can hear Christophe coming upstairs," Eugene answered. "He is bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you."

°°°°"Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!) Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left now."

°°°°Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man's ear, "I will pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble."

°°°°"My daughters told you that they were coming, didn't they, Christophe? Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once again before I die. Tell them that, but don't alarm them more than you can help."

°°°°Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

°°°°"They will come before long," the old man went on. "I know them so well. My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die; and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning. 'Good-morning, papa!' they used to say, and I would take them on my knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they loved me with all their hearts. MON DIEU! why could they not always be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah! forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for you have used me to endure pain. MON DIEU! if only I held their hands in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. HE will see them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked. They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this is! what pain this is! . . . ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they MUST have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make millions. (Oh! this is agony!)"

°°°°Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength to endure the pain.

°°°°"If they were here, I should not complain," he said. "So why should I complain now?"

°°°°He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

°°°°"First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse," he said; "but she and her husband were so busy that I couldn't get to speak to her. When I insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and went on like this: 'M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important business, when it is all finished she can go.' The gentleman looked angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said, 'Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.' As for Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, 'Ah yes, but madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It will be time enough then to tell her bad news!' I begged and I prayed, but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was out."

°°°°"To think that neither of his daughters should come!" exclaimed Rastignac. "I will write to them both."

°°°°"Neither of them!" cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. "They are busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not. Not until you are dying do you know your children. . . . Oh! my friend, do not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it. No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it."

°°°°The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

°°°°"Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and THEY would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money? If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God! who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh! this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was 'My kind father' here, 'My dear father' there. There was always a place for me at their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought. How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening parties. In fact, they acknowleged me their father; publicly they owned that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see, and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence, but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law's ear, 'Who may that gentleman be?'--'The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very rich.'--'The devil, e is!' they would say, and look again at me with the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one thing I did learn thoroughly --I knew that I was not wanted here on earth.

°°°°"The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that was how they both turned me out of the house.

°°°°"Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured; Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to- day? Have I not more than expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

°°°°"Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see, my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! MON DIEU! These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie! Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to ruin if a father's rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see. The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them, my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know what it means to trample on a father's corpse? There is a God in heaven who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

°°°°"Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss; one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault. I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so. It is no one's affair but mine; man's justice and God's justice have nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly; I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch, I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through love.

°°°°"My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should be present at their father's deathbed; the law is on my side. It would only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit, as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine, mine!" and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak spoke of menace.

°°°°"There, there, dear father," said Eugene, "lie down again; I will write to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them myself, if they do not come before."

°°°°"If they do not come?" repeated the old man, sobbing. "Why, I shall be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life; they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one. . . . Go to them; just tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud as I do now, 'Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who has been so kind to you is lying ill!'--Not a sound; no one comes! Then am I do die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them. I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all, my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh? . . . What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister. . . . Eugene, you are my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me nothing but my heart."

°°°°"Christophe!" shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man moaned, and by his cries, "go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to you."

°°°°"Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military, anything and everything, but make them come!" He looked at Eugene, and a last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. "Go to the authorities, to the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!"

°°°°"But you have cursed them."

°°°°"Who said that!" said the old man in dull amazement. "You know quite well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I can see them. . . . Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay their hands there, I think I should get better. . . . MON DIEU! who will recover their money for them when I am gone? . . . I will manufacture vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes."

°°°°"Here is something to drink," said Eugene, supporting the dying man on his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot's lips.

°°°°"How you must love your own father and mother!" said the old man, and grasped the student's hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling grasp. "I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that has been my life for the last ten years. . . . I have no daughters, my sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl's mind and contaminates her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid them! . . . Kill them! . . . Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They have murdered me between them! . . . Death or my daughters! . . . Ah! it is too late, I am dying, and they are not here! . . . Dying without them! . . . Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----"

°°°°"Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest; don't worry yourself, don't think."

°°°°"I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!"

°°°°"You SHALL see them."

°°°°"Really?" cried the old man, still wandering. "Oh! shall I see them; I shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my fingers . . . their hair . . ."

°°°°His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his daughters' hair.

°°°°"My blessing on them . . ." he said, making an effort, "my blessing . . ."

°°°°His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

°°°°"I met Christophe," he said; "he is gone for your cab."

°°°°Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath had grown.

°°°°"He will not get over this, I am sure," said Bianchon. He felt the old man's pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

°°°°"The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be better for him to die."

°°°°"Ah! my word, it would!"

°°°°"What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death."

°°°°"Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard. . . . There is a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

°°°°"We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come from?"

°°°°Rastignac took out his watch.

°°°°"There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall have to pay the cabman when I get home again."

°°°°Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder. The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de Restaud's house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could see no one.

°°°°"But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying," Rastignac told the man.

°°°°"The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----"

°°°°"If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at once."

°°°°The man went out.

°°°°Eugene waited for a long while. "Perhaps her father is dying at this moment," he thought.

°°°°Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte," said Rastignac, "M. Goriot, your father-in- law, is lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter. He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----"

°°°°"I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are aware," the Count answered coolly. "His character has been compromised in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much more important matters to think about than the things that fools and chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a few seconds; it lies entirely with her----"

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct; you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her, and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I ask."

°°°°"You can tell her yourself," the Count answered, impressed by the thrill of indignation in Eugene's voice.

°°°°The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her. Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to speak.

°°°°"I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all he would forgive me. . . . I did not think there was such torture in the world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not give way as long as I live," she said, turning to her husband. "I am a mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of appearances!" she cried aloud in her despair.

°°°°Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess' life. M. de Restaud's manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in bed.

°°°°"Poor dear Eugene, I am ill," she said. "I caught cold after the ball, and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come."

°°°°"If you were at death's door," Eugene broke in, "you must be carried somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer."

°°°°"Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just as you wish. As for HIM, he would die of grief I know if I went out to see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as I have seen the doctor.--Ah!" she cried out, "you are not wearing your watch, how is that?"

°°°°Eugene reddened.

°°°°"Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it. . . . Oh! it would be very wrong of you!"

°°°°The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, "Do you want to know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch has been pawned, for I had nothing either."

°°°°Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

°°°°"I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why, I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before you.--Therese," she called to the waiting-woman, "ask M. de Nucingen to come upstairs at once and speak to me."

°°°°Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve; he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine's purse for money, so as to dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse. He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient's back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of science, and it was tried in vain.

°°°°"Can you feel them?" asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of Rastignac, and answered, "They are coming, are they not?"

°°°°"There is hope yet," said the surgeon; "he can speak."

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene, "Delphine is coming."

°°°°"Oh! that is nothing!" said Bianchon; "he has been talking about his daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for water, they say----"

°°°°"We may as well give up," said the physician, addressing the surgeon. "Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless."

°°°°Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his loathsome bed.

°°°°"But the sheets ought to be changed," added the physician. "Even if there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come back again, Bianchon," he said, turning to the medical student. "If he complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm."

°°°°He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

°°°°"Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy," said Bianchon, as soon as they were alone; "we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help us to make the bed."

°°°°Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a customer.

°°°°"My dear Monsieur Eugene," she said, when he had spoken, "you know quite as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes, you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you; altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make."

°°°°Eugene hurried up to Goriot's room.

°°°°"Bianchon," he cried, "the money or the watch?"

°°°°"There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money."

°°°°Rastignac hurried downstairs.

°°°°"Here, madame" he said in disgust, "let us square accounts. M. Goriot will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----"

°°°°"Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman," she said, counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

°°°°"Let us get this over," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen."

°°°°"You won't forget Sylvie," said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene's ear; "she has been sitting up these two nights."

°°°°As soon as Eugene's back was turned, the old woman hurried after her handmaid.

°°°°"Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number 7. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse," she said in Sylvie's ear.

°°°°Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear the elderly economist.

°°°°"Quick," said Bianchon, "let us change his shirt. Hold him upright."

°°°°Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

°°°°"Ah! yes!" cried Bianchon. "It is the little locket and the chain made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on the chimney-piece."

°°°°Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded golden hair--Mme. Goriot's hair, no doubt. He read the name on the little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other. It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes, the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students, that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a shrill cry of delight.

°°°°"Nasie! Fifine!"

°°°°"There is life in him yet," said Bianchon.

°°°°"What does he go on living for?" said Sylvie.

°°°°"To suffer," answered Rastignac.

°°°°Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the students' heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair, they heard a faint whisper:

°°°°"Ah! my angels!"

°°°°Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which fled forth with them as they left his lips.

°°°°"Poor dear!" cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most ghastly and involuntary of lies.

°°°°The father's last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

°°°°"He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last, that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the throat. The brain must be completely suffused."

°°°°As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman hastened up, panting for breath.

°°°°"She has come too late," said Rastignac.

°°°°But it was not Delphine; it was Therese, her waiting-woman, who stood in the doorway.

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene," she said, "monsieur and madame have had a terrible scene about some money that Madame (poor thing!) wanted for her father. She fainted, and the doctor came, and she had to be bled, calling out all the while, 'My father is dying; I want to see papa!' It was heartbreaking to hear her----"

°°°°"That will do, Therese. If she came now, it would be trouble thrown away. M. Goriot cannot recognize any one now."

°°°°"Poor, dear gentleman, is he as bad at that?" said Therese.

°°°°"You don't want me now, I must go and look after my dinner; it is half-past four," remarked Sylvie. The next instant she all but collided with Mme. de Restaud on the landing outside.

°°°°There was something awful and appalling in the sudden apparition of the Countess. She saw the bed of death by the dim light of the single candle, and her tears flowed at the sight of her father's passive features, from which the life had almost ebbed. Bianchon with thoughtful tact left the room.

°°°°"I could not escape soon enough," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°The student bowed sadly in reply. Mme. de Restaud took her father's hand and kissed it.

°°°°"Forgive me, father! You used to say that my voice would call you back from the grave; ah! come back for one moment to bless your penitent daughter. Do you hear me? Oh! this is fearful! No one on earth will ever bless me henceforth; every one hates me; no one loves me but you in all the world. My own children will hate me. Take me with you, father; I will love you, I will take care of you. He does not hear me . . . I am mad . . ."

°°°°She fell on her knees, and gazed wildly at the human wreck before her.

°°°°"My cup of misery is full," she said, turning her eyes upon Eugene. "M. de Trailles has fled, leaving enormous debts behind him, and I have found out that he was deceiving me. My husband will never forgive me, and I have left my fortune in his hands. I have lost all my illusions. Alas! I have forsaken the one heart that loved me (she pointed to her father as she spoke), and for whom? I have held his kindness cheap, and slighted his affection; many and many a time I have given him pain, ungrateful wretch that I am!"

°°°°"He knew it," said Rastignac.

°°°°Just then Goriot's eyelids unclosed; it was only a muscular contraction, but the Countess' sudden start of reviving hope was no less dreadful than the dying eyes.

°°°°"Is it possible that he can hear me?" cried the Countess. "No," she answered herself, and sat down beside the bed. As Mme. de Restaud seemed to wish to sit by her father, Eugene went down to take a little food. The boarders were already assembled.

°°°°"Well," remarked the painter, as he joined them, "it seems that there is to be a death-orama upstairs."

°°°°"Charles, I think you might find something less painful to joke about," said Eugene.

°°°°"So we may not laugh here?" returned the painter. "What harm does it do? Bianchon said that the old man was quite insensible."

°°°°"Well, then," said the employe from the Museum, "he will die as he has lived."

°°°°"My father is dead!" shrieked the Countess.

°°°°The terrible cry brought Sylvie, Rastignac, and Bianchon; Mme. de Restaud had fainted away. When she recovered they carried her downstairs, and put her into the cab that stood waiting at the door. Eugene sent Therese with her, and bade the maid take the Countess to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Bianchon came down to them.

°°°°"Yes, he is dead," he said.

°°°°"Come, sit down to dinner, gentlemen," said Mme. Vauquer, "or the soup will be cold."

°°°°The two students sat down together.

°°°°"What is the next thing to be done?" Eugene asked of Bianchon.

°°°°"I have closed his eyes and composed his limbs," said Bianchon. "When the certificate has been officially registered at the Mayor's office, we will sew him in his winding sheet and bury him somewhere. What do you think we ought to do?"

°°°°"He will not smell at his bread like this any more," said the painter, mimicking the old man's little trick.

°°°°"Oh, hang it all!" cried the tutor, "let Father Goriot drop, and let us have something else for a change. He is a standing dish, and we have had him with every sauce this hour or more. It is one of the privileges of the good city of Paris that anybody may be born, or live, or die there without attracting any attention whatsoever. Let us profit by the advantages of civilization. There are fifty or sixty deaths every day; if you have a mind to do it, you can sit down at any time and wail over whole hecatombs of dead in Paris. Father Goriot has gone off the hooks, has he? So much the better for him. If you venerate his memory, keep it to yourselves, and let the rest of us feed in peace."

°°°°"Oh, to be sure," said the widow, "it is all the better for him that he is dead. It looks as though he had had trouble enough, poor soul, while he was alive."

°°°°And this was all the funeral oration delivered over him who had been for Eugene the type and embodiment of Fatherhood.

°°°°The fifteen lodgers began to talk as usual. When Bianchon and Eugene had satisfied their hunger, the rattle of spoons and forks, the boisterous conversation, the expressions on the faces that bespoke various degrees of want of feeling, gluttony, or indifference, everything about them made them shiver with loathing. They went out to find a priest to watch that night with the dead. It was necessary to measure their last pious cares by the scanty sum of money that remained. Before nine o'clock that evening the body was laid out on the bare sacking of the bedstead in the desolate room; a lighted candle stood on either side, and the priest watched at the foot. Rastignac made inquiries of this latter as to the expenses of the funeral, and wrote to the Baron de Nucingen and the Comte de Restaud, entreating both gentlemen to authorize their man of business to defray the charges of laying their father-in-law in the grave. He sent Christophe with the letters; then he went to bed, tired out, and slept.

°°°°Next day Bianchon and Rastignac were obliged to take the certificate to the registrar themselves, and by twelve o'clock the formalities were completed. Two hours went by, no word came from the Count nor from the Baron; nobody appeared to act for them, and Rastignac had already been obliged to pay the priest. Sylvie asked ten francs for sewing the old man in his winding- sheet and making him ready for the grave, and Eugene and Bianchon calculated that they had scarcely sufficient to pay for the funeral, if nothing was forthcoming from the dead man's family. So it was the medical student who laid him in a pauper's coffin, despatched from Bianchon's hospital, whence he obtained it at a cheaper rate.

°°°°"Let us play those wretches a trick," said he. "Go to the cemetery, buy a grave for five years at Pere-Lachaise, and arrange with the Church and the undertaker to have a third-class funeral. If the daughters and their husbands decline to repay you, you can carve this on the headstone--'HERE LIES M. GORIOT, FATHER OF THE COMTESSE DE RESTAUD AND THE BARONNE DE NUCINGEN, INTERRED AT THE EXPENSE OF TWO STUDENTS.' "

°°°°Eugene took part of his friend's advice, but only after he had gone in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

°°°°"Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their father, and are in deep grief over their loss."

°°°°Eugene's Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was impossible to reach Delphine.

°°°°"Sell some of your ornaments," he wrote hastily in the porter's room, "so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place."

°°°°He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the lodging-house about three o'clock. In spite of himself, the tears came into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth, was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs. A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

°°°°Bianchon's duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he had made for the burial service. The house student's note told Rastignac that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading Bianchon's scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot's two daughters in Mme. Vauquer's hands.

°°°°"How dared you take it?" he asked.

°°°°"Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?" retorted Sylvie. "It is gold."

°°°°"Of course it shall!" Eugene answered indignantly; "he shall at any rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with him."

°°°°When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man's breast the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were innocent little maidens, before they began "to think for themselves," as he had moaned out in his agony.

°°°°Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker's men were the only followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. When the coffin had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked round in vain for Goriot's two daughters or their husbands. Christophe was his only fellow- mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe's hand. He could not utter a word just then.

°°°°"Yes, Monsieur Eugene," said Christophe, "he was a good and worthy man, who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any harm, and gave nobody any trouble."

°°°°The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

°°°°The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the Libera nos and the De profundis. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with Eugene and Christophe.

°°°°"There is no one else to follow us," remarked the priest, "so we may as well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five."

°°°°But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen, arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o'clock Goriot's coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters' servants standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that fell on Father Goriot's grave, Eugene Rastignac's youth ended. He folded his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

°°°°He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste of its honey, and said magniloquently:

°°°°"Henceforth there is war between us."

°°°°And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine with Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°ADDENDUM

°°°°The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

°°°°Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d'   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Secrets of a Princess   Beatrix

°°°°Beauseant, Marquis   An Episode under the Terror

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomte de   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomtesse de   The Deserted Woman   Albert Savarus

°°°°Bianchon, Horace   The Atheist's Mass   Cesar Birotteau   The Commission in Lunacy   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   A Bachelor's Establishment   The Secrets of a Princess   The Government Clerks   Pierrette   A Study of Woman   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Honorine   The Seamy Side of History   The Magic Skin   A Second Home   A Prince of Bohemia   Letters of Two Brides   The Muse of the Department   The Imaginary Mistress   The Middle Classes   Cousin Betty   The Country Parson In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:   Another Study of Woman   La Grande Breteche

°°°°Bibi-Lupin (chief of secret police, called himself Gondureau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de   Sarrasine

°°°°Collin, Jacques   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Derville   Gobseck   A Start in Life   The Gondreville Mystery   Colonel Chabert   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Franchessini, Colonel   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Galathionne, Princess   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van   Gobseck   Cesar Birotteau   The Government Clerks   The Unconscious Humoriists

°°°°Jacques (M. de Beauseant's butler)   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Langeais, Duchesse Antoinette de   The Thirteen

°°°°Marsay, Henri de   The Thirteen   The Unconscious Humorists   Another Study of Woman   The Lily of the Valley   Jealousies of a Country Town   Ursule Mirouet   A Marriage Settlement   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Letters of Two Brides   The Ball at Sceaux   Modest Mignon   The Secrets of a Princess   The Gondreville Mystery   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Maurice (de Restaud's valet)   Gobseck

°°°°Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de   The Thirteen   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Another Study of Woman   Pierrette   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Nucingen, Baron Frederic de   The Firm of Nucingen   Pierrette   Cesar Birotteau   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Another Study of Woman   The Secrets of a Princess   A Man of Business   Cousin Betty   The Muse of the Department   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de   The Thirteen   Eugenie Grandet   Cesar Birotteau   Melmoth Reconciled   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   The Commission in Lunacy   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Modeste Mignon   The Firm of Nucingen   Another Study of Woman   A Daughter of Eve   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Poiret   The Government Clerks   A Start in Life   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Poiret, Madame (nee Christine-Michelle Michonneau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de (Eugene's parents)   Lost Illusions

°°°°Rastignac, Eugene de   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Ball at Sceaux   The Interdiction   A Study of Woman   Another Study of Woman   The Magic Skin   The Secrets of a Princess   A Daughter of Eve   The Gondreville Mystery   The Firm of Nucingen   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Rastignac, Laure-Rose and Agathe de   Lost Illusions   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Rastignac, Monseigneur Gabriel de   The Country Parson   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Restaud, Comte de   Gobseck

°°°°Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de   Gobseck

°°°°Selerier   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Taillefer, Jean-Frederic   The Firm of Nucingen   The Magic Skin   The Red Inn

°°°°Taillefer, Victorine   The Red Inn

°°°°Therese   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Tissot, Pierre-Francois   A Prince of Bohemia

°°°°Trailles, Comte Maxime de   Cesar Birotteau   Gobseck   Ursule Mirouet   A Man of Business   The Member for Arcis   The Secrets of a Princess   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   Beatrix   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°End

°°°°Eugenie Grandet

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Maria.

°°°°May your name, that of one whose portrait is the noblest ornament

°°°°of this work, lie on its opening pages like a branch of sacred

°°°°box, taken from an unknown tree, but sanctified by religion, and

°°°°kept ever fresh and green by pious hands to bless the house.De Balzac.

°°°°EUGENIE GRANDET

°°°°I

°°°°There are houses in certain provincial towns whose aspect inspiresmelancholy, akin to that called forth by sombre cloisters, drearymoorlands, or the desolation of ruins. Within these houses there is,perhaps, the silence of the cloister, the barrenness of moors, theskeleton of ruins; life and movement are so stagnant there that astranger might think them uninhabited, were it not that he encounterssuddenly the pale, cold glance of a motionless person, whose half-monastic face peers beyond the window-casing at the sound of anunaccustomed step.

°°°°Such elements of sadness formed the physiognomy, as it were, of adwelling-house in Saumur which stands at the end of the steep streetleading to the chateau in the upper part of the town. This street--nowlittle frequented, hot in summer, cold in winter, dark in certainsections--is remarkable for the resonance of its little pebblypavement, always clean and dry, for the narrowness of its tortuousroad-way, for the peaceful stillness of its houses, which belong tothe Old town and are over-topped by the ramparts. Houses threecenturies old are still solid, though built of wood, and their diversaspects add to the originality which commends this portion of Saumurto the attention of artists and antiquaries.

°°°°It is difficult to pass these houses without admiring the enormousoaken beams, their ends carved into fantastic figures, which crownwith a black bas-relief the lower floor of most of them. In one placethese transverse timbers are covered with slate and mark a bluish linealong the frail wall of a dwelling covered by a roof /en colombage/which bends beneath the weight of years, and whose rotting shinglesare twisted by the alternate action of sun and rain. In another placeblackened, worn-out window-sills, with delicate sculptures nowscarcely discernible, seem too weak to bear the brown clay pots fromwhich springs the heart's-ease or the rose-bush of some poor working-woman. Farther on are doors studded with enormous nails, where thegenius of our forefathers has traced domestic hieroglyphics, of whichthe meaning is now lost forever. Here a Protestant attested hisbelief; there a Leaguer cursed Henry IV.; elsewhere some bourgeois hascarved the insignia of his /noblesse de cloches/, symbols of his long-forgotten magisterial glory. The whole history of France is there.Next to a tottering house with roughly plastered walls, where anartisan enshrines his tools, rises the mansion of a country gentleman,on the stone arch of which above the door vestiges of armorialbearings may still be seen, battered by the many revolutions that haveshaken France since 1789. In this hilly street the ground-floors ofthe merchants are neither shops nor warehouses; lovers of the MiddleAges will here find the /ouvrouere/ of our forefathers in all itsnaive simplicity. These low rooms, which have no shop-frontage, noshow-windows, in fact no glass at all, are deep and dark and withoutinterior or exterior decoration. Their doors open in two parts, eachroughly iron-bound; the upper half is fastened back within the room,the lower half, fitted with a spring-bell, swings continually to andfro. Air and light reach the damp den within, either through the upperhalf of the door, or through an open space between the ceiling and alow front wall, breast-high, which is closed by solid shutters thatare taken down every morning, put up every evening, and held in placeby heavy iron bars.

°°°°This wall serves as a counter for the merchandise. No delusive displayis there; only samples of the business, whatever it may chance to be,--such, for instance, as three or four tubs full of codfish and salt,a few bundles of sail-cloth, cordage, copper wire hanging from thejoists above, iron hoops for casks ranged along the wall, or a fewpieces of cloth upon the shelves. Enter. A neat girl, glowing withyouth, wearing a white kerchief, her arms red and bare, drops herknitting and calls her father or her mother, one of whom comes forwardand sells you what you want, phlegmatically, civilly, or arrogantly,according to his or her individual character, whether it be a matterof two sous' or twenty thousand francs' worth of merchandise. You maysee a cooper, for instance, sitting in his doorway and twirling histhumbs as he talks with a neighbor. To all appearance he owns nothingmore than a few miserable boat-ribs and two or three bundles of laths;but below in the port his teeming wood-yard supplies all the cooperagetrade of Anjou. He knows to a plank how many casks are needed if thevintage is good. A hot season makes him rich, a rainy season ruinshim; in a single morning puncheons worth eleven francs have been knownto drop to six. In this country, as in Touraine, atmosphericvicissitudes control commercial life. Wine-growers, proprietors, wood-merchants, coopers, inn-keepers, mariners, all keep watch of the sun.They tremble when they go to bed lest they should hear in the morningof a frost in the night; they dread rain, wind, drought, and wantwater, heat, and clouds to suit their fancy. A perpetual duel goes onbetween the heavens and their terrestrial interests. The barometersmooths, saddens, or makes merry their countenances, turn and turnabout. From end to end of this street, formerly the Grand'Rue deSaumur, the words: "Here's golden weather," are passed from door todoor; or each man calls to his neighbor: "It rains louis," knowingwell what a sunbeam or the opportune rainfall is bringing him.On Saturdays after midday, in the fine season, not one sou's worth ofmerchandise can be bought from these worthy traders. Each has hisvineyard, his enclosure of fields, and all spend two days in thecountry. This being foreseen, and purchases, sales, and profitsprovided for, the merchants have ten or twelve hours to spend inparties of pleasure, in making observations, in criticisms, and incontinual spying. A housewife cannot buy a partridge without theneighbors asking the husband if it were cooked to a turn. A young girlnever puts her head near a window that she is not seen by idlinggroups in the street. Consciences are held in the light; and thehouses, dark, silent, impenetrable as they seem, hide no mysteries.Life is almost wholly in the open air; every household sits at its ownthreshold, breakfasts, dines, and quarrels there. No one can passalong the street without being examined; in fact formerly, when astranger entered a provincial town he was bantered and made game offrom door to door. From this came many good stories, and the nickname/copieux/, which was applied to the inhabitants of Angers, whoexcelled in such urban sarcasms.

°°°°The ancient mansions of the old town of Saumur are at the top of thishilly street, and were formerly occupied by the nobility of theneighborhood. The melancholy dwelling where the events of thefollowing history took place is one of these mansions,--venerablerelics of a century in which men and things bore the characteristicsof simplicity which French manners and customs are losing day by day.Follow the windings of the picturesque thoroughfare, whoseirregularities awaken recollections that plunge the mind mechanicallyinto reverie, and you will see a somewhat dark recess, in the centreof which is hidden the door of the house of Monsieur Grandet. It isimpossible to understand the force of this provincial expression--thehouse of Monsieur Grandet--without giving the biography of MonsieurGrandet himself.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet enjoyed a reputation in Saumur whose causes andeffects can never be fully understood by those who have not, at onetime or another, lived in the provinces. In 1789 Monsieur Grandet--still called by certain persons le Pere Grandet, though the number ofsuch old persons has perceptibly diminished--was a master-cooper, ableto read, write, and cipher. At the period when the French Republicoffered for sale the church property in the arrondissement of Saumur,the cooper, then forty years of age, had just married the daughter ofa rich wood-merchant. Supplied with the ready money of his own fortuneand his wife's /dot/, in all about two thousand louis-d'or, Grandetwent to the newly established "district," where, with the help of twohundred double louis given by his father-in-law to the surlyrepublican who presided over the sales of the national domain, heobtained for a song, legally if not legitimately, one of the finestvineyards in the arrondissement, an old abbey, and several farms. Theinhabitants of Saumur were so little revolutionary that they thoughtPere Grandet a bold man, a republican, and a patriot with a mind opento all the new ideas; though in point of fact it was open only tovineyards. He was appointed a member of the administration of Saumur,and his pacific influence made itself felt politically andcommercially. Politically, he protected the ci-devant nobles, andprevented, to the extent of his power, the sale of the lands andproperty of the /emigres/; commercially, he furnished the Republicanarmies with two or three thousand puncheons of white wine, and tookhis pay in splendid fields belonging to a community of women whoselands had been reserved for the last lot.

°°°°Under the Consulate Grandet became mayor, governed wisely, andharvested still better pickings. Under the Empire he was calledMonsieur Grandet. Napoleon, however, did not like republicans, andsuperseded Monsieur Grandet (who was supposed to have worn thePhrygian cap) by a man of his own surroundings, a future baron of theEmpire. Monsieur Grandet quitted office without regret. He hadconstructed in the interests of the town certain fine roads which ledto his own property; his house and lands, very advantageouslyassessed, paid moderate taxes; and since the registration of hisvarious estates, the vineyards, thanks to his constant care, hadbecome the "head of the country,"--a local term used to denote thosethat produced the finest quality of wine. He might have asked for thecross of the Legion of honor.

°°°°This event occurred in 1806. Monsieur Grandet was then fifty-sevenyears of age, his wife thirty-six, and an only daughter, the fruit oftheir legitimate love, was ten years old. Monsieur Grandet, whomProvidence no doubt desired to compensate for the loss of hismunicipal honors, inherited three fortunes in the course of this year,--that of Madame de la Gaudiniere, born de la Bertelliere, the motherof Madame Grandet; that of old Monsieur de la Bertelliere, hergrandfather; and, lastly, that of Madame Gentillet, her grandmother onthe mother's side: three inheritances, whose amount was not known toany one. The avarice of the deceased persons was so keen that for along time they had hoarded their money for the pleasure of secretlylooking at it. Old Monsieur de la Bertelliere called an investment anextravagance, and thought he got better interest from the sight of hisgold than from the profits of usury. The inhabitants of Saumurconsequently estimated his savings according to "the revenues of thesun's wealth," as they said.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet thus obtained that modern title of nobility which ourmania for equality can never rub out. He became the most imposingpersonage in the arrondissement. He worked a hundred acres ofvineyard, which in fruitful years yielded seven or eight hundredhogsheads of wine. He owned thirteen farms, an old abbey, whosewindows and arches he had walled up for the sake of economy,--ameasure which preserved them,--also a hundred and twenty-seven acresof meadow-land, where three thousand poplars, planted in 1793, grewand flourished; and finally, the house in which he lived. Such was hisvisible estate; as to his other property, only two persons could giveeven a vague guess at its value: one was Monsieur Cruchot, a notaryemployed in the usurious investments of Monsieur Grandet; the otherwas Monsieur des Grassins, the richest banker in Saumur, in whoseprofits Grandet had a certain covenanted and secret share.Although old Cruchot and Monsieur des Grassins were both gifted withthe deep discretion which wealth and trust beget in the provinces,they publicly testified so much respect to Monsieur Grandet thatobservers estimated the amount of his property by the obsequiousattention which they bestowed upon him. In all Saumur there was no onenot persuaded that Monsieur Grandet had a private treasure, somehiding-place full of louis, where he nightly took ineffable delight ingazing upon great masses of gold. Avaricious people gathered proof ofthis when they looked at the eyes of the good man, to which the yellowmetal seemed to have conveyed its tints. The glance of a manaccustomed to draw enormous interest from his capital acquires, likethat of the libertine, the gambler, or the sycophant, certainindefinable habits,--furtive, eager, mysterious movements, which neverescape the notice of his co-religionists. This secret language is in acertain way the freemasonry of the passions. Monsieur Grandet inspiredthe respectful esteem due to one who owed no man anything, who,skilful cooper and experienced wine-grower that he was, guessed withthe precision of an astronomer whether he ought to manufacture athousand puncheons for his vintage, or only five hundred, who neverfailed in any speculation, and always had casks for sale when caskswere worth more than the commodity that filled them, who could storehis whole vintage in his cellars and bide his time to put thepuncheons on the market at two hundred francs, when the littleproprietors had been forced to sell theirs for five louis. His famousvintage of 1811, judiciously stored and slowly disposed of, broughthim in more than two hundred and forty thousand francs.

°°°°Financially speaking, Monsieur Grandet was something between a tigerand a boa-constrictor. He could crouch and lie low, watch his prey along while, spring upon it, open his jaws, swallow a mass of louis,and then rest tranquilly like a snake in process of digestion,impassible, methodical, and cold. No one saw him pass without afeeling of admiration mingled with respect and fear; had not every manin Saumur felt the rending of those polished steel claws? For thisone, Maitre Cruchot had procured the money required for the purchaseof a domain, but at eleven per cent. For that one, Monsieur desGrassins discounted bills of exchange, but at a frightful deduction ofinterest. Few days ever passed that Monsieur Grandet's name was notmentioned either in the markets or in social conversations at theevening gatherings. To some the fortune of the old wine-grower was anobject of patriotic pride. More than one merchant, more than oneinnkeeper, said to strangers with a certain complacency: "Monsieur, wehave two or three millionaire establishments; but as for MonsieurGrandet, he does not himself know how much he is worth."

°°°°In 1816 the best reckoners in Saumur estimated the landed property ofthe worthy man at nearly four millions; but as, on an average, he hadmade yearly, from 1793 to 1817, a hundred thousand francs out of thatproperty, it was fair to presume that he possessed in actual money asum nearly equal to the value of his estate. So that when, after agame of boston or an evening discussion on the matter of vines, thetalk fell upon Monsieur Grandet, knowing people said: "Le PereGrandet? le Pere Grandet must have at least five or six millions.""You are cleverer than I am; I have never been able to find out theamount," answered Monsieur Cruchot or Monsieur des Grassins, wheneither chanced to overhear the remark.

°°°°If some Parisian mentioned Rothschild or Monsieur Lafitte, the peopleof Saumur asked if he were as rich as Monsieur Grandet. When theParisian, with a smile, tossed them a disdainful affirmative, theylooked at each other and shook their heads with an incredulous air. Solarge a fortune covered with a golden mantle all the actions of thisman. If in early days some peculiarities of his life gave occasion forlaughter or ridicule, laughter and ridicule had long since died away.His least important actions had the authority of results repeatedlyshown. His speech, his clothing, his gestures, the blinking of hiseyes, were law to the country-side, where every one, after studyinghim as a naturalist studies the result of instinct in the loweranimals, had come to understand the deep mute wisdom of his slightestactions.

°°°°"It will be a hard winter," said one; "Pere Grandet has put on his furgloves."

°°°°"Pere Grandet is buying quantities of staves; there will be plenty ofwine this year."

°°°°Monsieur Grandet never bought either bread or meat. His farmerssupplied him weekly with a sufficiency of capons, chickens, eggs,butter, and his tithe of wheat. He owned a mill; and the tenant wasbound, over and above his rent, to take a certain quantity of grainand return him the flour and bran. La Grande Nanon, his only servant,though she was no longer young, baked the bread of the householdherself every Saturday. Monsieur Grandet arranged with kitchen-gardeners who were his tenants to supply him with vegetables. As tofruits, he gathered such quantities that he sold the greater part inthe market. His fire-wood was cut from his own hedgerows or taken fromthe half-rotten old sheds which he built at the corners of his fields,and whose planks the farmers carted into town for him, all cut up, andobligingly stacked in his wood-house, receiving in return his thanks.His only known expenditures were for the consecrated bread, theclothing of his wife and daughter, the hire of their chairs in church,the wages of la Grand Nanon, the tinning of the saucepans, lights,taxes, repairs on his buildings, and the costs of his variousindustries. He had six hundred acres of woodland, lately purchased,which he induced a neighbor's keeper to watch, under the promise of anindemnity. After the acquisition of this property he ate game for thefirst time.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet's manners were very simple. He spoke little. Heusually expressed his meaning by short sententious phrases uttered ina soft voice. After the Revolution, the epoch at which he first cameinto notice, the good man stuttered in a wearisome way as soon as hewas required to speak at length or to maintain an argument. Thisstammering, the incoherence of his language, the flux of words inwhich he drowned his thought, his apparent lack of logic, attributedto defects of education, were in reality assumed, and will besufficiently explained by certain events in the following history.Four sentences, precise as algebraic formulas, sufficed him usually tograsp and solve all difficulties of life and commerce: "I don't know;I cannot; I will not; I will see about it." He never said yes, or no,and never committed himself to writing. If people talked to him helistened coldly, holding his chin in his right hand and resting hisright elbow in the back of his left hand, forming in his own mindopinions on all matters, from which he never receded. He reflectedlong before making any business agreement. When his opponent, aftercareful conversation, avowed the secret of his own purposes, confidentthat he had secured his listener's assent, Grandet answered: "I candecide nothing without consulting my wife." His wife, whom he hadreduced to a state of helpless slavery, was a useful screen to him inbusiness. He went nowhere among friends; he neither gave nor accepteddinners; he made no stir or noise, seeming to economize in everything,even movement. He never disturbed or disarranged the things of otherpeople, out of respect for the rights of property. Nevertheless, inspite of his soft voice, in spite of his circumspect bearing, thelanguage and habits of a coarse nature came to the surface, especiallyin his own home, where he controlled himself less than elsewhere.Physically, Grandet was a man five feet high, thick-set, square-built,with calves twelve inches in circumference, knotted knee-joints, andbroad shoulders; his face was round, tanned, and pitted by the small-pox; his chin was straight, his lips had no curves, his teeth werewhite; his eyes had that calm, devouring expression which peopleattribute to the basilisk; his forehead, full of transverse wrinkles,was not without certain significant protuberances; his yellow-grayishhair was said to be silver and gold by certain young people who didnot realize the impropriety of making a jest about Monsieur Grandet.His nose, thick at the end, bore a veined wen, which the common peoplesaid, not without reason, was full of malice. The whole countenanceshowed a dangerous cunning, an integrity without warmth, the egotismof a man long used to concentrate every feeling upon the enjoyments ofavarice and upon the only human being who was anything whatever tohim,--his daughter and sole heiress, Eugenie. Attitude, manners,bearing, everything about him, in short, testified to that belief inhimself which the habit of succeeding in all enterprises never failsto give to a man.

°°°°Thus, though his manners were unctuous and soft outwardly, MonsieurGrandet's nature was of iron. His dress never varied; and those whosaw him to-day saw him such as he had been since 1791. His stout shoeswere tied with leathern thongs; he wore, in all weathers, thickwoollen stockings, short breeches of coarse maroon cloth with silverbuckles, a velvet waistcoat, in alternate stripes of yellow and puce,buttoned squarely, a large maroon coat with wide flaps, a blackcravat, and a quaker's hat. His gloves, thick as those of a gendarme,lasted him twenty months; to preserve them, he always laid themmethodically on the brim of his hat in one particular spot. Saumurknew nothing further about this personage.

°°°°Only six individuals had a right of entrance to Monsieur Grandet'shouse. The most important of the first three was a nephew of MonsieurCruchot. Since his appointment as president of the Civil courts ofSaumur this young man had added the name of Bonfons to that ofCruchot. He now signed himself C. de Bonfons. Any litigant so ill-advised as to call him Monsieur Cruchot would soon be made to feel hisfolly in court. The magistrate protected those who called him Monsieurle president, but he favored with gracious smiles those who addressedhim as Monsieur de Bonfons. Monsieur le president was thirty-threeyears old, and possessed the estate of Bonfons (Boni Fontis), worthseven thousand francs a year; he expected to inherit the property ofhis uncle the notary and that of another uncle, the Abbe Cruchot, adignitary of the chapter of Saint-Martin de Tours, both of whom werethought to be very rich. These three Cruchots, backed by a goodlynumber of cousins, and allied to twenty families in the town, formed aparty, like the Medici in Florence; like the Medici, the Cruchots hadtheir Pazzi.

°°°°Madame des Grassins, mother of a son twenty-three years of age, cameassiduously to play cards with Madame Grandet, hoping to marry herdear Adolphe to Mademoiselle Eugenie. Monsieur des Grassins, thebanker, vigorously promoted the schemes of his wife by means of secretservices constantly rendered to the old miser, and always arrived intime upon the field of battle. The three des Grassins likewise hadtheir adherents, their cousins, their faithful allies. On the Cruchotside the abbe, the Talleyrand of the family, well backed-up by hisbrother the notary, sharply contested every inch of ground with hisfemale adversary, and tried to obtain the rich heiress for his nephewthe president.

°°°°This secret warfare between the Cruchots and des Grassins, the prizethereof being the hand in marriage of Eugenie Grandet, kept thevarious social circles of Saumur in violent agitation. WouldMademoiselle Grandet marry Monsieur le president or Monsieur Adolphedes Grassins? To this problem some replied that Monsieur Grandet wouldnever give his daughter to the one or to the other. The old cooper,eaten up with ambition, was looking, they said, for a peer of France,to whom an income of three hundred thousand francs would make all thepast, present, and future casks of the Grandets acceptable. Othersreplied that Monsieur and Madame des Grassins were nobles, andexceedingly rich; that Adolphe was a personable young fellow; and thatunless the old man had a nephew of the pope at his beck and call, sucha suitable alliance ought to satisfy a man who came from nothing,--aman whom Saumur remembered with an adze in his hand, and who had,moreover, worn the /bonnet rouge/. Certain wise heads called attentionto the fact that Monsieur Cruchot de Bonfons had the right of entry tothe house at all times, whereas his rival was received only onSundays. Others, however, maintained that Madame des Grassins was moreintimate with the women of the house of Grandet than the Cruchotswere, and could put into their minds certain ideas which would lead,sooner or later, to success. To this the former retorted that the AbbeCruchot was the most insinuating man in the world: pit a woman againsta monk, and the struggle was even. "It is diamond cut diamond," said aSaumur wit.

°°°°The oldest inhabitants, wiser than their fellows, declared that theGrandets knew better than to let the property go out of the family,and that Mademoiselle Eugenie Grandet of Saumur would be married tothe son of Monsieur Grandet of Paris, a wealthy wholesale wine-merchant. To this the Cruchotines and the Grassinists replied: "In thefirst place, the two brothers have seen each other only twice inthirty years; and next, Monsieur Grandet of Paris has ambitiousdesigns for his son. He is mayor of an arrondissement, a deputy,colonel of the National Guard, judge in the commercial courts; hedisowns the Grandets of Saumur, and means to ally himself with someducal family,--ducal under favor of Napoleon." In short, was thereanything not said of an heiress who was talked of through acircumference of fifty miles, and even in the public conveyances fromAngers to Blois, inclusively!

°°°°At the beginning of 1811, the Cruchotines won a signal advantage overthe Grassinists. The estate of Froidfond, remarkable for its park, itsmansion, its farms, streams, ponds, forests, and worth about threemillions, was put up for sale by the young Marquis de Froidfond, whowas obliged to liquidate his possessions. Maitre Cruchot, thepresident, and the abbe, aided by their adherents, were able toprevent the sale of the estate in little lots. The notary concluded abargain with the young man for the whole property, payable in gold,persuading him that suits without number would have to be broughtagainst the purchasers of small lots before he could get the money forthem; it was better, therefore, to sell the whole to Monsieur Grandet,who was solvent and able to pay for the estate in ready money. Thefine marquisate of Froidfond was accordingly conveyed down the gulletof Monsieur Grandet, who, to the great astonishment of Saumur, paidfor it, under proper discount, with the usual formalities.This affair echoed from Nantes to Orleans. Monsieur Grandet tookadvantage of a cart returning by way of Froidfond to go and see hischateau. Having cast a master's eye over the whole property, hereturned to Saumur, satisfied that he had invested his money at fiveper cent, and seized by the stupendous thought of extending andincreasing the marquisate of Froidfond by concentrating all hisproperty there. Then, to fill up his coffers, now nearly empty, heresolved to thin out his woods and his forests, and to sell off thepoplars in the meadows.

°°°°II

°°°°It is now easy to understand the full meaning of the term, "the houseof Monsieur Grandet,"--that cold, silent, pallid dwelling, standingabove the town and sheltered by the ruins of the ramparts. The twopillars and the arch, which made the porte-cochere on which the dooropened, were built, like the house itself, of tufa,--a white stonepeculiar to the shores of the Loire, and so soft that it lasts hardlymore than two centuries. Numberless irregular holes, capriciouslybored or eaten out by the inclemency of the weather, gave anappearance of the vermiculated stonework of French architecture to thearch and the side walls of this entrance, which bore some resemblanceto the gateway of a jail. Above the arch was a long bas-relief, inhard stone, representing the four seasons, the faces already crumblingaway and blackened. This bas-relief was surmounted by a projectingplinth, upon which a variety of chance growths had sprung up,--yellowpellitory, bindweed, convolvuli, nettles, plantain, and even a littlecherry-tree, already grown to some height.

°°°°The door of the archway was made of solid oak, brown, shrunken, andsplit in many places; though frail in appearance, it was firmly heldin place by a system of iron bolts arranged in symmetrical patterns. Asmall square grating, with close bars red with rust, filled up themiddle panel and made, as it were, a motive for the knocker, fastenedto it by a ring, which struck upon the grinning head of a huge nail.This knocker, of the oblong shape and kind which our ancestors called/jaquemart/, looked like a huge note of exclamation; an antiquary whoexamined it attentively might have found indications of the figure,essentially burlesque, which it once represented, and which long usagehad now effaced. Through this little grating--intended in olden timesfor the recognition of friends in times of civil war--inquisitivepersons could perceive, at the farther end of the dark and slimyvault, a few broken steps which led to a garden, picturesquely shut inby walls that were thick and damp, and through which oozed a moisturethat nourished tufts of sickly herbage. These walls were the ruins ofthe ramparts, under which ranged the gardens of several neighboringhouses.

°°°°The most important room on the ground-floor of the house was a largehall, entered directly from beneath the vault of the porte-cochere.Few people know the importance of a hall in the little towns of Anjou,Touraine, and Berry. The hall is at one and the same time antechamber,salon, office, boudoir, and dining-room; it is the theatre of domesticlife, the common living-room. There the barber of the neighborhoodcame, twice a year, to cut Monsieur Grandet's hair; there the farmers,the cure, the under-prefect, and the miller's boy came on business.This room, with two windows looking on the street, was entirely ofwood. Gray panels with ancient mouldings covered the walls from top tobottom; the ceiling showed all its beams, which were likewise paintedgray, while the space between them had been washed over in white, nowyellow with age. An old brass clock, inlaid with arabesques, adornedthe mantel of the ill-cut white stone chimney-piece, above which was agreenish mirror, whose edges, bevelled to show the thickness of theglass, reflected a thread of light the whole length of a gothic framein damascened steel-work. The two copper-gilt candelabra whichdecorated the corners of the chimney-piece served a double purpose: bytaking off the side-branches, each of which held a socket, the mainstem--which was fastened to a pedestal of bluish marble tipped withcopper--made a candlestick for one candle, which was sufficient forordinary occasions. The chairs, antique in shape, were covered withtapestry representing the fables of La Fontaine; it was necessary,however, to know that writer well to guess at the subjects, for thefaded colors and the figures, blurred by much darning, were difficultto distinguish.

°°°°At the four corners of the hall were closets, or rather buffets,surmounted by dirty shelves. An old card-table in marquetry, of whichthe upper part was a chess-board, stood in the space between the twowindows. Above this table was an oval barometer with a black borderenlivened with gilt bands, on which the flies had so licentiouslydisported themselves that the gilding had become problematical. On thepanel opposite to the chimney-piece were two portraits in pastel,supposed to represent the grandfather of Madame Grandet, old Monsieurde la Bertelliere, as a lieutenant in the French guard, and thedeceased Madame Gentillet in the guise of a shepherdess. The windowswere draped with curtains of red /gros de Tours/ held back by silkencords with ecclesiastical tassels. This luxurious decoration, littlein keeping with the habits of Monsieur Grandet, had been, togetherwith the steel pier-glass, the tapestries, and the buffets, which wereof rose-wood, included in the purchase of the house.

°°°°By the window nearest to the door stood a straw chair, whose legs wereraised on castors to lift its occupant, Madame Grandet, to a heightfrom which she could see the passers-by. A work-table of stainedcherry-wood filled up the embrasure, and the little armchair ofEugenie Grandet stood beside it. In this spot the lives had flowedpeacefully onward for fifteen years, in a round of constant work fromthe month of April to the month of November. On the first day of thelatter month they took their winter station by the chimney. Not untilthat day did Grandet permit a fire to be lighted; and on the thirty-first of March it was extinguished, without regard either to thechills of the early spring or to those of a wintry autumn. A foot-warmer, filled with embers from the kitchen fire, which la GrandeNanon contrived to save for them, enabled Madame and MademoiselleGrandet to bear the chilly mornings and evenings of April and October.Mother and daughter took charge of the family linen, and spent theirdays so conscientiously upon a labor properly that of working-women,that if Eugenie wished to embroider a collar for her mother she wasforced to take the time from sleep, and deceive her father to obtainthe necessary light. For a long time the miser had given out thetallow candle to his daughter and la Grande Nanon just as he gave outevery morning the bread and other necessaries for the dailyconsumption.

°°°°La Grande Nanon was perhaps the only human being capable of acceptingwillingly the despotism of her master. The whole town envied Monsieurand Madame Grandet the possession of her. La Grande Nanon, so calledon account of her height, which was five feet eight inches, had livedwith Monsieur Grandet for thirty-five years. Though she received onlysixty francs a year in wages, she was supposed to be one of therichest serving-women in Saumur. Those sixty francs, accumulatingthrough thirty-five years, had recently enabled her to invest fourthousand francs in an annuity with Maitre Cruchot. This result of herlong and persistent economy seemed gigantic. Every servant in thetown, seeing that the poor sexagenarian was sure of bread for her oldage, was jealous of her, and never thought of the hard slavery throughwhich it had been won.

°°°°At twenty-two years of age the poor girl had been unable to find asituation, so repulsive was her face to almost every one. Yet thefeeling was certainly unjust: the face would have been much admired onthe shoulders of a grenadier of the guard; but all things, so theysay, should be in keeping. Forced to leave a farm where she kept thecows, because the dwelling-house was burned down, she came to Saumurto find a place, full of the robust courage that shrinks from nolabor. Le Pere Grandet was at that time thinking of marriage and aboutto set up his household. He espied the girl, rejected as she was fromdoor to door. A good judge of corporeal strength in his trade as acooper, he guessed the work that might be got out of a female creatureshaped like a Hercules, as firm on her feet as an oak sixty years oldon its roots, strong in the hips, square in the back, with the handsof a cartman and an honesty as sound as her unblemished virtue.Neither the warts which adorned her martial visage, nor the red-bricktints of her skin, nor the sinewy arms, nor the ragged garments of laGrande Nanon, dismayed the cooper, who was at that time still of anage when the heart shudders. He fed, shod, and clothed the poor girl,gave her wages, and put her to work without treating her too roughly.Seeing herself thus welcomed, la Grande Nanon wept secretly tears ofjoy, and attached herself in all sincerity to her master, who fromthat day ruled her and worked her with feudal authority. Nanon dideverything. She cooked, she made the lye, she washed the linen in theLoire and brought it home on her shoulders; she got up early, she wentto bed late; she prepared the food of the vine-dressers during theharvest, kept watch upon the market-people, protected the property ofher master like a faithful dog, and even, full of blind confidence,obeyed without a murmur his most absurd exactions.

°°°°In the famous year of 1811, when the grapes were gathered withunheard-of difficulty, Grandet resolved to give Nanon his old watch,--the first present he had made her during twenty years of service.Though he turned over to her his old shoes (which fitted her), it isimpossible to consider that quarterly benefit as a gift, for the shoeswere always thoroughly worn-out. Necessity had made the poor girl soniggardly that Grandet had grown to love her as we love a dog, andNanon had let him fasten a spiked collar round her throat, whosespikes no longer pricked her. If Grandet cut the bread with rather toomuch parsimony, she made no complaint; she gaily shared the hygienicbenefits derived from the severe regime of the household, in which noone was ever ill. Nanon was, in fact, one of the family; she laughedwhen Grandet laughed, felt gloomy or chilly, warmed herself, andtoiled as he did. What pleasant compensations there were in suchequality! Never did the master have occasion to find fault with theservant for pilfering the grapes, nor for the plums and nectarineseaten under the trees. "Come, fall-to, Nanon!" he would say in yearswhen the branches bent under the fruit and the farmers were obliged togive it to the pigs.

°°°°To the poor peasant who in her youth had earned nothing but harshtreatment, to the pauper girl picked up by charity, Grandet'sambiguous laugh was like a sunbeam. Moreover, Nanon's simple heart andnarrow head could hold only one feeling and one idea. For thirty-fiveyears she had never ceased to see herself standing before the wood-yard of Monsieur Grandet, ragged and barefooted, and to hear him say:"What do you want, young one?" Her gratitude was ever new. SometimesGrandet, reflecting that the poor creature had never heard aflattering word, that she was ignorant of all the tender sentimentsinspired by women, that she might some day appear before the throne ofGod even more chaste than the Virgin Mary herself,--Grandet, struckwith pity, would say as he looked at her, "Poor Nanon!" Theexclamation was always followed by an undefinable look cast upon himin return by the old servant. The words, uttered from time to time,formed a chain of friendship that nothing ever parted, and to whicheach exclamation added a link. Such compassion arising in the heart ofthe miser, and accepted gratefully by the old spinster, had somethinginconceivably horrible about it. This cruel pity, recalling, as itdid, a thousand pleasures to the heart of the old cooper, was forNanon the sum total of happiness. Who does not likewise say, "PoorNanon!" God will recognize his angels by the inflexions of theirvoices and by their secret sighs.

°°°°There were very many households in Saumur where the servants werebetter treated, but where the masters received far less satisfactionin return. Thus it was often said: "What have the Grandets ever doneto make their Grande Nanon so attached to them? She would go throughfire and water for their sake!" Her kitchen, whose barred windowslooked into the court, was always clean, neat, cold,--a true miser'skitchen, where nothing went to waste. When Nanon had washed herdishes, locked up the remains of the dinner, and put out her fire, sheleft the kitchen, which was separated by a passage from the living-room, and went to spin hemp beside her masters. One tallow candlesufficed the family for the evening. The servant slept at the end ofthe passage in a species of closet lighted only by a fan-light. Herrobust health enabled her to live in this hole with impunity; thereshe could hear the slightest noise through the deep silence whichreigned night and day in that dreary house. Like a watch-dog, sheslept with one ear open, and took her rest with a mind alert.A description of the other parts of the dwelling will be foundconnected with the events of this history, though the foregoing sketchof the hall, where the whole luxury of the household appears, mayenable the reader to surmise the nakedness of the upper floors.In 1819, at the beginning of an evening in the middle of November, laGrande Nanon lighted the fire for the first time. The autumn had beenvery fine. This particular day was a fete-day well known to theCruchotines and the Grassinists. The six antagonists, armed at allpoints, were making ready to meet at the Grandets and surpass eachother in testimonials of friendship. That morning all Saumur had seenMadame and Mademoiselle Grandet, accompanied by Nanon, on their way tohear Mass at the parish church, and every one remembered that the daywas the anniversary of Mademoiselle Eugenie's birth. Calculating thehour at which the family dinner would be over, Maitre Cruchot, theAbbe Cruchot, and Monsieur C. de Bonfons hastened to arrive before thedes Grassins, and be the first to pay their compliments toMademoiselle Eugenie. All three brought enormous bouquets, gathered intheir little green-houses. The stalks of the flowers which thepresident intended to present were ingeniously wound round with awhite satin ribbon adorned with gold fringe. In the morning MonsieurGrandet, following his usual custom on the days that commemorated thebirth and the fete of Eugenie, went to her bedside and solemnlypresented her with his paternal gift,--which for the last thirteenyears had consisted regularly of a curious gold-piece. Madame Grandetgave her daughter a winter dress or a summer dress, as the case mightbe. These two dresses and the gold-pieces, of which she received twoothers on New Year's day and on her father's fete-day, gave Eugenie alittle revenue of a hundred crowns or thereabouts, which Grandet lovedto see her amass. Was it not putting his money from one strong-box toanother, and, as it were, training the parsimony of his heiress? fromwhom he sometimes demanded an account of her treasure (formerlyincreased by the gifts of the Bertellieres), saying: "It is to be yourmarriage dozen."

°°°°The "marriage dozen" is an old custom sacredly preserved and still inforce in many parts of central France. In Berry and in Anjou, when ayoung girl marries, her family, or that of the husband, must give hera purse, in which they place, according to their means, twelve pieces,or twelve dozen pieces, or twelve hundred pieces of gold. The poorestshepherd-girl never marries without her dozen, be it only a dozencoppers. They still tell in Issoudun of a certain "dozen" presented toa rich heiress, which contained a hundred and forty-four /portugaisesd'or/. Pope Clement VII., uncle of Catherine de' Medici, gave her whenhe married her to Henri II. a dozen antique gold medals of pricelessvalue.

°°°°During dinner the father, delighted to see his Eugenie looking well ina new gown, exclaimed: "As it is Eugenie's birthday let us have afire; it will be a good omen."

°°°°"Mademoiselle will be married this year, that's certain," said laGrande Nanon, carrying away the remains of the goose,--the pheasant oftradesmen.

°°°°"I don't see any one suitable for her in Saumur," said Madame Grandet,glancing at her husband with a timid look which, considering heryears, revealed the conjugal slavery under which the poor womanlanguished.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter and exclaimed gaily,--

°°°°"She is twenty-three years old to-day, the child; we must soon beginto think of it."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother silently exchanged a glance of intelligence.Madame Grandet was a dry, thin woman, as yellow as a quince, awkward,slow, one of those women who are born to be down-trodden. She had bigbones, a big nose, a big forehead, big eyes, and presented at firstsight a vague resemblance to those mealy fruits that have neithersavor nor succulence. Her teeth were black and few in number, hermouth was wrinkled, her chin long and pointed. She was an excellentwoman, a true la Bertelliere. L'abbe Cruchot found occasionalopportunity to tell her that she had not done ill; and she believedhim. Angelic sweetness, the resignation of an insect tortured bychildren, a rare piety, a good heart, an unalterable equanimity ofsoul, made her universally pitied and respected. Her husband nevergave her more than six francs at a time for her personal expenses.Ridiculous as it may seem, this woman, who by her own fortune and hervarious inheritances brought Pere Grandet more than three hundredthousand francs, had always felt so profoundly humiliated by herdependence and the slavery in which she lived, against which thegentleness of her spirit prevented her from revolting, that she hadnever asked for one penny or made a single remark on the deeds whichMaitre Cruchot brought for her signature. This foolish secret pride,this nobility of soul perpetually misunderstood and wounded byGrandet, ruled the whole conduct of the wife.

°°°°Madame Grandet was attired habitually in a gown of greenish levantinesilk, endeavoring to make it last nearly a year; with it she wore alarge kerchief of white cotton cloth, a bonnet made of plaited strawssewn together, and almost always a black-silk apron. As she seldomleft the house she wore out very few shoes. She never asked anythingfor herself. Grandet, seized with occasional remorse when heremembered how long a time had elapsed since he gave her the last sixfrancs, always stipulated for the "wife's pin-money" when he sold hisyearly vintage. The four or five louis presented by the Belgian or theDutchman who purchased the wine were the chief visible signs of MadameGrandet's annual revenues. But after she had received the five louis,her husband would often say to her, as though their purse were held incommon: "Can you lend me a few sous?" and the poor woman, glad to beable to do something for a man whom her confessor held up to her asher lord and master, returned him in the course of the winter severalcrowns out of the "pin-money." When Grandet drew from his pocket thefive-franc piece which he allowed monthly for the minor expenses,--thread, needles, and toilet,--of his daughter, he never failed to sayas he buttoned his breeches' pocket: "And you, mother, do you wantanything?"

°°°°"My friend," Madame Grandet would answer, moved by a sense of maternaldignity, "we will see about that later."

°°°°Wasted dignity! Grandet thought himself very generous to his wife.Philosophers who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, ofEugenie, have surely a right to say that irony is at the bottom of theways of Providence.

°°°°After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made toEugenie's marriage, Nanon went to fetch a bottle of black-currantratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly fell as shecame down the stairs.

°°°°"You great stupid!" said her master; "are you going to tumble aboutlike other people, hey?"

°°°°"Monsieur, it was that step on your staircase which has given way.""She is right," said Madame Grandet; "it ought to have been mendedlong ago. Yesterday Eugenie nearly twisted her ankle."

°°°°"Here," said Grandet to Nanon, seeing that she looked quite pale, "asit is Eugenie's birthday, and you came near falling, take a littleglass of ratafia to set you right."

°°°°"Faith! I've earned it," said Nanon; "most people would have brokenthe bottle; but I'd sooner have broken my elbow holding it up high.""Poor Nanon!" said Grandet, filling a glass.

°°°°"Did you hurt yourself?" asked Eugenie, looking kindly at her."No, I didn't fall; I threw myself back on my haunches."

°°°°"Well! as it is Eugenie's birthday," said Grandet, "I'll have the stepmended. You people don't know how to set your foot in the corner wherethe wood is still firm."

°°°°Grandet took the candle, leaving his wife, daughter, and servantwithout any other light than that from the hearth, where the flameswere lively, and went into the bakehouse to fetch planks, nails, andtools.

°°°°"Can I help you?" cried Nanon, hearing him hammer on the stairs."No, no! I'm an old hand at it," answered the former cooper.At the moment when Grandet was mending his worm-eaten staircase andwhistling with all his might, in remembrance of the days of his youth,the three Cruchots knocked at the door.

°°°°"Is it you, Monsieur Cruchot?" asked Nanon, peeping through the littlegrating.

°°°°"Yes," answered the president.

°°°°Nanon opened the door, and the light from the hearth, reflected on theceiling, enabled the three Cruchots to find their way into the room."Ha! you've come a-greeting," said Nanon, smelling the flowers."Excuse me, messieurs," cried Grandet, recognizing their voices; "I'llbe with you in a moment. I'm not proud; I am patching up a step on mystaircase."

°°°°"Go on, go on, Monsieur Grandet; a man's house is his castle," saidthe president sententiously.

°°°°Madame and Mademoiselle Grandet rose. The president, profiting by thedarkness, said to Eugenie:

°°°°"Will you permit me, mademoiselle, to wish you, on this the day ofyour birth, a series of happy years and the continuance of the healthwhich you now enjoy?"

°°°°He offered her a huge bouquet of choice flowers which were rare inSaumur; then, taking the heiress by the elbows, he kissed her on eachside of her neck with a complacency that made her blush. Thepresident, who looked like a rusty iron nail, felt that his courtshipwas progressing.

°°°°"Don't stand on ceremony," said Grandet, entering. "How well you dothings on fete-days, Monsieur le president!"

°°°°"When it concerns mademoiselle," said the abbe, armed with his ownbouquet, "every day is a fete-day for my nephew."

°°°°The abbe kissed Eugenie's hand. As for Maitre Cruchot, he boldlykissed her on both cheeks, remarking: "How we sprout up, to be sure!Every year is twelve months."

°°°°As he replaced the candlestick beside the clock, Grandet, who neverforgot his own jokes, and repeated them to satiety when he thoughtthem funny, said,--

°°°°"As this is Eugenie's birthday let us illuminate."

°°°°He carefully took off the branches of the candelabra, put a socket oneach pedestal, took from Nanon a new tallow candle with paper twistedround the end of it, put it into the hollow, made it firm, lit it, andthen sat down beside his wife, looking alternately at his friends, hisdaughter, and the two candles. The Abbe Cruchot, a plump, puffy littleman, with a red wig plastered down and a face like an old femalegambler, said as he stretched out his feet, well shod in stout shoeswith silver buckles: "The des Grassins have not come?"

°°°°"Not yet," said Grandet.

°°°°"But are they coming?" asked the old notary, twisting his face, whichhad as many holes as a collander, into a queer grimace.

°°°°"I think so," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Are your vintages all finished?" said Monsieur de Bonfons to Grandet."Yes, all of them," said the old man, rising to walk up and down theroom, his chest swelling with pride as he said the words, "all ofthem." Through the door of the passage which led to the kitchen he sawla Grande Nanon sitting beside her fire with a candle and preparing tospin there, so as not to intrude among the guests.

°°°°"Nanon," he said, going into the passage, "put out that fire and thatcandle, and come and sit with us. Pardieu! the hall is big enough forall."

°°°°"But monsieur, you are to have the great people."

°°°°"Are not you as good as they? They are descended from Adam, and so areyou."

°°°°Grandet came back to the president and said,--

°°°°"Have you sold your vintage?"

°°°°"No, not I; I shall keep it. If the wine is good this year, it will bebetter two years hence. The proprietors, you know, have made anagreement to keep up the price; and this year the Belgians won't getthe better of us. Suppose they are sent off empty-handed for once,faith! they'll come back."

°°°°"Yes, but let us mind what we are about," said Grandet in a tone whichmade the president tremble.

°°°°"Is he driving some bargain?" thought Cruchot.

°°°°At this moment the knocker announced the des Grassins family, andtheir arrival interrupted a conversation which had begun betweenMadame Grandet and the abbe.

°°°°Madame des Grassins was one of those lively, plump little women, withpink-and-white skins, who, thanks to the claustral calm of theprovinces and the habits of a virtuous life, keep their youth untilthey are past forty. She was like the last rose of autumn,--pleasantto the eye, though the petals have a certain frostiness, and theirperfume is slight. She dressed well, got her fashions from Paris, setthe tone to Saumur, and gave parties. Her husband, formerly aquartermaster in the Imperial guard, who had been desperately woundedat Austerlitz, and had since retired, still retained, in spite of hisrespect for Grandet, the seeming frankness of an old soldier."Good evening, Grandet," he said, holding out his hand and affecting asort of superiority, with which he always crushed the Cruchots."Mademoiselle," he added, turning to Eugenie, after bowing to MadameGrandet, "you are always beautiful and good, and truly I do not knowwhat to wish you." So saying, he offered her a little box which hisservant had brought and which contained a Cape heather,--a flowerlately imported into Europe and very rare.

°°°°Madame des Grassins kissed Eugenie very affectionately, pressed herhand, and said: "Adolphe wishes to make you my little offering."A tall, blond young man, pale and slight, with tolerable manners andseemingly rather shy, although he had just spent eight or ten thousandfrancs over his allowance in Paris, where he had been sent to studylaw, now came forward and kissed Eugenie on both cheeks, offering hera workbox with utensils in silver-gilt,--mere show-case trumpery, inspite of the monogram E.G. in gothic letters rather well engraved,which belonged properly to something in better taste. As she openedit, Eugenie experienced one of those unexpected and perfect delightswhich make a young girl blush and quiver and tremble with pleasure.She turned her eyes to her father as if to ask permission to acceptit, and Monsieur Grandet replied: "Take it, my daughter," in a tonewhich would have made an actor illustrious.

°°°°The three Cruchots felt crushed as they saw the joyous, animated lookcast upon Adolphe des Grassins by the heiress, to whom such richeswere unheard-of. Monsieur des Grassins offered Grandet a pinch ofsnuff, took one himself, shook off the grains as they fell on theribbon of the Legion of honor which was attached to the button-hole ofhis blue surtout; then he looked at the Cruchots with an air thatseemed to say, "Parry that thrust if you can!" Madame des Grassinscast her eyes on the blue vases which held the Cruchot bouquets,looking at the enemy's gifts with the pretended interest of asatirical woman. At this delicate juncture the Abbe Cruchot left thecompany seated in a circle round the fire and joined Grandet at thelower end of the hall. As the two men reached the embrasure of thefarthest window the priest said in the miser's ear: "Those peoplethrow money out of the windows."

°°°°"What does that matter if it gets into my cellar?" retorted the oldwine-grower.

°°°°"If you want to give gilt scissors to your daughter, you have themeans," said the abbe.

°°°°"I give her something better than scissors," answered Grandet."My nephew is a blockhead," thought the abbe as he looked at thepresident, whose rumpled hair added to the ill grace of his browncountenance. "Couldn't he have found some little trifle which costmoney?"

°°°°"We will join you at cards, Madame Grandet," said Madame des Grassins."We might have two tables, as we are all here."

°°°°"As it is Eugenie's birthday you had better play loto all together,"said Pere Grandet: "the two young ones can join"; and the old cooper,who never played any game, motioned to his daughter and Adolphe."Come, Nanon, set the tables."

°°°°"We will help you, Mademoiselle Nanon," said Madame des Grassinsgaily, quite joyous at the joy she had given Eugenie.

°°°°"I have never in my life been so pleased," the heiress said to her; "Ihave never seen anything so pretty."

°°°°"Adolphe brought it from Paris, and he chose it," Madame des Grassinswhispered in her ear.

°°°°"Go on! go on! damned intriguing thing!" thought the president. "Ifyou ever have a suit in court, you or your husband, it shall go hardwith you."

°°°°The notary, sitting in his corner, looked calmly at the abbe, sayingto himself: "The des Grassins may do what they like; my property andmy brother's and that of my nephew amount in all to eleven hundredthousand francs. The des Grassins, at the most, have not half that;besides, they have a daughter. They may give what presents they like;heiress and presents too will be ours one of these days."At half-past eight in the evening the two card-tables were set out.Madame des Grassins succeeded in putting her son beside Eugenie. Theactors in this scene, so full of interest, commonplace as it seems,were provided with bits of pasteboard striped in many colors andnumbered, and with counters of blue glass, and they appeared to belistening to the jokes of the notary, who never drew a number withoutmaking a remark, while in fact they were all thinking of MonsieurGrandet's millions. The old cooper, with inward self-conceit, wascontemplating the pink feathers and the fresh toilet of Madame desGrassins, the martial head of the banker, the faces of Adolphe, thepresident, the abbe, and the notary, saying to himself:--"They are all after my money. Hey! neither the one nor the other shallhave my daughter; but they are useful--useful as harpoons to fishwith."

°°°°This family gaiety in the old gray room dimly lighted by two tallowcandles; this laughter, accompanied by the whirr of Nanon's spinning-wheel, sincere only upon the lips of Eugenie or her mother; thistriviality mingled with important interests; this young girl, who,like certain birds made victims of the price put upon them, was nowlured and trapped by proofs of friendship of which she was the dupe,--all these things contributed to make the scene a melancholy comedy. Isit not, moreover, a drama of all times and all places, though herebrought down to its simplest expression? The figure of Grandet,playing his own game with the false friendship of the two families andgetting enormous profits from it, dominates the scene and throws lightupon it. The modern god,--the only god in whom faith is preserved,--money, is here, in all its power, manifested in a single countenance.The tender sentiments of life hold here but a secondary place; onlythe three pure, simple hearts of Nanon, of Eugenie, and of her motherwere inspired by them. And how much of ignorance there was in thesimplicity of these poor women! Eugenie and her mother knew nothing ofGrandet's wealth; they could only estimate the things of life by theglimmer of their pale ideas, and they neither valued nor despisedmoney, because they were accustomed to do without it. Their feelings,bruised, though they did not know it, but ever-living, were the secretspring of their existence, and made them curious exceptions in themidst of these other people whose lives were purely material.Frightful condition of the human race! there is no one of its joysthat does not come from some species of ignorance.

°°°°At the moment when Madame Grandet had won a loto of sixteen sous,--thelargest ever pooled in that house,--and while la Grande Nanon waslaughing with delight as she watched madame pocketing her riches, theknocker resounded on the house-door with such a noise that the womenall jumped in their chairs.

°°°°"There is no man in Saumur who would knock like that," said thenotary.

°°°°"How can they bang in that way!" exclaimed Nanon; "do they want tobreak in the door?"

°°°°"Who the devil is it?" cried Grandet.

°°°°III

°°°°Nanon took one of the candles and went to open the door, followed byher master.

°°°°"Grandet! Grandet!" cried his wife, moved by a sudden impulse of fear,and running to the door of the room.

°°°°All the players looked at each other.

°°°°"Suppose we all go?" said Monsieur des Grassins; "that knock strikesme as evil-intentioned."

°°°°Hardly was Monsieur des Grassins allowed to see the figure of a youngman, accompanied by a porter from the coach-office carrying two largetrunks and dragging a carpet-bag after him, than Monsieur Grandetturned roughly on his wife and said,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, go back to your loto; leave me to speak withmonsieur."

°°°°Then he pulled the door quickly to, and the excited players returnedto their seats, but did not continue the game.

°°°°"Is it any one belonging to Saumur, Monsieur des Grassins?" asked hiswife.

°°°°"No, it is a traveller."

°°°°"He must have come from Paris."

°°°°"Just so," said the notary, pulling out his watch, which was twoinches thick and looked like a Dutch man-of-war; "it's nine o'clock;the diligence of the Grand Bureau is never late."

°°°°"Is the gentleman young?" inquired the Abbe Cruchot.

°°°°"Yes," answered Monsieur des Grassins, "and he has brought luggagewhich must weigh nearly three tons."

°°°°"Nanon does not come back," said Eugenie.

°°°°"It must be one of your relations," remarked the president."Let us go on with our game," said Madame Grandet gently. "I know fromMonsieur Grandet's tone of voice that he is annoyed; perhaps he wouldnot like to find us talking of his affairs."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said Adolphe to his neighbor, "it is no doubt yourcousin Grandet,--a very good-looking young man; I met him at the ballof Monsieur de Nucingen." Adolphe did not go on, for his mother trodon his toes; and then, asking him aloud for two sous to put on herstake, she whispered: "Will you hold your tongue, you great goose!"At this moment Grandet returned, without la Grande Nanon, whose steps,together with those of the porter, echoed up the staircase; and he wasfollowed by the traveller who had excited such curiosity and so filledthe lively imaginations of those present that his arrival at thisdwelling, and his sudden fall into the midst of this assembly, canonly be likened to that of a snail into a beehive, or the introductionof a peacock into some village poultry-yard.

°°°°"Sit down near the fire," said Grandet.

°°°°Before seating himself, the young stranger saluted the assembledcompany very gracefully. The men rose to answer by a courteousinclination, and the women made a ceremonious bow.

°°°°"You are cold, no doubt, monsieur," said Madame Grandet; "you have,perhaps, travelled from--"

°°°°"Just like all women!" said the old wine-grower, looking up from aletter he was reading. "Do let monsieur rest himself!"

°°°°"But, father, perhaps monsieur would like to take something," saidEugenie.

°°°°"He has got a tongue," said the old man sternly.

°°°°The stranger was the only person surprised by this scene; all theothers were well-used to the despotic ways of the master. However,after the two questions and the two replies had been exchanged, thenewcomer rose, turned his back towards the fire, lifted one foot so asto warm the sole of its boot, and said to Eugenie,--

°°°°"Thank you, my cousin, but I dined at Tours. And," he added, lookingat Grandet, "I need nothing; I am not even tired."

°°°°"Monsieur has come from the capital?" asked Madame des Grassins.Monsieur Charles,--such was the name of the son of Monsieur Grandet ofParis,--hearing himself addressed, took a little eye-glass, suspendedby a chain from his neck, applied it to his right eye to examine whatwas on the table, and also the persons sitting round it. He ogledMadame des Grassins with much impertinence, and said to her, after hehad observed all he wished,--

°°°°"Yes, madame. You are playing at loto, aunt," he added. "Do not let meinterrupt you, I beg; go on with your game: it is too amusing toleave."

°°°°"I was certain it was the cousin," thought Madame des Grassins,casting repeated glances at him.

°°°°"Forty-seven!" cried the old abbe. "Mark it down, Madame des Grassins.Isn't that your number?"

°°°°Monsieur des Grassins put a counter on his wife's card, who satwatching first the cousin from Paris and then Eugenie, withoutthinking of her loto, a prey to mournful presentiments. From time totime the young the heiress glanced furtively at her cousin, and thebanker's wife easily detected a /crescendo/ of surprise and curiosityin her mind.

°°°°Monsieur Charles Grandet, a handsome young man of twenty-two,presented at this moment a singular contrast to the worthyprovincials, who, considerably disgusted by his aristocratic manners,were all studying him with sarcastic intent. This needs anexplanation. At twenty-two, young people are still so near childhoodthat they often conduct themselves childishly. In all probability, outof every hundred of them fully ninety-nine would have behavedprecisely as Monsieur Charles Grandet was now behaving.

°°°°Some days earlier than this his father had told him to go and spendseveral months with his uncle at Saumur. Perhaps Monsieur Grandet wasthinking of Eugenie. Charles, sent for the first time in his life intothe provinces, took a fancy to make his appearance with thesuperiority of a man of fashion, to reduce the whole arrondissement todespair by his luxury, and to make his visit an epoch, importing intothose country regions all the refinements of Parisian life. In short,to explain it in one word, he mean to pass more time at Saumur inbrushing his nails than he ever thought of doing in Paris, and toassume the extra nicety and elegance of dress which a young man offashion often lays aside for a certain negligence which in itself isnot devoid of grace. Charles therefore brought with him a completehunting-costume, the finest gun, the best hunting-knife in theprettiest sheath to be found in all Paris. He brought his wholecollection of waistcoats. They were of all kinds,--gray, black, white,scarabaeus-colored: some were shot with gold, some spangled, some/chined/; some were double-breasted and crossed like a shawl, otherswere straight in the collar; some had turned-over collars, somebuttoned up to the top with gilt buttons. He brought every variety ofcollar and cravat in fashion at that epoch. He brought two ofBuisson's coats and all his finest linen He brought his pretty goldtoilet-set,--a present from his mother. He brought all his dandyknick-knacks, not forgetting a ravishing little desk presented to himby the most amiable of women,--amiable for him, at least,--a fine ladywhom he called Annette and who at this moment was travelling,matrimonially and wearily, in Scotland, a victim to certain suspicionswhich required a passing sacrifice of happiness; in the desk was muchpretty note-paper on which to write to her once a fortnight.In short, it was as complete a cargo of Parisian frivolities as it waspossible for him to get together,--a collection of all the implementsof husbandry with which the youth of leisure tills his life, from thelittle whip which helps to begin a duel, to the handsomely chasedpistols which end it. His father having told him to travel alone andmodestly, he had taken the coupe of the diligence all to himself,rather pleased at not having to damage a delightful travelling-carriage ordered for a journey on which he was to meet his Annette,the great lady who, etc.,--whom he intended to rejoin at Baden in thefollowing June. Charles expected to meet scores of people at hisuncle's house, to hunt in his uncle's forests,--to live, in short, theusual chateau life; he did not know that his uncle was in Saumur, andhad only inquired about him incidentally when asking the way toFroidfond. Hearing that he was in town, he supposed that he shouldfind him in a suitable mansion.

°°°°In order that he might make a becoming first appearance before hisuncle either at Saumur or at Froidfond, he had put on his most eleganttravelling attire, simple yet exquisite,--"adorable," to use the wordwhich in those days summed up the special perfections of a man or athing. At Tours a hairdresser had re-curled his beautiful chestnutlocks; there he changed his linen and put on a black satin cravat,which, combined with a round shirt-collar, framed his fair and smilingcountenance agreeably. A travelling great-coat, only half buttoned up,nipped in his waist and disclosed a cashmere waistcoat crossed infront, beneath which was another waistcoat of white material. Hiswatch, negligently slipped into a pocket, was fastened by a short goldchain to a buttonhole. His gray trousers, buttoned up at the sides,were set off at the seams with patterns of black silk embroidery. Hegracefully twirled a cane, whose chased gold knob did not mar thefreshness of his gray gloves. And to complete all, his cap was inexcellent taste. None but a Parisian, and a Parisian of the upperspheres, could thus array himself without appearing ridiculous; noneother could give the harmony of self-conceit to all these fopperies,which were carried off, however, with a dashing air,--the air of ayoung man who has fine pistols, a sure aim, and Annette.

°°°°Now if you wish to understand the mutual amazement of the provincialparty and the young Parisian; if you would clearly see the brilliancewhich the traveller's elegance cast among the gray shadows of the roomand upon the faces of this family group,--endeavor to picture to yourminds the Cruchots. All three took snuff, and had long ceased torepress the habit of snivelling or to remove the brown blotches whichstrewed the frills of their dingy shirts and the yellowing creases oftheir crumpled collars. Their flabby cravats were twisted into ropesas soon as they wound them about their throats. The enormous quantityof linen which allowed these people to have their clothing washed onlyonce in six months, and to keep it during that time in the depths oftheir closets, also enabled time to lay its grimy and decaying stainsupon it. There was perfect unison of ill-grace and senility aboutthem; their faces, as faded as their threadbare coats, as creased astheir trousers, were worn-out, shrivelled-up, and puckered. As for theothers, the general negligence of their dress, which was incompleteand wanting in freshness,--like the toilet of all country places,where insensibly people cease to dress for others and come to thinkseriously of the price of a pair of gloves,--was in keeping with thenegligence of the Cruchots. A horror of fashion was the only point onwhich the Grassinists and the Cruchotines agreed.

°°°°When the Parisian took up his eye-glass to examine the strangeaccessories of this dwelling,--the joists of the ceiling, the color ofthe woodwork, and the specks which the flies had left there insufficient number to punctuate the "Moniteur" and the "Encyclopaediaof Sciences,"--the loto-players lifted their noses and looked at himwith as much curiosity as they might have felt about a giraffe.Monsieur des Grassins and his son, to whom the appearance of a man offashion was not wholly unknown, were nevertheless as much astonishedas their neighbors, whether it was that they fell under theindefinable influence of the general feeling, or that they reallyshared it as with satirical glances they seemed to say to theircompatriots,--

°°°°"That is what you see in Paris!"

°°°°They were able to examine Charles at their leisure without fearing todisplease the master of the house. Grandet was absorbed in the longletter which he held in his hand; and to read it he had taken the onlycandle upon the card-table, paying no heed to his guests or theirpleasure. Eugenie, to whom such a type of perfection, whether of dressor of person, was absolutely unknown, thought she beheld in her cousina being descended from seraphic spheres. She inhaled with delight thefragrance wafted from the graceful curls of that brilliant head. Shewould have liked to touch the soft kid of the delicate gloves. Sheenvied Charles his small hands, his complexion, the freshness andrefinement of his features. In short,--if it is possible to sum up theeffect this elegant being produced upon an ignorant young girlperpetually employed in darning stockings or in mending her father'sclothes, and whose life flowed on beneath these unclean rafters,seeing none but occasional passers along the silent street,--thisvision of her cousin roused in her soul an emotion of delicate desirelike that inspired in a young man by the fanciful pictures of womendrawn by Westall for the English "Keepsakes," and that engraved by theFindens with so clever a tool that we fear, as we breathe upon thepaper, that the celestial apparitions may be wafted away. Charles drewfrom his pocket a handkerchief embroidered by the great lady nowtravelling in Scotland. As Eugenie saw this pretty piece of work, donein the vacant hours which were lost to love, she looked at her cousinto see if it were possible that he meant to make use of it. Themanners of the young man, his gestures, the way in which he took uphis eye-glass, his affected superciliousness, his contemptuous glanceat the coffer which had just given so much pleasure to the richheiress, and which he evidently regarded as without value, or even asridiculous,--all these things, which shocked the Cruchots and the desGrassins, pleased Eugenie so deeply that before she slept she dreamedlong dreams of her phoenix cousin.

°°°°The loto-numbers were drawn very slowly, and presently the game camesuddenly to an end. La Grand Nanon entered and said aloud: "Madame, Iwant the sheets for monsieur's bed."

°°°°Madame Grandet followed her out. Madame des Grassins said in a lowvoice: "Let us keep our sous and stop playing." Each took his or hertwo sous from the chipped saucer in which they had been put; then theparty moved in a body toward the fire.

°°°°"Have you finished your game?" said Grandet, without looking up fromhis letter.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" replied Madame des Grassins, taking a seat near Charles.Eugenie, prompted by a thought often born in the heart of a young girlwhen sentiment enters it for the first time, left the room to go andhelp her mother and Nanon. Had an able confessor then questioned hershe would, no doubt, have avowed to him that she thought neither ofher mother nor of Nanon, but was pricked by a poignant desire to lookafter her cousin's room and concern herself with her cousin; to supplywhat might be needed, to remedy any forgetfulness, to see that all wasdone to make it, as far as possible, suitable and elegant; and, infact, she arrived in time to prove to her mother and Nanon thateverything still remained to be done. She put into Nanon's head thenotion of passing a warming-pan between the sheets. She herselfcovered the old table with a cloth and requested Nanon to change itevery morning; she convinced her mother that it was necessary to lighta good fire, and persuaded Nanon to bring up a great pile of wood intothe corridor without saying anything to her father. She ran to get,from one of the corner-shelves of the hall, a tray of old lacquerwhich was part of the inheritance of the late Monsieur de laBertelliere, catching up at the same time a six-sided crystal goblet,a little tarnished gilt spoon, an antique flask engraved with cupids,all of which she put triumphantly on the corner of her cousin'schimney-piece. More ideas surged through her head in one quarter of anhour than she had ever had since she came into the world."Mamma," she said, "my cousin will never bear the smell of a tallowcandle; suppose we buy a wax one?" And she darted, swift as a bird, toget the five-franc piece which she had just received for her monthlyexpenses. "Here, Nanon," she cried, "quick!"

°°°°"What will your father say?" This terrible remonstrance was uttered byMadame Grandet as she beheld her daughter armed with an old Sevressugar-basin which Grandet had brought home from the chateau ofFroidfond. "And where will you get the sugar? Are you crazy?""Mamma, Nanon can buy some sugar as well as the candle."

°°°°"But your father?"

°°°°"Surely his nephew ought not to go without a glass of /eau sucree/?Besides, he will not notice it."

°°°°"Your father sees everything," said Madame Grandet, shaking her head.Nanon hesitated; she knew her master.

°°°°"Come, Nanon, go,--because it is my birthday."

°°°°Nanon gave a loud laugh as she heard the first little jest her youngmistress had ever made, and then obeyed her.

°°°°While Eugenie and her mother were trying to embellish the bedroomassigned by Monsieur Grandet for his nephew, Charles himself was theobject of Madame des Grassins' attentions; to all appearances she wassetting her cap at him.

°°°°"You are very courageous, monsieur," she said to the young dandy, "toleave the pleasures of the capital at this season and take up yourabode in Saumur. But if we do not frighten you away, you will findthere are some amusements even here."

°°°°She threw him the ogling glance of the provinces, where women put somuch prudence and reserve into their eyes that they impart to them theprudish concupiscence peculiar to certain ecclesiastics to whom allpleasure is either a theft or an error. Charles was so completely outof his element in this abode, and so far from the vast chateau and thesumptuous life with which his fancy had endowed his uncle, that as helooked at Madame des Grassins he perceived a dim likeness to Parisianfaces. He gracefully responded to the species of invitation addressedto him, and began very naturally a conversation, in which Madame desGrassins gradually lowered her voice so as to bring it into harmonywith the nature of the confidences she was making. With her, as withCharles, there was the need of conference; so after a few momentsspent in coquettish phrases and a little serious jesting, the cleverprovincial said, thinking herself unheard by the others, who werediscussing the sale of wines which at that season filled the heads ofevery one in Saumur,--

°°°°"Monsieur if you will do us the honor to come and see us, you willgive as much pleasure to my husband as to myself. Our salon is theonly one in Saumur where you will find the higher business circlesmingling with the nobility. We belong to both societies, who meet atour house simply because they find it amusing. My husband--I say itwith pride--is as much valued by the one class as by the other. Wewill try to relieve the monotony of your visit here. If you stay allthe time with Monsieur Grandet, good heavens! what will become of you?Your uncle is a sordid miser who thinks of nothing but his vines; youraunt is a pious soul who can't put two ideas together; and your cousinis a little fool, without education, perfectly common, no fortune, whowill spend her life in darning towels."

°°°°"She is really very nice, this woman," thought Charles Grandet as heduly responded to Madame des Grassins' coquetries.

°°°°"It seems to me, wife, that you are taking possession of monsieur,"said the stout banker, laughing.

°°°°On this remark the notary and the president said a few words that weremore or less significant; but the abbe, looking at them slyly, broughttheir thoughts to a focus by taking a pinch of snuff and saying as hehanded round his snuff-box: "Who can do the honors of Saumur formonsieur so well as madame?"

°°°°"Ah! what do you mean by that, monsieur l'abbe?" demanded Monsieur desGrassins.

°°°°"I mean it in the best possible sense for you, for madame, for thetown of Saumur, and for monsieur," said the wily old man, turning toCharles.

°°°°The Abbe Cruchot had guessed the conversation between Charles andMadame des Grassins without seeming to pay attention to it."Monsieur," said Adolphe to Charles with an air which he tried to makefree and easy, "I don't know whether you remember me, but I had thehonor of dancing as your /vis-a-vis/ at a ball given by the Baron deNucingen, and--"

°°°°"Perfectly; I remember perfectly, monsieur," answered Charles, pleasedto find himself the object of general attention.

°°°°"Monsieur is your son?" he said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°The abbe looked at her maliciously.

°°°°"Yes, monsieur," she answered.

°°°°"Then you were very young when you were in Paris?" said Charles,addressing Adolphe.

°°°°"You must know, monsieur," said the abbe, "that we send them toBabylon as soon as they are weaned."

°°°°Madame des Grassins examined the abbe with a glance of extremepenetration.

°°°°"It is only in the provinces," he continued, "that you will find womenof thirty and more years as fresh as madame, here, with a son about totake his degree. I almost fancy myself back in the days when the youngmen stood on chairs in the ball-room to see you dance, madame," saidthe abbe, turning to his female adversary. "To me, your triumphs arebut of yesterday--"

°°°°"The old rogue!" thought Madame Grassins; "can he have guessed myintentions?"

°°°°"It seems that I shall have a good deal of success in Saumur," thoughtCharles as he unbuttoned his great-coat, put a hand into hiswaistcoat, and cast a glance into the far distance, to imitate theattitude which Chantrey has given to Lord Byron.

°°°°The inattention of Pere Grandet, or, to speak more truly, thepreoccupation of mind into which the reading of the letter had plungedhim, did not escape the vigilance of the notary and the president, whotried to guess the contents of the letter by the almost imperceptiblemotions of the miser's face, which was then under the full light ofthe candle. He maintained the habitual calm of his features withevident difficulty; we may, in fact, picture to ourselves thecountenance such a man endeavored to preserve as he read the fatalletter which here follows:--

°°°°My Brother,--It is almost twenty-three years since we have seen

°°°°each other. My marriage was the occasion of our last interview,

°°°°after which we parted, and both of us were happy. Assuredly I

°°°°could not then foresee that you would one day be the prop of the

°°°°family whose prosperity you then predicted.

°°°°When you hold this letter within your hands I shall be no longer

°°°°living. In the position I now hold I cannot survive the disgrace

°°°°of bankruptcy. I have waited on the edge of the gulf until the

°°°°last moment, hoping to save myself. The end has come, I must sink

°°°°into it. The double bankruptcies of my broker and of Roguin, my

°°°°notary, have carried off my last resources and left me nothing. I

°°°°have the bitterness of owing nearly four millions, with assets not

°°°°more than twenty-five per cent in value to pay them. The wines in

°°°°my warehouses suffer from the fall in prices caused by the

°°°°abundance and quality of your vintage. In three days Paris will

°°°°cry out: "Monsieur Grandet was a knave!" and I, an honest man,

°°°°shall be lying in my winding-sheet of infamy. I deprive my son of

°°°°a good name, which I have stained, and the fortune of his mother,

°°°°which I have lost. He knows nothing of all this,--my unfortunate

°°°°child whom I idolize! We parted tenderly. He was ignorant,

°°°°happily, that the last beatings of my heart were spent in that

°°°°farewell. Will he not some day curse me? My brother, my brother!

°°°°the curses of our children are horrible; they can appeal against

°°°°ours, but theirs are irrevocable. Grandet, you are my elder

°°°°brother, you owe me your protection; act for me so that Charles

°°°°may cast no bitter words upon my grave! My brother, if I were

°°°°writing with my blood, with my tears, no greater anguish could I

°°°°put into this letter,--nor as great, for then I should weep, I

°°°°should bleed, I should die, I should suffer no more, but now I

°°°°suffer and look at death with dry eyes.

°°°°From henceforth you are my son's father; he has no relations, as

°°°°you well know, on his mother's side. Why did I not consider social

°°°°prejudices? Why did I yield to love? Why did I marry the natural

°°°°daughter of a great lord? Charles has no family. Oh, my unhappy

°°°°son! my son! Listen, Grandet! I implore nothing for myself,--

°°°°besides, your property may not be large enough to carry a mortgage

°°°°of three millions,--but for my son! Brother, my suppliant hands

°°°°are clasped as I think of you; behold them! Grandet, I confide my

°°°°son to you in dying, and I look at the means of death with less

°°°°pain as I think that you will be to him a father. He loved me

°°°°well, my Charles; I was good to him, I never thwarted him; he will

°°°°not curse me. Ah, you see! he is gentle, he is like his mother, he

°°°°will cause you no grief. Poor boy! accustomed to all the

°°°°enjoyments of luxury, he knows nothing of the privations to which

°°°°you and I were condemned by the poverty of our youth. And I leave

°°°°him ruined! alone! Yes, all my friends will avoid him, and it is I

°°°°who have brought this humiliation upon him! Would that I had the

°°°°force to send him with one thrust into the heavens to his mother's

°°°°side! Madness! I come back to my disaster--to his. I send him to

°°°°you that you may tell him in some fitting way of my death, of his

°°°°future fate. Be a father to him, but a good father. Do not tear

°°°°him all at once from his idle life, it would kill him. I beg him

°°°°on my knees to renounce all rights that, as his mother's heir, he

°°°°may have on my estate. But the prayer is superfluous; he is

°°°°honorable, and he will feel that he must not appear among my

°°°°creditors. Bring him to see this at the right time; reveal to him

°°°°the hard conditions of the life I have made for him: and if he

°°°°still has tender thoughts of me, tell him in my name that all is

°°°°not lost for him. Yes, work, labor, which saved us both, may give

°°°°him back the fortune of which I have deprived him; and if he

°°°°listens to his father's voice as it reaches him from the grave, he

°°°°will go the Indies. My brother, Charles is an upright and

°°°°courageous young man; give him the wherewithal to make his

°°°°venture; he will die sooner than not repay you the funds which you

°°°°may lend him. Grandet! if you will not do this, you will lay up

°°°°for yourself remorse. Ah, should my child find neither tenderness

°°°°nor succor in you, I would call down the vengeance of God upon

°°°°your cruelty!

°°°°If I had been able to save something from the wreck, I might have

°°°°had the right to leave him at least a portion of his mother's

°°°°property; but my last monthly payments have absorbed everything. I

°°°°did not wish to die uncertain of my child's fate; I hoped to feel

°°°°a sacred promise in a clasp of your hand which might have warmed

°°°°my heart: but time fails me. While Charles is journeying to you I

°°°°shall be preparing my assignment. I shall endeavor to show by the

°°°°order and good faith of my accounts that my disaster comes neither

°°°°from a faulty life nor from dishonesty. It is for my son's sake

°°°°that I strive to do this.

°°°°Farewell, my brother! May the blessing of God be yours for the

°°°°generous guardianship I lay upon you, and which, I doubt not, you

°°°°will accept. A voice will henceforth and forever pray for you in

°°°°that world where we must all go, and where I am now as you read

°°°°these lines.

°°°°Victor-Ange-Guillaume Grandet.

°°°°"So you are talking?" said Pere Grandet as he carefully folded theletter in its original creases and put it into his waistcoat-pocket.He looked at his nephew with a humble, timid air, beneath which he hidhis feelings and his calculations. "Have you warmed yourself?" he saidto him.

°°°°"Thoroughly, my dear uncle."

°°°°"Well, where are the women?" said his uncle, already forgetting thathis nephew was to sleep at the house. At this moment Eugenie andMadame Grandet returned.

°°°°"Is the room all ready?" said Grandet, recovering his composure."Yes, father."

°°°°"Well then, my nephew, if you are tired, Nanon shall show you yourroom. It isn't a dandy's room; but you will excuse a poor wine-growerwho never has a penny to spare. Taxes swallow up everything.""We do not wish to intrude, Grandet," said the banker; "you may wantto talk to your nephew, and therefore we will bid you good-night."At these words the assembly rose, and each made a parting bow inkeeping with his or her own character. The old notary went to the doorto fetch his lantern and came back to light it, offering to accompanythe des Grassins on their way. Madame des Grassins had not foreseenthe incident which brought the evening prematurely to an end, herservant therefore had not arrived.

°°°°"Will you do me the honor to take my arm, madame?" said the abbe."Thank you, monsieur l'abbe, but I have my son," she answered dryly."Ladies cannot compromise themselves with me," said the abbe."Take Monsieur Cruchot's arm," said her husband.

°°°°The abbe walked off with the pretty lady so quickly that they weresoon some distance in advance of the caravan.

°°°°"That is a good-looking young man, madame," he said, pressing her arm."Good-by to the grapes, the vintage is done. It is all over with us.We may as well say adieu to Mademoiselle Grandet. Eugenie will belongto the dandy. Unless this cousin is enamoured of some Parisian woman,your son Adolphe will find another rival in--"

°°°°"Not at all, monsieur l'abbe. This young man cannot fail to see thatEugenie is a little fool,--a girl without the least freshness. Did younotice her to-night? She was as yellow as a quince."

°°°°"Perhaps you made the cousin notice it?"

°°°°"I did not take the trouble--"

°°°°"Place yourself always beside Eugenie, madame, and you need never takethe trouble to say anything to the young man against his cousin; hewill make his own comparisons, which--"

°°°°"Well, he has promised to dine with me the day after to-morrow.""Ah! if you only /would/, madame--" said the abbe.

°°°°"What is it that you wish me to do, monsieur l'abbe? Do you mean tooffer me bad advice? I have not reached the age of thirty-nine,without a stain upon my reputation, thank God! to compromise myselfnow, even for the empire of the Great Mogul. You and I are of an agewhen we both know the meaning of words. For an ecclesiastic, youcertainly have ideas that are very incongruous. Fie! it is worthy ofFaublas!"

°°°°"You have read Faublas?"

°°°°"No, monsieur l'abbe; I meant to say the /Liaisons dangereuses/.""Ah! that book is infinitely more moral," said the abbe, laughing."But you make me out as wicked as a young man of the present day; Ionly meant--"

°°°°"Do you dare to tell me you were not thinking of putting wicked thingsinto my head? Isn't it perfectly clear? If this young man--who I admitis very good-looking--were to make love to me, he would not think ofhis cousin. In Paris, I know, good mothers do devote themselves inthis way to the happiness and welfare of their children; but we livein the provinces, monsieur l'abbe."

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"And," she continued, "I do not want, and Adolphe himself would notwant, a hundred millions brought at such a price."

°°°°"Madame, I said nothing about a hundred millions; that temptationmight be too great for either of us to withstand. Only, I do thinkthat an honest woman may permit herself, in all honor, certainharmless little coquetries, which are, in fact, part of her socialduty and which--"

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"Are we not bound, madame, to make ourselves agreeable to each other?--Permit me to blow my nose.--I assure you, madame," he resumed, "thatthe young gentleman ogled you through his glass in a more flatteringmanner than he put on when he looked at me; but I forgive him fordoing homage to beauty in preference to old age--"

°°°°"It is quite apparent," said the president in his loud voice, "thatMonsieur Grandet of Paris has sent his son to Saumur with extremelymatrimonial intentions."

°°°°"But in that case the cousin wouldn't have fallen among us like acannon-ball," answered the notary.

°°°°"That doesn't prove anything," said Monsieur des Grassins; "the oldmiser is always making mysteries."

°°°°"Des Grassins, my friend, I have invited the young man to dinner. Youmust go and ask Monsieur and Madame de Larsonniere and the du Hautoys,with the beautiful demoiselle du Hautoy, of course. I hope she will beproperly dressed; that jealous mother of hers does make such a frightof her! Gentlemen, I trust that you will all do us the honor to come,"she added, stopping the procession to address the two Cruchots."Here you are at home, madame," said the notary.

°°°°After bowing to the three des Grassins, the three Cruchots returnedhome, applying their provincial genius for analysis to studying, underall its aspects, the great event of the evening, which undoubtedlychanged the respective positions of Grassinists and Cruchotines. Theadmirable common-sense which guided all the actions of these greatmachinators made each side feel the necessity of a momentary allianceagainst a common enemy. Must they not mutually hinder Eugenie fromloving her cousin, and the cousin from thinking of Eugenie? Could theParisian resist the influence of treacherous insinuations, soft-spokencalumnies, slanders full of faint praise and artless denials, whichshould be made to circle incessantly about him and deceive him?IV

°°°°When the four relations were left alone, Monsieur Grandet said to hisnephew,--

°°°°"We must go to bed. It is too late to talk about the matters whichhave brought you here; to-morrow we will take a suitable moment. Webreakfast at eight o'clock; at midday we eat a little fruit or a bitof bread, and drink a glass of white wine; and we dine, like theParisians, at five o'clock. That's the order of the day. If you liketo go and see the town and the environs you are free to do so. Youwill excuse me if my occupations do not permit me to accompany you.You may perhaps hear people say that I am rich,--Monsieur Grandetthis, Monsieur Grandet that. I let them talk; their gossip does nothurt my credit. But I have not a penny; I work in my old age like anapprentice whose worldly goods are a bad plane and two good arms.Perhaps you'll soon know yourself what a franc costs when you have gotto sweat for it. Nanon, where are the candles?"

°°°°"I trust, my nephew, that you will find all you want," said MadameGrandet; "but if you should need anything else, you can call Nanon.""My dear aunt, I shall need nothing; I have, I believe, broughteverything with me. Permit me to bid you good-night, and my youngcousin also."

°°°°Charles took a lighted wax candle from Nanon's hand,--an Anjou candle,very yellow in color, and so shopworn that it looked like tallow anddeceived Monsieur Grandet, who, incapable of suspecting its presenceunder his roof, did not perceive this magnificence.

°°°°"I will show you the way," he said.

°°°°Instead of leaving the hall by the door which opened under thearchway, Grandet ceremoniously went through the passage which dividedthe hall from the kitchen. A swing-door, furnished with a large ovalpane of glass, shut this passage from the staircase, so as to fend offthe cold air which rushed through it. But the north wind whistled nonethe less keenly in winter, and, in spite of the sand-bags at thebottom of the doors of the living-room, the temperature within couldscarcely be kept at a proper height. Nanon went to bolt the outerdoor; then she closed the hall and let loose a wolf-dog, whose barkwas so strangled that he seemed to have laryngitis. This animal, notedfor his ferocity, recognized no one but Nanon; the two untutoredchildren of the fields understood each other.

°°°°When Charles saw the yellow, smoke-stained walls of the well of thestaircase, where each worm-eaten step shook under the heavy foot-fallof his uncle, his expectations began to sober more and more. Hefancied himself in a hen-roost. His aunt and cousin, to whom he turnedan inquiring look, were so used to the staircase that they did notguess the cause of his amazement, and took the glance for anexpression of friendliness, which they answered by a smile that madehim desperate.

°°°°"Why the devil did my father send me to such a place?" he said tohimself.

°°°°When they reached the first landing he saw three doors painted inEtruscan red and without casings,--doors sunk in the dusty walls andprovided with iron bars, which in fact were bolts, each ending withthe pattern of a flame, as did both ends of the long sheath of thelock. The first door at the top of the staircase, which opened into aroom directly above the kitchen, was evidently walled up. In fact, theonly entrance to that room was through Grandet's bedchamber; the roomitself was his office. The single window which lighted it, on the sideof the court, was protected by a lattice of strong iron bars. No one,not even Madame Grandet, had permission to enter it. The old man choseto be alone, like an alchemist in his laboratory. There, no doubt,some hiding-place had been ingeniously constructed; there the title-deeds of property were stored; there hung the scales on which to weighthe louis; there were devised, by night and secretly, the estimates,the profits, the receipts, so that business men, finding Grandetprepared at all points, imagined that he got his cue from fairies ordemons; there, no doubt, while Nanon's loud snoring shook the rafters,while the wolf-dog watched and yawned in the courtyard, while Madameand Mademoiselle Grandet were quietly sleeping, came the old cooper tocuddle, to con over, to caress and clutch and clasp his gold. Thewalls were thick, the screens sure. He alone had the key of thislaboratory, where--so people declared--he studied the maps on whichhis fruit-trees were marked, and calculated his profits to a vine, andalmost to a twig.

°°°°The door of Eugenie's chamber was opposite to the walled-up entranceto this room. At the other end of the landing were the appartements ofthe married pair, which occupied the whole front of the house. MadameGrandet had a room next to that of Eugenie, which was entered througha glass door. The master's chamber was separated from that of his wifeby a partition, and from the mysterious strong-room by a thick wall.Pere Grandet lodged his nephew on the second floor, in the highmansarde attic which was above his own bedroom, so that he might hearhim if the young man took it into his head to go and come. WhenEugenie and her mother reached the middle of the landing they kissedeach other for good-night; then with a few words of adieu to Charles,cold upon the lips, but certainly very warm in the heart of the younggirl, they withdrew into their own chambers.

°°°°"Here you are in your room, my nephew," said Pere Grandet as he openedthe door. "If you need to go out, call Nanon; without her, beware! thedog would eat you up without a word. Sleep well. Good-night. Ha! why,they have made you a fire!" he cried.

°°°°At this moment Nanon appeared with the warming pan.

°°°°"Here's something more!" said Monsieur Grandet. "Do you take my nephewfor a lying-in woman? Carry off your brazier, Nanon!"

°°°°"But, monsieur, the sheets are damp, and this gentleman is as delicateas a woman."

°°°°"Well, go on, as you've taken it into your head," said Grandet,pushing her by the shoulders; "but don't set things on fire." Sosaying, the miser went down-stairs, grumbling indistinct sentences.Charles stood aghast in the midst of his trunks. After casting hiseyes on the attic-walls covered with that yellow paper sprinkled withbouquets so well known in dance-houses, on the fireplace of ribbedstone whose very look was chilling, on the chairs of yellow wood withvarnished cane seats that seemed to have more than the usual fourangles, on the open night-table capacious enough to hold a smallsergeant-at-arms, on the meagre bit of rag-carpet beside the bed, onthe tester whose cloth valance shook as if, devoured by moths, it wasabout to fall, he turned gravely to la Grande Nanon and said,--"Look here! my dear woman, just tell me, am I in the house of MonsieurGrandet, formerly mayor of Saumur, and brother to Monsieur Grandet ofParis?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur; and a very good, a very kind, a very perfectgentleman. Shall I help you to unpack your trunks?"

°°°°"Faith! yes, if you will, my old trooper. Didn't you serve in themarines of the Imperial Guard?"

°°°°"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Nanon. "What's that,--the marines of the guard?Is it salt? Does it go in the water?"

°°°°"Here, get me my dressing-gown out of that valise; there's the key."Nanon was wonder-struck by the sight of a dressing-gown made of greensilk, brocaded with gold flowers of an antique design.

°°°°"Are you going to put that on to go to bed with?" she asked."Yes."

°°°°"Holy Virgin! what a beautiful altar-cloth it would make for theparish church! My dear darling monsieur, give it to the church, andyou'll save your soul; if you don't, you'll lose it. Oh, how nice youlook in it! I must call mademoiselle to see you."

°°°°"Come, Nanon, if Nanon you are, hold your tongue; let me go to bed.I'll arrange my things to-morrow. If my dressing-gown pleases you somuch, you shall save your soul. I'm too good a Christian not to giveit to you when I go away, and you can do what you like with it."Nanon stood rooted to the ground, gazing at Charles and unable to putfaith into his words.

°°°°"Good night, Nanon."

°°°°"What in the world have I come here for?" thought Charles as he wentto sleep. "My father is not a fool; my journey must have some object.Pshaw! put off serious thought till the morrow, as some Greek idiotsaid."

°°°°"Blessed Virgin! how charming he is, my cousin!" Eugenie was saying,interrupting her prayers, which that night at least were neverfinished.

°°°°Madame Grandet had no thoughts at all as she went to bed. She heardthe miser walking up and down his room through the door ofcommunication which was in the middle of the partition. Like all timidwomen, she had studied the character of her lord. Just as the petrelforesees the storm, she knew by imperceptible signs when an inwardtempest shook her husband; and at such times, to use an expression ofher own, she "feigned dead."

°°°°Grandet gazed at the door lined with sheet-iron which he lately put tohis sanctum, and said to himself,--

°°°°"What a crazy idea of my brother to bequeath his son to me! A finelegacy! I have not fifty francs to give him. What are fifty francs toa dandy who looked at my barometer as if he meant to make firewood ofit!"

°°°°In thinking over the consequences of that legacy of anguish Grandetwas perhaps more agitated than his brother had been at the moment ofwriting it.

°°°°"I shall have that golden robe," thought Nanon, who went to sleeptricked out in her altar-cloth, dreaming for the first time in herlife of flowers, embroidery, and damask, just as Eugenie was dreamingof love.

°°°°*****

°°°°In the pure and monotonous life of young girls there comes a delicioushour when the sun sheds its rays into their soul, when the flowersexpress their thoughts, when the throbbings of the heart send upwardto the brain their fertilizing warmth and melt all thoughts into avague desire,--day of innocent melancholy and of dulcet joys! Whenbabes begin to see, they smile; when a young girl first perceives thesentiment of nature, she smiles as she smiled when an infant. If lightis the first love of life, is not love a light to the heart? Themoment to see within the veil of earthly things had come for Eugenie.An early riser, like all provincial girls, she was up betimes and saidher prayers, and then began the business of dressing,--a businesswhich henceforth was to have a meaning. First she brushed and smoothedher chestnut hair and twisted its heavy masses to the top of her headwith the utmost care, preventing the loose tresses from straying, andgiving to her head a symmetry which heightened the timid candor of herface; for the simplicity of these accessories accorded well with theinnocent sincerity of its lines. As she washed her hands again andagain in the cold water which hardened and reddened the skin, shelooked at her handsome round arms and asked herself what her cousindid to make his hands so softly white, his nails so delicately curved.She put on new stockings and her prettiest shoes. She laced her corsetstraight, without skipping a single eyelet. And then, wishing for thefirst time in her life to appear to advantage, she felt the joy ofhaving a new gown, well made, which rendered her attractive.As she finished her toilet the clock of the parish church struck thehour; to her astonishment, it was only seven. The desire of havingplenty of time for dressing carefully had led her to get up too early.Ignorant of the art of retouching every curl and studying everyeffect, Eugenie simply crossed her arms, sat down by the window, andlooked at the court-yard, the narrow garden, and the high terracedwalls that over-topped it: a dismal, hedged-in prospect, yet notwholly devoid of those mysterious beauties which belong to solitary oruncultivated nature. Near the kitchen was a well surrounded by a curb,with a pulley fastened to a bent iron rod clasped by a vine whoseleaves were withered, reddened, and shrivelled by the season. Fromthence the tortuous shoots straggled to the wall, clutched it, and ranthe whole length of the house, ending near the wood-pile, where thelogs were ranged with as much precision as the books in a library. Thepavement of the court-yard showed the black stains produced in time bylichens, herbage, and the absence of all movement or friction. Thethick walls wore a coating of green moss streaked with waving brownlines, and the eight stone steps at the bottom of the court-yard whichled up to the gate of the garden were disjointed and hidden beneathtall plants, like the tomb of a knight buried by his widow in the daysof the Crusades. Above a foundation of moss-grown, crumbling stoneswas a trellis of rotten wood, half fallen from decay; over themclambered and intertwined at will a mass of clustering creepers. Oneach side of the latticed gate stretched the crooked arms of twostunted apple-trees. Three parallel walks, gravelled and separatedfrom each other by square beds, where the earth was held in by box-borders, made the garden, which terminated, beneath a terrace of theold walls, in a group of lindens. At the farther end were raspberry-bushes; at the other, near the house, an immense walnut-tree droopedits branches almost into the window of the miser's sanctum.A clear day and the beautiful autumnal sun common to the banks of theLoire was beginning to melt the hoar-frost which the night had laid onthese picturesque objects, on the walls, and on the plants whichswathed the court-yard. Eugenie found a novel charm in the aspect ofthings lately so insignificant to her. A thousand confused thoughtscame to birth in her mind and grew there, as the sunbeams grew withoutalong the wall. She felt that impulse of delight, vague, inexplicable,which wraps the moral being as a cloud wraps the physical body. Herthoughts were all in keeping with the details of this strangelandscape, and the harmonies of her heart blended with the harmoniesof nature. When the sun reached an angle of the wall where the "Venus-hair" of southern climes drooped its thick leaves, lit with thechanging colors of a pigeon's breast, celestial rays of hope illuminedthe future to her eyes, and thenceforth she loved to gaze upon thatpiece of wall, on its pale flowers, its blue harebells, its wiltingherbage, with which she mingled memories as tender as those ofchildhood. The noise made by each leaf as it fell from its twig in thevoid of that echoing court gave answer to the secret questionings ofthe young girl, who could have stayed there the livelong day withoutperceiving the flight of time. Then came tumultuous heavings of thesoul. She rose often, went to her glass, and looked at herself, as anauthor in good faith looks at his work to criticise it and blame it inhis own mind.

°°°°"I am not beautiful enough for him!" Such was Eugenie's thought,--ahumble thought, fertile in suffering. The poor girl did not do herselfjustice; but modesty, or rather fear, is among the first of love'svirtues. Eugenie belonged to the type of children with sturdyconstitutions, such as we see among the lesser bourgeoisie, whosebeauties always seem a little vulgar; and yet, though she resembledthe Venus of Milo, the lines of her figure were ennobled by the softerChristian sentiment which purifies womanhood and gives it adistinction unknown to the sculptors of antiquity. She had an enormoushead, with the masculine yet delicate forehead of the Jupiter ofPhidias, and gray eyes, to which her chaste life, penetrating fullyinto them, carried a flood of light. The features of her round face,formerly fresh and rosy, were at one time swollen by the small-pox,which destroyed the velvet texture of the skin, though it kindly leftno other traces, and her cheek was still so soft and delicate that hermother's kiss made a momentary red mark upon it. Her nose was somewhattoo thick, but it harmonized well with the vermilion mouth, whoselips, creased in many lines, were full of love and kindness. Thethroat was exquisitely round. The bust, well curved and carefullycovered, attracted the eye and inspired reverie. It lacked, no doubt,the grace which a fitting dress can bestow; but to a connoisseur thenon-flexibility of her figure had its own charm. Eugenie, tall andstrongly made, had none of the prettiness which pleases the masses;but she was beautiful with a beauty which the spirit recognizes, andnone but artists truly love. A painter seeking here below for a typeof Mary's celestial purity, searching womankind for those proud modesteyes which Raphael divined, for those virgin lines, often due tochances of conception, which the modesty of Christian life alone canbestow or keep unchanged,--such a painter, in love with his ideal,would have found in the face of Eugenie the innate nobleness that isignorant of itself; he would have seen beneath the calmness of thatbrow a world of love; he would have felt, in the shape of the eyes, inthe fall of the eyelids, the presence of the nameless something thatwe call divine. Her features, the contour of her head, which noexpression of pleasure had ever altered or wearied, were like thelines of the horizon softly traced in the far distance across thetranquil lakes. That calm and rosy countenance, margined with lightlike a lovely full-blown flower, rested the mind, held the eye, andimparted the charm of the conscience that was there reflected. Eugeniewas standing on the shore of life where young illusions flower, wheredaisies are gathered with delights ere long to be unknown; and thusshe said, looking at her image in the glass, unconscious as yet oflove: "I am too ugly; he will not notice me."

°°°°Then she opened the door of her chamber which led to the staircase,and stretched out her neck to listen for the household noises. "He isnot up," she thought, hearing Nanon's morning cough as the good soulwent and came, sweeping out the halls, lighting her fire, chaining thedog, and speaking to the beasts in the stable. Eugenie at once wentdown and ran to Nanon, who was milking the cow.

°°°°"Nanon, my good Nanon, make a little cream for my cousin's breakfast.""Why, mademoiselle, you should have thought of that yesterday," saidNanon, bursting into a loud peal of laughter. "I can't make cream.Your cousin is a darling, a darling! oh, that he is! You should haveseen him in his dressing-gown, all silk and gold! I saw him, I did! Hewears linen as fine as the surplice of monsieur le cure.""Nanon, please make us a /galette/."

°°°°"And who'll give me wood for the oven, and flour and butter for thecakes?" said Nanon, who in her function of prime-minister to Grandetassumed at times enormous importance in the eyes of Eugenie and hermother. "Mustn't rob the master to feast the cousin. You ask him forbutter and flour and wood: he's your father, perhaps he'll give yousome. See! there he is now, coming to give out the provisions."Eugenie escaped into the garden, quite frightened as she heard thestaircase shaking under her father's step. Already she felt theeffects of that virgin modesty and that special consciousness ofhappiness which lead us to fancy, not perhaps without reason, that ourthoughts are graven on our foreheads and are open to the eyes of all.Perceiving for the first time the cold nakedness of her father'shouse, the poor girl felt a sort of rage that she could not put it inharmony with her cousin's elegance. She felt the need of doingsomething for him,--what, she did not know. Ingenuous and truthful,she followed her angelic nature without mistrusting her impressions orher feelings. The mere sight of her cousin had wakened within her thenatural yearnings of a woman,--yearnings that were the more likely todevelop ardently because, having reached her twenty-third year, shewas in the plenitude of her intelligence and her desires. For thefirst time in her life her heart was full of terror at the sight ofher father; in him she saw the master of the fate, and she fanciedherself guilty of wrong-doing in hiding from his knowledge certainthoughts. She walked with hasty steps, surprised to breathe a purerair, to feel the sun's rays quickening her pulses, to absorb fromtheir heat a moral warmth and a new life. As she turned over in hermind some stratagem by which to get the cake, a quarrel--an event asrare as the sight of swallows in winter--broke out between la GrandeNanon and Grandet. Armed with his keys, the master had come to doleout provisions for the day's consumption.

°°°°"Is there any bread left from yesterday?" he said to Nanon."Not a crumb, monsieur."

°°°°Grandet took a large round loaf, well floured and moulded in one ofthe flat baskets which they use for baking in Anjou, and was about tocut it, when Nanon said to him,--

°°°°"We are five, to-day, monsieur."

°°°°"That's true," said Grandet, "but your loaves weigh six pounds;there'll be some left. Besides, these young fellows from Paris don'teat bread, you'll see."

°°°°"Then they must eat /frippe/?" said Nanon.

°°°°/Frippe/ is a word of the local lexicon of Anjou, and means anyaccompaniment of bread, from butter which is spread upon it, thecommonest kind of /frippe/, to peach preserve, the most distinguishedof all the /frippes/; those who in their childhood have licked the/frippe/ and left the bread, will comprehend the meaning of Nanon'sspeech.

°°°°"No," answered Grandet, "they eat neither bread nor /frippe/; they aresomething like marriageable girls."

°°°°After ordering the meals for the day with his usual parsimony, thegoodman, having locked the closets containing the supplies, was aboutto go towards the fruit-garden, when Nanon stopped him to say,--"Monsieur, give me a little flour and some butter, and I'll make a/galette/ for the young ones."

°°°°"Are you going to pillage the house on account of my nephew?""I wasn't thinking any more of your nephew than I was of your dog,--not more than you think yourself; for, look here, you've only forkedout six bits of sugar. I want eight."

°°°°"What's all this, Nanon? I have never seen you like this before. Whathave you got in your head? Are you the mistress here? You sha'n't havemore than six pieces of sugar."

°°°°"Well, then, how is your nephew to sweeten his coffee?"

°°°°"With two pieces; I'll go without myself."

°°°°"Go without sugar at your age! I'd rather buy you some out of my ownpocket."

°°°°"Mind your own business."

°°°°In spite of the recent fall in prices, sugar was still in Grandet'seyes the most valuable of all the colonial products; to him it wasalways six francs a pound. The necessity of economizing it, acquiredunder the Empire, had grown to be the most inveterate of his habits.All women, even the greatest ninnies, know how to dodge and dodge toget their ends; Nanon abandoned the sugar for the sake of getting the/galette/.

°°°°"Mademoiselle!" she called through the window, "do you want some/galette/?"

°°°°"No, no," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Come, Nanon," said Grandet, hearing his daughter's voice. "See here."He opened the cupboard where the flour was kept, gave her a cupful,and added a few ounces of butter to the piece he had already cut off."I shall want wood for the oven," said the implacable Nanon."Well, take what you want," he answered sadly; "but in that case youmust make us a fruit-tart, and you'll cook the whole dinner in theoven. In that way you won't need two fires."

°°°°"Goodness!" cried Nanon, "you needn't tell me that."

°°°°Grandet cast a look that was well-nigh paternal upon his faithfuldeputy.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she cried, when his back was turned, "we shall havethe /galette/."

°°°°Pere Grandet returned from the garden with the fruit and arranged aplateful on the kitchen-table.

°°°°"Just see, monsieur," said Nanon, "what pretty boots your nephew has.What leather! why it smells good! What does he clean it with, Iwonder? Am I to put your egg-polish on it?"

°°°°"Nanon, I think eggs would injure that kind of leather. Tell him youdon't know how to black morocco; yes, that's morocco. He will get yousomething himself in Saumur to polish those boots with. I have heardthat they put sugar into the blacking to make it shine."

°°°°"They look good to eat," said the cook, putting the boots to her nose."Bless me! if they don't smell like madame's eau-de-cologne. Ah! howfunny!"

°°°°"Funny!" said her master. "Do you call it funny to put more money intoboots than the man who stands in them is worth?"

°°°°"Monsieur," she said, when Grandet returned the second time, afterlocking the fruit-garden, "won't you have the /pot-au-feu/ put on onceor twice a week on account of your nephew?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Am I to go to the butcher's?"

°°°°"Certainly not. We will make the broth of fowls; the farmers willbring them. I shall tell Cornoiller to shoot some crows; they make thebest soup in the world."

°°°°"Isn't it true, monsieur, that crows eat the dead?"

°°°°"You are a fool, Nanon. They eat what they can get, like the rest ofthe world. Don't we all live on the dead? What are legacies?"Monsieur Grandet, having no further orders to give, drew out hiswatch, and seeing that he had half an hour to dispose of beforebreakfast, he took his hat, went and kissed his daughter, and said toher:

°°°°"Do you want to come for a walk in the fields, down by the Loire? Ihave something to do there."

°°°°Eugenie fetched her straw bonnet, lined with pink taffeta; then thefather and daughter went down the winding street to the shore."Where are you going at this early hour?" said Cruchot, the notary,meeting them.

°°°°"To see something," answered Grandet, not duped by the matutinalappearance of his friend.

°°°°When Pere Grandet went to "see something," the notary knew byexperience there was something to be got by going with him; so hewent.

°°°°"Come, Cruchot," said Grandet, "you are one of my friends. I'll showyou what folly it is to plant poplar-trees on good ground.""Do you call the sixty thousand francs that you pocketed for thosethat were in your fields down by the Loire, folly?" said MaitreCruchot, opening his eyes with amazement. "What luck you have had! Tocut down your trees at the very time they ran short of white-wood atNantes, and to sell them at thirty francs!"

°°°°Eugenie listened, without knowing that she approached the most solemnmoment of her whole life, and that the notary was about to bring downupon her head a paternal and supreme sentence. Grandet had now reachedthe magnificent fields which he owned on the banks of the Loire, wherethirty workmen were employed in clearing away, filling up, andlevelling the spots formerly occupied by the poplars.

°°°°"Maitre Cruchot, see how much ground this tree once took up! Jean," hecried to a laborer, "m-m-measure with your r-r-rule, b-both ways.""Four times eight feet," said the man.

°°°°"Thirty-two feet lost," said Grandet to Cruchot. "I had three hundredpoplars in this one line, isn't that so? Well, then, three h-h-hundredtimes thir-thirty-two lost m-m-me five hundred in h-h-hay; add twiceas much for the side rows,--fifteen hundred; the middle rows as muchmore. So we may c-c-call it a th-thousand b-b-bales of h-h-hay--""Very good," said Cruchot, to help out his friend; "a thousand balesare worth about six hundred francs."

°°°°"Say t-t-twelve hundred, be-c-cause there's three or four hundredfrancs on the second crop. Well, then, c-c-calculate that t-twelvethousand francs a year for f-f-forty years with interest c-c-comesto--"

°°°°"Say sixty thousand francs," said the notary.

°°°°"I am willing; c-c-comes t-t-to sixty th-th-thousand. Very good,"continued Grandet, without stuttering: "two thousand poplars fortyyears old will only yield me fifty thousand francs. There's a loss. Ihave found that myself," said Grandet, getting on his high horse."Jean, fill up all the holes except those at the bank of the river;there you are to plant the poplars I have bought. Plant 'em there, andthey'll get nourishment from the government," he said, turning toCruchot, and giving a slight motion to the wen on his nose, whichexpressed more than the most ironical of smiles.

°°°°"True enough; poplars should only be planted on poor soil," saidCruchot, amazed at Grandet's calculations.

°°°°"Y-y-yes, monsieur," answered the old man satirically.

°°°°Eugenie, who was gazing at the sublime scenery of the Loire, andpaying no attention to her father's reckonings, presently turned anear to the remarks of Cruchot when she heard him say,--

°°°°"So you have brought a son-in-law from Paris. All Saumur is talkingabout your nephew. I shall soon have the marriage-contract to draw up,hey! Pere Grandet?"

°°°°"You g-g-got up very early to t-t-tell me that," said Grandet,accompanying the remark with a motion of his wen. "Well, oldc-c-comrade, I'll be frank, and t-t-tell you what you want t-t-toknow. I would rather, do you see, f-f-fling my daughter into the Loirethan g-g-give her to her c-c-cousin. You may t-t-tell that everywhere,--no, never mind; let the world t-t-talk."

°°°°This answer dazzled and blinded the young girl with sudden light. Thedistant hopes upspringing in her heart bloomed suddenly, became real,tangible, like a cluster of flowers, and she saw them cut down andwilting on the earth. Since the previous evening she had attachedherself to Charles by those links of happiness which bind soul tosoul; from henceforth suffering was to rivet them. Is it not the nobledestiny of women to be more moved by the dark solemnities of griefthan by the splendors of fortune? How was it that fatherly feeling haddied out of her father's heart? Of what crime had Charles been guilty?Mysterious questions! Already her dawning love, a mystery so profound,was wrapping itself in mystery. She walked back trembling in all herlimbs; and when she reached the gloomy street, lately so joyous toher, she felt its sadness, she breathed the melancholy which time andevents had printed there. None of love's lessons lacked. A few stepsfrom their own door she went on before her father and waited at thethreshold. But Grandet, who saw a newspaper in the notary's hand,stopped short and asked,--

°°°°"How are the Funds?"

°°°°"You never listen to my advice, Grandet," answered Cruchot. "Buy soon;you will still make twenty per cent in two years, besides getting anexcellent rate of interest,--five thousand a year for eighty thousandfrancs fifty centimes."

°°°°"We'll see about that," answered Grandet, rubbing his chin."Good God!" exclaimed the notary.

°°°°"Well, what?" cried Grandet; and at the same moment Cruchot put thenewspaper under his eyes and said:

°°°°"Read that!"

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, one of the most respected merchants in Paris,

°°°°blew his brains out yesterday, after making his usual appearance

°°°°at the Bourse. He had sent his resignation to the president of the

°°°°Chamber of Deputies, and had also resigned his functions as a

°°°°judge of the commercial courts. The failures of Monsieur Roguin

°°°°and Monsieur Souchet, his broker and his notary, had ruined him.

°°°°The esteem felt for Monsieur Grandet and the credit he enjoyed

°°°°were nevertheless such that he might have obtained the necessary

°°°°assistance from other business houses. It is much to be regretted

°°°°that so honorable a man should have yielded to momentary despair,"

°°°°etc.

°°°°"I knew it," said the old wine-grower to the notary.

°°°°The words sent a chill of horror through Maitre Cruchot, who,notwithstanding his impassibility as a notary, felt the cold runningdown his spine as he thought that Grandet of Paris had possiblyimplored in vain the millions of Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"And his son, so joyous yesterday--"

°°°°"He knows nothing as yet," answered Grandet, with the same composure."Adieu! Monsieur Grandet," said Cruchot, who now understood the stateof the case, and went off to reassure Monsieur de Bonfons.On entering, Grandet found breakfast ready. Madame Grandet, roundwhose neck Eugenie had flung her arms, kissing her with the quickeffusion of feeling often caused by secret grief, was already seatedin her chair on castors, knitting sleeves for the coming winter."You can begin to eat," said Nanon, coming downstairs four steps at atime; "the young one is sleeping like a cherub. Isn't he a darlingwith his eyes shut? I went in and I called him: no answer.""Let him sleep," said Grandet; "he'll wake soon enough to hear ill-tidings."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Eugenie, putting into her coffee the two littlebits of sugar weighing less than half an ounce which the old miseramused himself by cutting up in his leisure hours. Madame Grandet, whodid not dare to put the question, gazed at her husband.

°°°°"His father has blown his brains out."

°°°°"My uncle?" said Eugenie.

°°°°"Poor young man!" exclaimed Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Poor indeed!" said Grandet; "he isn't worth a sou!"

°°°°"Eh! poor boy, and he's sleeping like the king of the world!" saidNanon in a gentle voice.

°°°°Eugenie stopped eating. Her heart was wrung, as the young heart iswrung when pity for the suffering of one she loves overflows, for thefirst time, the whole being of a woman. The poor girl wept."What are you crying about? You didn't know your uncle," said herfather, giving her one of those hungry tigerish looks he doubtlessthrew upon his piles of gold.

°°°°"But, monsieur," said Nanon, "who wouldn't feel pity for the pooryoung man, sleeping there like a wooden shoe, without knowing what'scoming?"

°°°°"I didn't speak to you, Nanon. Hold your tongue!"

°°°°Eugenie learned at that moment that the woman who loves must be ableto hide her feelings. She did not answer.

°°°°"You will say nothing to him about it, Ma'ame Grandet, till I return,"said the old man. "I have to go and straighten the line of my hedgealong the high-road. I shall be back at noon, in time for the secondbreakfast, and then I will talk with my nephew about his affairs. Asfor you, Mademoiselle Eugenie, if it is for that dandy you are crying,that's enough, child. He's going off like a shot to the Indies. Youwill never see him again."

°°°°The father took his gloves from the brim of his hat, put them on withhis usual composure, pushed them in place by shoving the fingers ofboth hands together, and went out.

°°°°"Mamma, I am suffocating!" cried Eugenie when she was alone with hermother; "I have never suffered like this."

°°°°Madame Grandet, seeing that she turned pale, opened the window and lether breathe fresh air.

°°°°"I feel better!" said Eugenie after a moment.

°°°°This nervous excitement in a nature hitherto, to all appearance, calmand cold, reacted on Madame Grandet; she looked at her daughter withthe sympathetic intuition with which mothers are gifted for theobjects of their tenderness, and guessed all. In truth the life of theHungarian sisters, bound together by a freak of nature, could scarcelyhave been more intimate than that of Eugenie and her mother,--alwaystogether in the embrasure of that window, and sleeping together in thesame atmosphere.

°°°°"My poor child!" said Madame Grandet, taking Eugenie's head and layingit upon her bosom.

°°°°At these words the young girl raised her head, questioned her motherby a look, and seemed to search out her inmost thought.

°°°°"Why send him to the Indies?" she said. "If he is unhappy, ought henot to stay with us? Is he not our nearest relation?"

°°°°"Yes, my child, it seems natural; but your father has his reasons: wemust respect them."

°°°°The mother and daughter sat down in silence, the former upon herraised seat, the latter in her little armchair, and both took up theirwork. Swelling with gratitude for the full heart-understanding hermother had given her, Eugenie kissed the dear hand, saying,--"How good you are, my kind mamma!"

°°°°The words sent a glow of light into the motherly face, worn andblighted as it was by many sorrows.

°°°°"You like him?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°Madame Grandet only smiled in reply. Then, after a moment's silence,she said in a low voice: "Do you love him already? That is wrong.""Wrong?" said Eugenie. "Why is it wrong? You are pleased with him,Nanon is pleased with him; why should he not please me? Come, mamma,let us set the table for his breakfast."

°°°°She threw down her work, and her mother did the same, saying, "Foolishchild!" But she sanctioned the child's folly by sharing it. Eugeniecalled Nanon.

°°°°"What do you want now, mademoiselle?"

°°°°"Nanon, can we have cream by midday?"

°°°°"Ah! midday, to be sure you can," answered the old servant."Well, let him have his coffee very strong; I heard Monsieur desGrassins say that they make the coffee very strong in Paris. Put in agreat deal."

°°°°"Where am I to get it?"

°°°°"Buy some."

°°°°"Suppose monsieur meets me?"

°°°°"He has gone to his fields."

°°°°"I'll run, then. But Monsieur Fessard asked me yesterday if the Magihad come to stay with us when I bought the wax candle. All the townwill know our goings-on."

°°°°"If your father finds it out," said Madame Grandet, "he is capable ofbeating us."

°°°°"Well, let him beat us; we will take his blows on our knees."Madame Grandet for all answer raised her eyes to heaven. Nanon put onher hood and went off. Eugenie got out some clean table-linen, andwent to fetch a few bunches of grapes which she had amused herself byhanging on a string across the attic; she walked softly along thecorridor, so as not to waken her cousin, and she could not helplistening at the door to his quiet breathing.

°°°°"Sorrow is watching while he sleeps," she thought.

°°°°She took the freshest vine-leaves and arranged her dish of grapes ascoquettishly as a practised house-keeper might have done, and placedit triumphantly on the table. She laid hands on the pears counted outby her father, and piled them in a pyramid mixed with leaves. She wentand came, and skipped and ran. She would have liked to lay undercontribution everything in her father's house; but the keys were inhis pocket. Nanon came back with two fresh eggs. At sight of themEugenie almost hugged her round the neck.

°°°°"The farmer from Lande had them in his basket. I asked him for them,and he gave them to me, the darling, for nothing, as an attention!"VAfter two hours' thought and care, during which Eugenie jumped uptwenty times from her work to see if the coffee were boiling, or to goand listen to the noise her cousin made in dressing, she succeeded inpreparing a simple little breakfast, very inexpensive, but which,nevertheless, departed alarmingly from the inveterate customs of thehouse. The midday breakfast was always taken standing. Each took aslice of bread, a little fruit or some butter, and a glass of wine. AsEugenie looked at the table drawn up near the fire with an arm-chairplaced before her cousin's plate, at the two dishes of fruit, the egg-cup, the bottle of white wine, the bread, and the sugar heaped up in asaucer, she trembled in all her limbs at the mere thought of the lookher father would give her if he should come in at that moment. Sheglanced often at the clock to see if her cousin could breakfast beforethe master's return.

°°°°"Don't be troubled, Eugenie; if your father comes in, I will take itall upon myself," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Eugenie could not repress a tear.

°°°°"Oh, my good mother!" she cried, "I have never loved you enough."Charles, who had been tramping about his room for some time, singingto himself, now came down. Happily, it was only eleven o'clock. Thetrue Parisian! he had put as much dandyism into his dress as if hewere in the chateau of the noble lady then travelling in Scotland. Hecame into the room with the smiling, courteous manner so becoming toyouth, which made Eugenie's heart beat with mournful joy. He had takenthe destruction of his castles in Anjou as a joke, and came up to hisaunt gaily.

°°°°"Have you slept well, dear aunt? and you, too, my cousin?""Very well, monsieur; did you?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"I? perfectly."

°°°°"You must be hungry, cousin," said Eugenie; "will you take your seat?""I never breakfast before midday; I never get up till then. However, Ifared so badly on the journey that I am glad to eat something at once.Besides--" here he pulled out the prettiest watch Breguet ever made."Dear me! I am early, it is only eleven o'clock!"

°°°°"Early?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Yes; but I wanted to put my things in order. Well, I shall be glad tohave anything to eat,--anything, it doesn't matter what, a chicken, apartridge."

°°°°"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Nanon, overhearing the words.

°°°°"A partridge!" whispered Eugenie to herself; she would gladly havegiven the whole of her little hoard for a partridge.

°°°°"Come and sit down," said his aunt.

°°°°The young dandy let himself drop into an easy-chair, just as a prettywoman falls gracefully upon a sofa. Eugenie and her mother tookordinary chairs and sat beside him, near the fire.

°°°°"Do you always live here?" said Charles, thinking the room uglier bydaylight than it had seemed the night before.

°°°°"Always," answered Eugenie, looking at him, "except during thevintage. Then we go and help Nanon, and live at the Abbaye desNoyers."

°°°°"Don't you ever take walks?"

°°°°"Sometimes on Sunday after vespers, when the weather is fine," saidMadame Grandet, "we walk on the bridge, or we go and watch thehaymakers."

°°°°"Have you a theatre?"

°°°°"Go to the theatre!" exclaimed Madame Grandet, "see a play! Why,monsieur, don't you know it is a mortal sin?"

°°°°"See here, monsieur," said Nanon, bringing in the eggs, "here are yourchickens,--in the shell."

°°°°"Oh! fresh eggs," said Charles, who, like all people accustomed toluxury, had already forgotten about his partridge, "that is delicious:now, if you will give me the butter, my good girl."

°°°°"Butter! then you can't have the /galette/."

°°°°"Nanon, bring the butter," cried Eugenie.

°°°°The young girl watched her cousin as he cut his sippets, with as muchpleasure as a grisette takes in a melodrama where innocence and virtuetriumph. Charles, brought up by a charming mother, improved, andtrained by a woman of fashion, had the elegant, dainty, foppishmovements of a coxcomb. The compassionate sympathy and tenderness of ayoung girl possess a power that is actually magnetic; so that Charles,finding himself the object of the attentions of his aunt and cousin,could not escape the influence of feelings which flowed towards him,as it were, and inundated him. He gave Eugenie a bright, caressinglook full of kindness,--a look which seemed itself a smile. Heperceived, as his eyes lingered upon her, the exquisite harmony offeatures in the pure face, the grace of her innocent attitude, themagic clearness of the eyes, where young love sparkled and desireshone unconsciously.

°°°°"Ah! my dear cousin, if you were in full dress at the Opera, I assureyou my aunt's words would come true,--you would make the men committhe mortal sin of envy, and the women the sin of jealousy."The compliment went to Eugenie's heart and set it beating, though shedid not understand its meaning.

°°°°"Oh! cousin," she said, "you are laughing at a poor little countrygirl."

°°°°"If you knew me, my cousin, you would know that I abhor ridicule; itwithers the heart and jars upon all my feelings." Here he swallowedhis buttered sippet very gracefully. "No, I really have not enoughmind to make fun of others; and doubtless it is a great defect. InParis, when they want to disparage a man, they say: 'He has a goodheart.' The phrase means: 'The poor fellow is as stupid as arhinoceros.' But as I am rich, and known to hit the bull's-eye atthirty paces with any kind of pistol, and even in the open fields,ridicule respects me."

°°°°"My dear nephew, that bespeaks a good heart."

°°°°"You have a very pretty ring," said Eugenie; "is there any harm inasking to see it?"

°°°°Charles held out his hand after loosening the ring, and Eugenieblushed as she touched the pink nails of her cousin with the tips ofher fingers.

°°°°"See, mamma, what beautiful workmanship."

°°°°"My! there's a lot of gold!" said Nanon, bringing in the coffee."What is that?" exclaimed Charles, laughing, as he pointed to anoblong pot of brown earthenware, glazed on the inside, and edged witha fringe of ashes, from the bottom of which the coffee-grounds werebubbling up and falling in the boiling liquid.

°°°°"It is boiled coffee," said Nanon.

°°°°"Ah! my dear aunt, I shall at least leave one beneficent trace of myvisit here. You are indeed behind the age! I must teach you to makegood coffee in a Chaptal coffee-pot."

°°°°He tried to explain the process of a Chaptal coffee-pot.

°°°°"Gracious! if there are so many things as all that to do," said Nanon,"we may as well give up our lives to it. I shall never make coffeethat way; I know that! Pray, who is to get the fodder for the cowwhile I make the coffee?"

°°°°"I will make it," said Eugenie.

°°°°"Child!" said Madame Grandet, looking at her daughter.

°°°°The word recalled to their minds the sorrow that was about to fallupon the unfortunate young man; the three women were silent, andlooked at him with an air of commiseration that caught his attention."Is anything the matter, my cousin?" he said.

°°°°"Hush!" said Madame Grandet to Eugenie, who was about to answer; "youknow, my daughter, that your father charged us not to speak tomonsieur--"

°°°°"Say Charles," said young Grandet.

°°°°"Ah! you are called Charles? What a beautiful name!" cried Eugenie.Presentiments of evil are almost always justified. At this momentNanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie, who had all three been thinkingwith a shudder of the old man's return, heard the knock whose echoesthey knew but too well.

°°°°"There's papa!" said Eugenie.

°°°°She removed the saucer filled with sugar, leaving a few pieces on thetable-cloth; Nanon carried off the egg-cup; Madame Grandet sat up likea frightened hare. It was evidently a panic, which amazed Charles, whowas wholly unable to understand it.

°°°°"Why! what is the matter?" he asked.

°°°°"My father has come," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, what of that?"

°°°°Monsieur Grandet entered the room, threw his keen eye upon the table,upon Charles, and saw the whole thing.

°°°°"Ha! ha! so you have been making a feast for your nephew; very good,very good, very good indeed!" he said, without stuttering. "When thecat's away, the mice will play."

°°°°"Feast!" thought Charles, incapable of suspecting or imagining therules and customs of the household.

°°°°"Give me my glass, Nanon," said the master

°°°°Eugenie brought the glass. Grandet drew a horn-handled knife with abig blade from his breeches' pocket, cut a slice of bread, took asmall bit of butter, spread it carefully on the bread, and ate itstanding. At this moment Charlie was sweetening his coffee. PereGrandet saw the bits of sugar, looked at his wife, who turned pale,and made three steps forward; he leaned down to the poor woman's earand said,--

°°°°"Where did you get all that sugar?"

°°°°"Nanon fetched it from Fessard's; there was none."

°°°°It is impossible to picture the profound interest the three women tookin this mute scene. Nanon had left her kitchen and stood looking intothe room to see what would happen. Charles, having tasted his coffee,found it bitter and glanced about for the sugar, which Grandet hadalready put away.

°°°°"What do you want?" said his uncle.

°°°°"The sugar."

°°°°"Put in more milk," answered the master of the house; "your coffeewill taste sweeter."

°°°°Eugenie took the saucer which Grandet had put away and placed it onthe table, looking calmly at her father as she did so. Most assuredly,the Parisian woman who held a silken ladder with her feeble arms tofacilitate the flight of her lover, showed no greater courage thanEugenie displayed when she replaced the sugar upon the table. Thelover rewarded his mistress when she proudly showed him her beautifulbruised arm, and bathed every swollen vein with tears and kisses tillit was cured with happiness. Charles, on the other hand, never so muchas knew the secret of the cruel agitation that shook and bruised theheart of his cousin, crushed as it was by the look of the old miser."You are not eating your breakfast, wife."

°°°°The poor helot came forward with a piteous look, cut herself a pieceof bread, and took a pear. Eugenie boldly offered her father somegrapes, saying,--

°°°°"Taste my preserves, papa. My cousin, you will eat some, will you not?I went to get these pretty grapes expressly for you."

°°°°"If no one stops them, they will pillage Saumur for you, nephew. Whenyou have finished, we will go into the garden; I have something totell you which can't be sweetened."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother cast a look on Charles whose meaning the youngman could not mistake.

°°°°"What is it you mean, uncle? Since the death of my poor mother"--atthese words his voice softened--"no other sorrow can touch me.""My nephew, who knows by what afflictions God is pleased to try us?"said his aunt.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta," said Grandet, "there's your nonsense beginning. I amsorry to see those white hands of yours, nephew"; and he showed theshoulder-of-mutton fists which Nature had put at the end of his ownarms. "There's a pair of hands made to pick up silver pieces. You'vebeen brought up to put your feet in the kid out of which we make thepurses we keep our money in. A bad look-out! Very bad!"

°°°°"What do you mean, uncle? I'll be hanged if I understand a single wordof what you are saying."

°°°°"Come!" said Grandet.

°°°°The miser closed the blade of his knife with a snap, drank the last ofhis wine, and opened the door.

°°°°"My cousin, take courage!"

°°°°The tone of the young girl struck terror to Charles's heart, and hefollowed his terrible uncle, a prey to disquieting thoughts. Eugenie,her mother, and Nanon went into the kitchen, moved by irresistiblecuriosity to watch the two actors in the scene which was about to takeplace in the garden, where at first the uncle walked silently ahead ofthe nephew. Grandet was not at all troubled at having to tell Charlesof the death of his father; but he did feel a sort of compassion inknowing him to be without a penny, and he sought for some phrase orformula by which to soften the communication of that cruel truth. "Youhave lost your father," seemed to him a mere nothing to say; fathersdie before their children. But "you are absolutely without means,"--all the misfortunes of life were summed up in those words! Grandetwalked round the garden three times, the gravel crunching under hisheavy step.

°°°°In the crucial moments of life our minds fasten upon the localitywhere joys or sorrows overwhelm us. Charles noticed with minuteattention the box-borders of the little garden, the yellow leaves asthey fluttered down, the dilapidated walls, the gnarled fruit-trees,--picturesque details which were destined to remain forever in hismemory, blending eternally, by the mnemonics that belong exclusivelyto the passions, with the recollections of this solemn hour."It is very fine weather, very warm," said Grandet, drawing a longbreath.

°°°°"Yes, uncle; but why--"

°°°°"Well, my lad," answered his uncle, "I have some bad news to give you.Your father is ill--"

°°°°"Then why am I here?" said Charles. "Nanon," he cried, "order post-horses! I can get a carriage somewhere?" he added, turning to hisuncle, who stood motionless.

°°°°"Horses and carriages are useless," answered Grandet, looking atCharles, who remained silent, his eyes growing fixed. "Yes, my poorboy, you guess the truth,--he is dead. But that's nothing; there issomething worse: he blew out his brains."

°°°°"My father!"

°°°°"Yes, but that's not the worst; the newspapers are all talking aboutit. Here, read that."

°°°°Grandet, who had borrowed the fatal article from Cruchot, thrust thepaper under his nephew's eyes. The poor young man, still a child,still at an age when feelings wear no mask, burst into tears."That's good!" thought Grandet; "his eyes frightened me. He'll be allright if he weeps,--That is not the worst, my poor nephew," he saidaloud, not noticing whether Charles heard him, "that is nothing; youwill get over it: but--"

°°°°"Never, never! My father! Oh, my father!"

°°°°"He has ruined you, you haven't a penny."

°°°°"What does that matter? My father! Where is my father?"

°°°°His sobs resounded horribly against those dreary walls andreverberated in the echoes. The three women, filled with pity, weptalso; for tears are often as contagious as laughter. Charles, withoutlistening further to his uncle, ran through the court and up thestaircase to his chamber, where he threw himself across the bed andhid his face in the sheets, to weep in peace for his lost parents."The first burst must have its way," said Grandet, entering theliving-room, where Eugenie and her mother had hastily resumed theirseats and were sewing with trembling hands, after wiping their eyes."But that young man is good for nothing; his head is more taken upwith the dead than with his money."

°°°°Eugenie shuddered as she heard her father's comment on the most sacredof all griefs. From that moment she began to judge him. Charles'ssobs, though muffled, still sounded through the sepulchral house; andhis deep groans, which seemed to come from the earth beneath, onlyceased towards evening, after growing gradually feebler.

°°°°"Poor young man!" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Fatal exclamation! Pere Grandet looked at his wife, at Eugenie, and atthe sugar-bowl. He recollected the extraordinary breakfast preparedfor the unfortunate youth, and he took a position in the middle of theroom.

°°°°"Listen to me," he said, with his usual composure. "I hope that youwill not continue this extravagance, Madame Grandet. I don't give youMY money to stuff that young fellow with sugar."

°°°°"My mother had nothing to do with it," said Eugenie; "it was I who--""Is it because you are of age," said Grandet, interrupting hisdaughter, "that you choose to contradict me? Remember, Eugenie--""Father, the son of your brother ought to receive from us--""Ta, ta, ta, ta!" exclaimed the cooper on four chromatic tones; "theson of my brother this, my nephew that! Charles is nothing at all tous; he hasn't a farthing, his father has failed; and when this dandyhas cried his fill, off he goes from here. I won't have himrevolutionize my household."

°°°°"What is 'failing,' father?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°"To fail," answered her father, "is to commit the most dishonorableaction that can disgrace a man."

°°°°"It must be a great sin," said Madame Grandet, "and our brother may bedamned."

°°°°"There, there, don't begin with your litanies!" said Grandet,shrugging his shoulders. "To fail, Eugenie," he resumed, "is to commita theft which the law, unfortunately, takes under its protection.People have given their property to Guillaume Grandet trusting to hisreputation for honor and integrity; he has made away with it all, andleft them nothing but their eyes to weep with. A highway robber isbetter than a bankrupt: the one attacks you and you can defendyourself, he risks his own life; but the other--in short, Charles isdishonored."

°°°°The words rang in the poor girl's heart and weighed it down with theirheavy meaning. Upright and delicate as a flower born in the depths ofa forest, she knew nothing of the world's maxims, of its deceitfularguments and specious sophisms; she therefore believed the atrociousexplanation which her father gave her designedly, concealing thedistinction which exists between an involuntary failure and anintentional one.

°°°°"Father, could you not have prevented such a misfortune?""My brother did not consult me. Besides, he owes four millions.""What is a 'million,' father?" she asked, with the simplicity of achild which thinks it can find out at once all that it wants to know."A million?" said Grandet, "why, it is a million pieces of twenty souseach, and it takes five twenty sous pieces to make five francs.""Dear me!" cried Eugenie, "how could my uncle possibly have had fourmillions? Is there any one else in France who ever had so manymillions?" Pere Grandet stroked his chin, smiled, and his wen seemedto dilate. "But what will become of my cousin Charles?"

°°°°"He is going off to the West Indies by his father's request, and hewill try to make his fortune there."

°°°°"Has he got the money to go with?"

°°°°"I shall pay for his journey as far as--yes, as far as Nantes."Eugenie sprang into his arms.

°°°°"Oh, father, how good you are!"

°°°°She kissed him with a warmth that almost made Grandet ashamed ofhimself, for his conscience galled him a little.

°°°°"Will it take much time to amass a million?" she asked.

°°°°"Look here!" said the old miser, "you know what a napoleon is? Well,it takes fifty thousand napoleons to make a million."

°°°°"Mamma, we must say a great many /neuvaines/ for him."

°°°°"I was thinking so," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"That's the way, always spending my money!" cried the father. "Do youthink there are francs on every bush?"

°°°°At this moment a muffled cry, more distressing than all the others,echoed through the garrets and struck a chill to the hearts of Eugenieand her mother.

°°°°"Nanon, go upstairs and see that he does not kill himself," saidGrandet. "Now, then," he added, looking at his wife and daughter, whohad turned pale at his words, "no nonsense, you two! I must leave you;I have got to see about the Dutchmen who are going away to-day. Andthen I must find Cruchot, and talk with him about all this."He departed. As soon as he had shut the door Eugenie and her motherbreathed more freely. Until this morning the young girl had never feltconstrained in the presence of her father; but for the last few hoursevery moment wrought a change in her feelings and ideas.

°°°°"Mamma, how many louis are there in a cask of wine?"

°°°°"Your father sells his from a hundred to a hundred and fifty francs,sometimes two hundred,--at least, so I've heard say."

°°°°"Then papa must be rich?"

°°°°"Perhaps he is. But Monsieur Cruchot told me he bought Froidfond twoyears ago; that may have pinched him."

°°°°Eugenie, not being able to understand the question of her father'sfortune, stopped short in her calculations.

°°°°"He didn't even see me, the darling!" said Nanon, coming back from hererrand. "He's stretched out like a calf on his bed and crying like theMadeleine, and that's a blessing! What's the matter with the poor dearyoung man!"

°°°°"Let us go and console him, mamma; if any one knocks, we can comedown."

°°°°Madame Grandet was helpless against the sweet persuasive tones of herdaughter's voice. Eugenie was sublime: she had become a woman. Thetwo, with beating hearts, went up to Charles's room. The door wasopen. The young man heard and saw nothing; plunged in grief, he onlyuttered inarticulate cries.

°°°°"How he loves his father!" said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°In the utterance of those words it was impossible to mistake the hopesof a heart that, unknown to itself, had suddenly become passionate.Madame Grandet cast a mother's look upon her daughter, and thenwhispered in her ear,--

°°°°"Take care, you will love him!"

°°°°"Love him!" answered Eugenie. "Ah! if you did but know what my fathersaid to Monsieur Cruchot."

°°°°Charles turned over, and saw his aunt and cousin.

°°°°"I have lost my father, my poor father! If he had told me his secrettroubles we might have worked together to repair them. My God! my poorfather! I was so sure I should see him again that I think I kissed himquite coldly--"

°°°°Sobs cut short the words.

°°°°"We will pray for him," said Madame Grandet. "Resign yourself to thewill of God."

°°°°"Cousin," said Eugenie, "take courage! Your loss is irreparable;therefore think only of saving your honor."

°°°°With the delicate instinct of a woman who intuitively puts her mindinto all things, even at the moment when she offers consolation,Eugenie sought to cheat her cousin's grief by turning his thoughtsinward upon himself.

°°°°"My honor?" exclaimed the young man, tossing aside his hair with animpatient gesture as he sat up on his bed and crossed his arms. "Ah!that is true. My uncle said my father had failed." He uttered a heart-rending cry, and hid his face in his hands. "Leave me, leave me,cousin! My God! my God! forgive my father, for he must have sufferedsorely!"

°°°°There was something terribly attractive in the sight of this youngsorrow, sincere without reasoning or afterthought. It was a virgingrief which the simple hearts of Eugenie and her mother were fitted tocomprehend, and they obeyed the sign Charles made them to leave him tohimself. They went downstairs in silence and took their accustomedplaces by the window and sewed for nearly an hour without exchanging aword. Eugenie had seen in the furtive glance that she cast about theyoung man's room--that girlish glance which sees all in the twinklingof an eye--the pretty trifles of his dressing-case, his scissors, hisrazors embossed with gold. This gleam of luxury across her cousin'sgrief only made him the more interesting to her, possibly by way ofcontrast. Never before had so serious an event, so dramatic a sight,touched the imaginations of these two passive beings, hitherto sunk inthe stillness and calm of solitude.

°°°°"Mamma," said Eugenie, "we must wear mourning for my uncle.""Your father will decide that," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°They relapsed into silence. Eugenie drew her stitches with a uniformmotion which revealed to an observer the teeming thoughts of hermeditation. The first desire of the girl's heart was to share hercousin's mourning.

°°°°VI

°°°°About four o'clock an abrupt knock at the door struck sharply on theheart of Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What can have happened to your father?" she said to her daughter.Grandet entered joyously. After taking off his gloves, he rubbed hishands hard enough to take off their skin as well, if his epidermis hadnot been tanned and cured like Russia leather,--saving, of course, theperfume of larch-trees and incense. Presently his secret escaped him."Wife," he said, without stuttering, "I've trapped them all! Our wineis sold! The Dutch and the Belgians have gone. I walked about themarket-place in front of their inn, pretending to be doing nothing.That Belgian fellow--you know who I mean--came up to me. The owners ofall the good vineyards have kept back their vintages, intending towait; well, I didn't hinder them. The Belgian was in despair; I sawthat. In a minute the bargain was made. He takes my vintage at twohundred francs the puncheon, half down. He paid me in gold; the notesare drawn. Here are six louis for you. In three months wines will havefallen."

°°°°These words, uttered in a quiet tone of voice, were nevertheless sobitterly sarcastic that the inhabitants of Saumur, grouped at thismoment in the market-place and overwhelmed by the news of the saleGrandet had just effected, would have shuddered had they heard them.Their panic would have brought the price of wines down fifty per centat once.

°°°°"Did you have a thousand puncheons this year, father?"

°°°°"Yes, little one."

°°°°That term applied to his daughter was the superlative expression ofthe old miser's joy.

°°°°"Then that makes two hundred thousand pieces of twenty sous each?""Yes, Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"Then, father, you can easily help Charles."

°°°°The amazement, the anger, the stupefaction of Belshazzar when he sawthe /Mene-Tekel-Upharsin/ before his eyes is not to be compared withthe cold rage of Grandet, who, having forgotten his nephew, now foundhim enshrined in the heart and calculations of his daughter."What's this? Ever since that dandy put foot in MY house everythinggoes wrong! You behave as if you had the right to buy sugar-plums andmake feasts and weddings. I won't have that sort of thing. I hope Iknow my duty at my time of life! I certainly sha'n't take lessons frommy daughter, or from anybody else. I shall do for my nephew what it isproper to do, and you have no need to poke your nose into it. As foryou, Eugenie," he added, facing her, "don't speak of this again, orI'll send you to the Abbaye des Noyers with Nanon, see if I don't; andno later than to-morrow either, if you disobey me! Where is thatfellow, has he come down yet?"

°°°°"No, my friend," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What is he doing then?"

°°°°"He is weeping for his father," said Eugenie.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter without finding a word to say; afterall, he was a father. He made a couple of turns up and down the room,and then went hurriedly to his secret den to think over an investmenthe was meditating in the public Funds. The thinning out of his twothousand acres of forest land had yielded him six hundred thousandfrancs: putting this sum to that derived from the sale of his poplarsand to his other gains for the last year and for the current year, hehad amassed a total of nine hundred thousand francs, without countingthe two hundred thousand he had got by the sale just concluded. Thetwenty per cent which Cruchot assured him would gain in a short timefrom the Funds, then quoted at seventy, tempted him. He figured outhis calculation on the margin of the newspaper which gave the accountof his brother's death, all the while hearing the moans of his nephew,but without listening to them. Nanon came and knocked on the wall tosummon him to dinner. On the last step of the staircase he was sayingto himself as he came down,--

°°°°"I'll do it; I shall get eight per cent interest. In two years I shallhave fifteen hundred thousand francs, which I will then draw out ingood gold,--Well, where's my nephew?"

°°°°"He says he doesn't want anything to eat," answered Nanon; "that's notgood for him."

°°°°"So much saved," retorted her master.

°°°°"That's so," she said.

°°°°"Bah! he won't cry long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the woods."The dinner was eaten in silence.

°°°°"My good friend," said Madame Grandet, when the cloth was removed, "wemust put on mourning."

°°°°"Upon my word, Madame Grandet! what will you invent next to spendmoney on? Mourning is in the heart, and not in the clothes.""But mourning for a brother is indispensable; and the Church commandsus to--"

°°°°"Buy your mourning out of your six louis. Give me a hat-band; that'senough for me."

°°°°Eugenie raised her eyes to heaven without uttering a word. Hergenerous instincts, slumbering and long repressed but now suddenly andfor the first time awakened, were galled at every turn. The eveningpassed to all appearance like a thousand other evenings of theirmonotonous life, yet it was certainly the most horrible. Eugenie sewedwithout raising her head, and did not use the workbox which Charleshad despised the night before. Madame Grandet knitted her sleeves.Grandet twirled his thumbs for four hours, absorbed in calculationswhose results were on the morrow to astonish Saumur. No one came tovisit the family that day. The whole town was ringing with the news ofthe business trick just played by Grandet, the failure of his brother,and the arrival of his nephew. Obeying the desire to gossip over theirmutual interests, all the upper and middle-class wine-growers inSaumur met at Monsieur des Grassins, where terrible imprecations werebeing fulminated against the ex-mayor. Nanon was spinning, and thewhirr of her wheel was the only sound heard beneath the gray raftersof that silent hall.

°°°°"We don't waste our tongues," she said, showing her teeth, as largeand white as peeled almonds.

°°°°"Nothing should be wasted," answered Grandet, rousing himself from hisreverie. He saw a perspective of eight millions in three years, and hewas sailing along that sheet of gold. "Let us go to bed. I will bid mynephew good-night for the rest of you, and see if he will takeanything."

°°°°Madame Grandet remained on the landing of the first storey to hear theconversation that was about to take place between the goodman and hisnephew. Eugenie, bolder than her mother, went up two stairs."Well, nephew, you are in trouble. Yes, weep, that's natural. A fatheris a father; but we must bear our troubles patiently. I am a gooduncle to you, remember that. Come, take courage! Will you have alittle glass of wine?" (Wine costs nothing in Saumur, and they offerit as tea is offered in China.) "Why!" added Grandet, "you have got nolight! That's bad, very bad; you ought to see what you are about," andhe walked to the chimney-piece. "What's this?" he cried. "A waxcandle! How the devil did they filch a wax candle? The spendthriftswould tear down the ceilings of my house to boil the fellow's eggs."Hearing these words, mother and daughter slipped back into their roomsand burrowed in their beds, with the celerity of frightened micegetting back to their holes.

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you found a mine?" said the man, coming into thechamber of his wife.

°°°°"My friend, wait; I am saying my prayers," said the poor mother in atrembling voice.

°°°°"The devil take your good God!" growled Grandet in reply.Misers have no belief in a future life; the present is their all inall. This thought casts a terrible light upon our present epoch, inwhich, far more than at any former period, money sways the laws andpolitics and morals.  Institutions, books, men, and dogmas, allconspire to undermine belief in a future life,--a belief upon whichthe social edifice has rested for eighteen hundred years. The grave,as a means of transition, is little feared in our day. The future,which once opened to us beyond the requiems, has now been importedinto the present. To obtain /per fas et nefas/ a terrestrial paradiseof luxury and earthly enjoyment, to harden the heart and macerate thebody for the sake of fleeting possessions, as the martyrs oncesuffered all things to reach eternal joys, this is now the universalthought--a thought written everywhere, even in the very laws which askof the legislator, "What do you pay?" instead of asking him, "What doyou think?" When this doctrine has passed down from the bourgeoisie tothe populace, where will this country be?

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you done?" asked the old man.

°°°°"My friend, I am praying for you."

°°°°"Very good! Good-night; to-morrow morning we will have a talk."The poor woman went to sleep like a schoolboy who, not having learnedhis lessons, knows he will see his master's angry face on the morrow.At the moment when, filled with fear, she was drawing the sheet aboveher head that she might stifle hearing, Eugenie, in her night-gown andwith naked feet, ran to her side and kissed her brow.

°°°°"Oh! my good mother," she said, "to-morrow I will tell him it was I.""No; he would send you to Noyers. Leave me to manage it; he cannot eatme."

°°°°"Do you hear, mamma?"

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"/He/ is weeping still."

°°°°"Go to bed, my daughter; you will take cold in your feet: the floor isdamp."

°°°°*****

°°°°Thus passed the solemn day which was destined to weight upon the wholelife of the rich and poor heiress, whose sleep was never again to beso calm, nor yet so pure, as it had been up to this moment. It oftenhappens that certain actions of human life seem, literally speaking,improbable, though actual. Is not this because we constantly omit toturn the stream of psychological light upon our impulsivedeterminations, and fail to explain the subtile reasons, mysteriouslyconceived in our minds, which impelled them? Perhaps Eugenie's deeppassion should be analyzed in its most delicate fibres; for it became,scoffers might say, a malady which influenced her whole existence.Many people prefer to deny results rather than estimate the force ofties and links and bonds, which secretly join one fact to another inthe moral order. Here, therefore, Eugenie's past life will offer toobservers of human nature an explanation of her naive want ofreflection and the suddenness of the emotions which overflowed hersoul. The more tranquil her life had been, the more vivid was herwomanly pity, the more simple-minded were the sentiments now developedin her soul.

°°°°Made restless by the events of the day, she woke at intervals tolisten to her cousin, thinking she heard the sighs which still echoedin her heart. Sometimes she saw him dying of his trouble, sometimesshe dreamed that he fainted from hunger. Towards morning she wascertain that she heard a startling cry. She dressed at once and ran,in the dawning light, with a swift foot to her cousin's chamber, thedoor of which he had left open. The candle had burned down to thesocket. Charles, overcome by nature, was sleeping, dressed and sittingin an armchair beside the bed, on which his head rested; he dreamed asmen dream on an empty stomach. Eugenie might weep at her ease; shemight admire the young and handsome face blotted with grief, the eyesswollen with weeping, that seemed, sleeping as they were, to wellforth tears. Charles felt sympathetically the young girl's presence;he opened his eyes and saw her pitying him.

°°°°"Pardon me, my cousin," he said, evidently not knowing the hour northe place in which he found himself.

°°°°"There are hearts who hear you, cousin, and /we/ thought you mightneed something. You should go to bed; you tire yourself by sittingthus."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, then, adieu!"

°°°°She escaped, ashamed and happy at having gone there. Innocence alonecan dare to be so bold. Once enlightened, virtue makes hercalculations as well as vice. Eugenie, who had not trembled beside hercousin, could scarcely stand upon her legs when she regained herchamber. Her ignorant life had suddenly come to an end; she reasoned,she rebuked herself with many reproaches.

°°°°"What will he think of me? He will think that I love him!"That was what she most wished him to think. An honest love has its ownprescience, and knows that love begets love. What an event for thispoor solitary girl thus to have entered the chamber of a young man!Are there not thoughts and actions in the life of love which tocertain souls bear the full meaning of the holiest espousals? An hourlater she went to her mother and dressed her as usual. Then they bothcame down and sat in their places before the window waiting forGrandet, with that cruel anxiety which, according to the individualcharacter, freezes the heart or warms it, shrivels or dilates it, whena scene is feared, a punishment expected,--a feeling so natural thateven domestic animals possess it, and whine at the slightest pain ofpunishment, though they make no outcry when they inadvertently hurtthemselves. The goodman came down; but he spoke to his wife with anabsent manner, kissed Eugenie, and sat down to table without appearingto remember his threats of the night before.

°°°°"What has become of my nephew? The lad gives no trouble.""Monsieur, he is asleep," answered Nanon.

°°°°"So much the better; he won't want a wax candle," said Grandet in ajeering tone.

°°°°This unusual clemency, this bitter gaiety, struck Madame Grandet withamazement, and she looked at her husband attentively. The goodman--here it may be well to explain that in Touraine, Anjou, Pitou, andBretagne the word "goodman," already used to designate Grandet, isbestowed as often upon harsh and cruel men as upon those of kindlytemperament, when either have reached a certain age; the title meansnothing on the score of individual gentleness--the goodman took hishat and gloves, saying as he went out,--

°°°°"I am going to loiter about the market-place and find Cruchot.""Eugenie, your father certainly has something on his mind."Grandet, who was a poor sleeper, employed half his nights in thepreliminary calculations which gave such astonishing accuracy to hisviews and observations and schemes, and secured to them the unfailingsuccess at sight of which his townsmen stood amazed. All human poweris a compound of time and patience. Powerful beings will and wait. Thelife of a miser is the constant exercise of human power put to theservice of self. It rests on two sentiments only,--self-love and self-interest; but self-interest being to a certain extent compact andintelligent self-love, the visible sign of real superiority, itfollows that self-love and self-interest are two parts of the samewhole,--egotism. From this arises, perhaps, the excessive curiosityshown in the habits of a miser's life whenever they are put before theworld. Every nature holds by a thread to those beings who challengeall human sentiments by concentrating all in one passion. Where is theman without desire? and what social desire can be satisfied withoutmoney?

°°°°Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

°°°°In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

°°°°"My cousin!"

°°°°"Yes, cousin."

°°°°"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

°°°°"Where you like."

°°°°"How do you feel?"

°°°°"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

°°°°This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

°°°°She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

°°°°That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

°°°°"What troubles you?" she said.

°°°°"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

°°°°Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

°°°°When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

°°°°"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

°°°°"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

°°°°Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

°°°°"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

°°°°"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

°°°°The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

°°°°"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

°°°°Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

°°°°"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

°°°°"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

°°°°*****

°°°°About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

°°°°VII

°°°°At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

°°°°The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

°°°°"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

°°°°"Certainly, nephew."

°°°°As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

°°°°He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

°°°°"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

°°°°"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

°°°°"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

°°°°"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

°°°°"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

°°°°"--is threatened with insolvency--"

°°°°"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

°°°°"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

°°°°"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

°°°°"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

°°°°"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

°°°°"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

°°°°"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

°°°°"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

°°°°"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

°°°°"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

°°°°Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

°°°°"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

°°°°"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

°°°°"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

°°°°"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Exactly so," said the president.

°°°°"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

°°°°"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

°°°°"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

°°°°"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

°°°°"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

°°°°"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

°°°°"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

°°°°"Bentham, an Englishman.'

°°°°"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

°°°°"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

°°°°"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

°°°°"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

°°°°"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

°°°°"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

°°°°"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

°°°°"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

°°°°"That's very true."

°°°°"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

°°°°"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

°°°°"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

°°°°"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

°°°°A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

°°°°"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

°°°°He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

°°°°"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

°°°°"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

°°°°These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

°°°°"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

°°°°"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

°°°°The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

°°°°"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

°°°°She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

°°°°"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

°°°°"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

°°°°"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

°°°°"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

°°°°"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

°°°°"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

°°°°"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

°°°°"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

°°°°"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

°°°°The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

°°°°"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

°°°°"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

°°°°"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

°°°°When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

°°°°"Are not they fuming, hein?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

°°°°"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

°°°°In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

°°°°When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

°°°°"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

°°°°So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

°°°°"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

°°°°Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

°°°°"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

°°°°"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

°°°°The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

°°°°"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

°°°°"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

°°°°"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

°°°°"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

°°°°"I didn't know where."

°°°°"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

°°°°"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

°°°°"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

°°°°"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

°°°°The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

°°°°VIII

°°°°"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

°°°°"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

°°°°"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

°°°°"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

°°°°These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

°°°°She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

°°°°"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

°°°°My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

°°°°great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

°°°°foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

°°°°fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

°°°°when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

°°°°yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

°°°°plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

°°°°If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

°°°°that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

°°°°fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

°°°°my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

°°°°me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

°°°°so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

°°°°the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

°°°°bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

°°°°killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

°°°°there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

°°°°ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

°°°°I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

°°°°last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

°°°°enterprise.

°°°°"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

°°°°She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

°°°°I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

°°°°hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

°°°°not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

°°°°even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

°°°°have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

°°°°to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

°°°°world like other men who have started young without a sou and

°°°°brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

°°°°faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

°°°°another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

°°°°so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

°°°°my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

°°°°life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

°°°°Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

°°°°young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

°°°°caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

°°°°family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

°°°°were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

°°°°Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

°°°°grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

°°°°with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

°°°°your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

°°°°expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

°°°°accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

°°°°Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

°°°°When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

°°°°ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

°°°°hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

°°°°your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

°°°°spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

°°°°cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

°°°°ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

°°°°depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

°°°°of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

°°°°poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

°°°°see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

°°°°life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

°°°°can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

°°°°necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

°°°°have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

°°°°face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

°°°°seems to me--

°°°°"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

°°°°Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

°°°°Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

°°°°"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

°°°°Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

°°°°Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

°°°°My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

°°°°friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

°°°°of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

°°°°settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

°°°°can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

°°°°have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

°°°°have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

°°°°and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

°°°°can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

°°°°horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

°°°°keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

°°°°the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

°°°°will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

°°°°these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

°°°°nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

°°°°give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

°°°°his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

°°°°travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

°°°°them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

°°°°do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

°°°°seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

°°°°British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

°°°°pay him--

°°°°"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

°°°°Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

°°°°"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

°°°°"I have read those letters."

°°°°Charles colored.

°°°°"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

°°°°"And what?" asked Charles.

°°°°"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

°°°°"My dear cousin--"

°°°°"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

°°°°Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

°°°°"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

°°°°Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

°°°°As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

°°°°"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

°°°°Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

°°°°"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

°°°°"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

°°°°"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

°°°°"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

°°°°Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

°°°°"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

°°°°"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

°°°°"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

°°°°"But he owns Froidfond."

°°°°"What is Froidfond worth?"

°°°°"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

°°°°"Nothing but a poor farm!"

°°°°"He has vineyards and fields."

°°°°"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

°°°°"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

°°°°Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

°°°°Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

°°°°It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

°°°°"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

°°°°"Nothing," answered the old man.

°°°°Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

°°°°"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

°°°°"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

°°°°"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

°°°°"Say /was/ worth--"

°°°°"Where the devil have they got any?"

°°°°"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

°°°°"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

°°°°"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

°°°°"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

°°°°"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

°°°°Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

°°°°"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

°°°°The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

°°°°"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

°°°°Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

°°°°"Dans les gardes francaises

°°°°J'avais un bon papa."

°°°°Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

°°°°"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

°°°°He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

°°°°"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

°°°°"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

°°°°"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

°°°°"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

°°°°IX

°°°°The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

°°°°For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

°°°°After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

°°°°Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

°°°°"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

°°°°"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

°°°°"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

°°°°"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

°°°°"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

°°°°"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

°°°°"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

°°°°"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

°°°°"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

°°°°"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

°°°°The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

°°°°"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

°°°°Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

°°°°"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

°°°°He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

°°°°"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

°°°°"I must," he said, bowing his head.

°°°°For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

°°°°"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

°°°°"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

°°°°When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

°°°°"Do you love me?" she said.

°°°°"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

°°°°"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

°°°°She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

°°°°"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

°°°°"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

°°°°The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

°°°°"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

°°°°"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

°°°°"Then my heart will be always there."

°°°°"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

°°°°No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

°°°°"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

°°°°At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

°°°°"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

°°°°"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

°°°°"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

°°°°Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

°°°°Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

°°°°"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

°°°°Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

°°°°In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

°°°°Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

°°°°In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

°°°°"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

°°°°Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

°°°°"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

°°°°"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

°°°°The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

°°°°But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

°°°°As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

°°°°"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

°°°°"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

°°°°"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

°°°°In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

°°°°*****

°°°°In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

°°°°"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

°°°°Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

°°°°"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

°°°°X

°°°°Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

°°°°"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

°°°°The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

°°°°"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

°°°°"Where could we have got the money?"

°°°°"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

°°°°"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

°°°°Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

°°°°"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

°°°°There was a moment's silence.

°°°°"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

°°°°"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

°°°°"I'm always gay,--

°°°°"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

°°°°Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

°°°°he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

°°°°Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

°°°°"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

°°°°The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

°°°°When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

°°°°"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

°°°°"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

°°°°"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

°°°°"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

°°°°"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

°°°°"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur."

°°°°"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

°°°°"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

°°°°Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

°°°°"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

°°°°"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

°°°°"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

°°°°"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

°°°°The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

°°°°"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

°°°°At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

°°°°"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

°°°°"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

°°°°The two women were dumb.

°°°°"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

°°°°Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

°°°°"I have not got /my/ gold."

°°°°"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

°°°°"No, I have not got it."

°°°°"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

°°°°"No."

°°°°"By the shears of my father!"

°°°°Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

°°°°"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

°°°°Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

°°°°"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

°°°°Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

°°°°"Yes, father."

°°°°She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

°°°°"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

°°°°"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

°°°°Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

°°°°"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

°°°°"What use?"

°°°°"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

°°°°"And this is mine."

°°°°"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

°°°°"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

°°°°"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

°°°°She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

°°°°"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

°°°°Eugenie was silent and impassive.

°°°°"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

°°°°"You are a child."

°°°°"Of age."

°°°°Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

°°°°He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

°°°°Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

°°°°"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

°°°°Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

°°°°"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

°°°°"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

°°°°"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

°°°°"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

°°°°Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

°°°°"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

°°°°"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

°°°°"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

°°°°"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

°°°°"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

°°°°"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

°°°°He looked fixedly at his wife.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

°°°°"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

°°°°"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

°°°°"I will ask God to punish only me."

°°°°"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

°°°°"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

°°°°"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

°°°°"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

°°°°*****

°°°°Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

°°°°"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

°°°°"It is grease I'm trying out."

°°°°"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

°°°°The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

°°°°"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

°°°°At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

°°°°"How is Madame Grandet?"

°°°°"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

°°°°"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

°°°°They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

°°°°"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

°°°°When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

°°°°"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

°°°°"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

°°°°XI

°°°°For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

°°°°"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

°°°°"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

°°°°Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

°°°°One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

°°°°"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

°°°°"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

°°°°"All" meant "him."

°°°°"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

°°°°"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

°°°°Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

°°°°"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

°°°°Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

°°°°When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

°°°°"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

°°°°At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

°°°°"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

°°°°"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

°°°°"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

°°°°On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

°°°°"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

°°°°"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

°°°°"What do you mean?"

°°°°"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

°°°°"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

°°°°These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

°°°°"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

°°°°"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

°°°°"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

°°°°"She has given away her gold!"

°°°°"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

°°°°"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

°°°°"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

°°°°"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

°°°°"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

°°°°"How much?"

°°°°"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

°°°°"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

°°°°After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

°°°°"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

°°°°"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

°°°°"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

°°°°"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

°°°°"She has not a month to live."

°°°°Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

°°°°"What can be done?"

°°°°"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

°°°°"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

°°°°"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

°°°°"The scoundrels!"

°°°°"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

°°°°"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

°°°°He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

°°°°"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

°°°°"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

°°°°But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

°°°°"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

°°°°He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

°°°°"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

°°°°"O God, have pity upon us!"

°°°°The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

°°°°"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

°°°°Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

°°°°"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

°°°°"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

°°°°"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

°°°°"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

°°°°"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

°°°°Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

°°°°"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

°°°°"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

°°°°The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

°°°°"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

°°°°"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

°°°°"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

°°°°Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

°°°°"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

°°°°Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

°°°°"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

°°°°"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

°°°°"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

°°°°"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

°°°°XII

°°°°On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

°°°°"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

°°°°"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

°°°°"Oh! father--"

°°°°"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

°°°°"What is it you wish me to do?"

°°°°"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

°°°°"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

°°°°"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

°°°°"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

°°°°"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

°°°°Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

°°°°"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

°°°°"I will do all you wish, father."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

°°°°"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

°°°°He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

°°°°"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

°°°°The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

°°°°"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

°°°°"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

°°°°"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

°°°°Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

°°°°*****

°°°°Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

°°°°At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

°°°°"Yes, my father," she would answer.

°°°°"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

°°°°Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

°°°°"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

°°°°When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

°°°°"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

°°°°"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

°°°°*****

°°°°Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

°°°°"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

°°°°The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

°°°°"Nanon, we are alone--"

°°°°"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

°°°°"The ocean is between us," she said.

°°°°While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

°°°°"Fast colors!" said the draper.

°°°°"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

°°°°"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

°°°°When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

°°°°At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

°°°°It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

°°°°"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

°°°°"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

°°°°"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

°°°°"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

°°°°Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

°°°°Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

°°°°"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

°°°°"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

°°°°XIII

°°°°While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

°°°°With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

°°°°Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

°°°°Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

°°°°"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

°°°°Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

°°°°Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

°°°°"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

°°°°*****

°°°°At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

°°°°"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

°°°°The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

°°°°"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

°°°°Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

°°°°"Read it, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

°°°°Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

°°°°My dear Cousin,--

°°°°"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

°°°°You--

°°°°"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

°°°°"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

°°°°"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

°°°°She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

°°°°My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

°°°°success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

°°°°rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

°°°°together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

°°°°des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

°°°°we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

°°°°Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

°°°°the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

°°°°be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

°°°°life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

°°°°To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

°°°°dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

°°°°realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

°°°°from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

°°°°forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

°°°°long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

°°°°Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

°°°°--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

°°°°forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

°°°°night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

°°°°to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

°°°°heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

°°°°Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

°°°°sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

°°°°deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

°°°°all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

°°°°present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

°°°°all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

°°°°Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

°°°°your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

°°°°will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

°°°°education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

°°°°with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

°°°°myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

°°°°to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

°°°°think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

°°°°be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

°°°°right to understand it and to judge it.

°°°°I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

°°°°francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

°°°°Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

°°°°me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

°°°°Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

°°°°dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

°°°°marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

°°°°advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

°°°°are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

°°°°my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

°°°°have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

°°°°year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

°°°°proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

°°°°You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

°°°°heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

°°°°years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

°°°°but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

°°°°remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

°°°°which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

°°°°and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

°°°°you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

°°°°convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

°°°°putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

°°°°of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

°°°°ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

°°°°simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

°°°°Your devoted cousin,

°°°°Charles.

°°°°"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

°°°°P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

°°°°thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

°°°°capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

°°°°am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

°°°°which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

°°°°gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

°°°°hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

°°°°"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

°°°°Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

°°°°"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

°°°°Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

°°°°This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

°°°°"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

°°°°"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

°°°°"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

°°°°"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

°°°°"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

°°°°At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

°°°°"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

°°°°"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

°°°°"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

°°°°"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

°°°°Eugenie read the following letter:--

°°°°My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

°°°°has been in Paris about a month--

°°°°"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

°°°°I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

°°°°Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

°°°°the banns are published--

°°°°"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

°°°°The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

°°°°will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

°°°°tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

°°°°business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

°°°°keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

°°°°fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

°°°°devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

°°°°/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

°°°°the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

°°°°francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

°°°°there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

°°°°creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

°°°°I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

°°°°Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

°°°°Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

°°°°for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

°°°°have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

°°°°happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

°°°°matter before you have spoken to her about it--

°°°°There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

°°°°"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

°°°°"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

°°°°"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

°°°°"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

°°°°"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

°°°°The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

°°°°"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

°°°°There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

°°°°"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

°°°°"A love game," said the notary.

°°°°Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

°°°°"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

°°°°"I am ready for all things," said the president.

°°°°"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

°°°°The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

°°°°"I will be your slave!" he said.

°°°°"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

°°°°The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

°°°°When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

°°°°The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

°°°°The president gave Charles the following letter:--

°°°°My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

°°°°place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

°°°°also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

°°°°sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

°°°°I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

°°°°Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

°°°°mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

°°°°I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

°°°°not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

°°°°according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

°°°°our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

°°°°your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

°°°°in your cousin

°°°°Eugenie.

°°°°The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

°°°°"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

°°°°"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

°°°°Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

°°°°"Seventeen mil--"

°°°°"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

°°°°"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

°°°°"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

°°°°"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

°°°°"In money?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

°°°°"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

°°°°"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

°°°°The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

°°°°"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

°°°°The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

°°°°"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

°°°°"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

°°°°Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

°°°°God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

°°°°The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

°°°°Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

°°°°End





°°°°Colonel Chabert

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage and Clara Bell

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Madame la Comtesse Ida de Bocarme nee du Chasteler.

°°°°COLONEL CHABERT

°°°°"HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!"

°°°°This exclamation was made by a lawyer's clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper--a messenger in fact--who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread with a hearty appetite. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

°°°°"Come, Simonnin, don't play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!" said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

°°°°The lawyer's messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and /billets-doux/ keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

°°°°"If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?" asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

°°°°And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

°°°°"What trick can we play that cove?" said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

°°°°Then he went on improvising:

°°°°"/But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth/--(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned-- you, as you engross it!)--/when he resumed the reins of Government, understood/--(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)--/the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!/--(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)--/and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents/--('numerous' is flattering, and ought to please the Bench)--/all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in/--Stop," said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, "that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.--Well," he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, "well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!"

°°°°And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating--"/given in/--Are you ready?"

°°°°"Yes," cried the three writers.

°°°°It all went all together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

°°°°"/Given in/--Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our /i/'s and cross our /t/'s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages."

°°°°"By Jingo!" repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

°°°°"What! have you written /by Jingo/?" cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

°°°°"Why, yes," said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor's copy, "he has written, '/We must dot our i's/' and spelt it /by Gingo/!"

°°°°All the clerks shouted with laughter.

°°°°"Why! Monsieur Hure, you take 'By Jingo' for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!" exclaimed Simonnin.

°°°°"Scratch it cleanly out," said the head clerk. "If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the 'Shoulder arms!' of the law."

°°°°"/Given in--in/?" asked Godeschal.--"Tell me when, Boucard."

°°°°"June 1814," replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

°°°°A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, "Come in!"

°°°°Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers--/broutilles/ (odds and ends) in French law jargon--and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

°°°°The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk's cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk's table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

°°°°The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,--all the glory of a lawyer's office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine --neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of /remainders/, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to /Chlet/)--a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

°°°°So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients--something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities--an attorney's office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

°°°°But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man's soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

°°°°"Where is my penknife?"

°°°°"I am eating my breakfast."

°°°°"You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen!"

°°°°These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

°°°°"Monsieur, is your master at home?"

°°°°The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, "I am deaf."

°°°°"What do you want, sir?" asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

°°°°"This is the fifth time I have called," replied the victim. "I wish to speak to M. Derville."

°°°°"On business?"

°°°°"Yes, but I can explain it to no one but--"

°°°°"M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to----"

°°°°The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers' clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the old man, "as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up."

°°°°Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

°°°°"It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning." The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in "parties," went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

°°°°"I will come again to-night," said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

°°°°The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

°°°°"What do you think of that for a cracked pot?" said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

°°°°"He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again," said a clerk.

°°°°"He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay," said the head clerk.

°°°°"No, he is a retired concierge," said Godeschal.

°°°°"I bet you he is a nobleman," cried Boucard.

°°°°"I bet you he has been a porter," retorted Godeschal. "Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body's. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch."

°°°°"He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch," cried Desroches. "It has been known!"

°°°°"No," Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, "I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic."

°°°°"I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Done with you," answered Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur! Monsieur!" shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

°°°°"What are you at now, Simonnin?" asked Boucard.

°°°°"I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know."

°°°°All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

°°°°"What can we say to him?" cried Godeschal.

°°°°"Leave it to me," replied Boucard.

°°°°The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Boucard, "will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know----"

°°°°"Chabert."

°°°°"The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?" asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

°°°°"The same, monsieur," replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

°°°°"Whew!"

°°°°"Done brown!"

°°°°"Poof!"

°°°°"Oh!"

°°°°"Ah!"

°°°°"Boum!"

°°°°"The old rogue!"

°°°°"Ting-a-ring-ting!"

°°°°"Sold again!"

°°°°"Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying," said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

°°°°There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopeia of the language would fail to represent.

°°°°"Which theatre shall we go to?"

°°°°"To the opera," cried the head clerk.

°°°°"In the first place," said Godeschal, "I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui."

°°°°"Madame Saqui is not the play."

°°°°"What is a play?" replied Godeschal. "First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen--"

°°°°"But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!" cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

°°°°"To be seen for money," Godeschal added.

°°°°"But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective," said Desroches.

°°°°"But do listen to me!"

°°°°"You are talking nonsense, my dear boy," said Boucard.

°°°°"Is Curtius' a play?" said Godeschal.

°°°°"No," said the head clerk, "it is a collection of figures--but it is a spectacle."

°°°°"I bet you a hundred francs to a sou," Godeschal resumed, "that Curtius' Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy."

°°°°"And so on, and so forth!" said Simonnin.

°°°°"You mind I don't box your ears!" said Godeschal.

°°°°The clerk shrugged their shoulders.

°°°°"Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us," he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. "On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients."

°°°°"Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow," said Boucard. "To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!"

°°°°"If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?" said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal's.

°°°°"Since nothing is settled," said Boucard, "let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in 'Nero.' Simonnin may go to the pit."

°°°°And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

°°°°"/Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen/ (in words)," said Godeschal. "Ready?"

°°°°"Yes," replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

°°°°"/And we hope that my lords on the Bench/," the extemporizing clerk went on. "Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself."

°°°°"Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines," said Boucard.

°°°°"/We hope/," Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, "/that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth/----"

°°°°"Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn't you like a glass of water?" said the little messenger.

°°°°"That imp of a boy!" said Boucard. "Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides."

°°°°"/Here set forth/," Godeschal went on. "Add /in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse/ (at full length) /de Grandlieu/."

°°°°"What!" cried the chief, "are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor--a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of 'inasmuch,' and go to the Courts myself."

°°°°This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, "Those were good times."

°°°°At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maitre Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

°°°°Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at finding the head clerk busily arranging in a convenient order on his master's dining-room table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take a seat, which the client did.

°°°°"On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you named such an hour for an interview," said the old man, with the forced mirth of a ruined man, who does his best to smile.

°°°°"The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too," replied the man, going on with his work. "M. Derville chooses this hour for studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect is freer at this hour--the only time when he can have the silence and quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case, read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business, then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money."

°°°°As he listened to this explanation, the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an expression so bereft of intelligence, that the clerk, after looking at him, thought no more about him.

°°°°A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers. The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius' collection to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This quiescence would not have been a subject for astonishment if it had not completed the supernatural aspect of the man's whole person. The old soldier was dry and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, if I may use such a vulgar expression, was as the face of the dead. Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

°°°°Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head was due to some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by Rembrandt, without a frame. The brim of the hat which covered the old man's brow cast a black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This grotesque effect, though natural, threw into relief by contrast the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a certain look of melancholy madness, and the deteriorating symptoms characteristic of senility, giving the face an indescribably ill- starred look which no human words could render.

°°°°But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had worn into this face, as drops of water from the sky falling on fine marble at last destroy its beauty. A physician, an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama at the sight of its sublime horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques which artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of the lithographic stone while chatting with a friend.

°°°°On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful reverie in silence and at night. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow to the young man; the leather lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was, "His intelligence must have escaped through that cut."

°°°°"If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!" thought Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Derville, "to whom have I the honor of speaking?"

°°°°"To Colonel Chabert."

°°°°"Which?"

°°°°"He who was killed at Eylau," replied the old man.

°°°°On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each other, as much as to say, "He is mad."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Colonel went on, "I wish to confide to you the secret of my position."

°°°°A thing worthy of note is the natural intrepidity of lawyers. Whether from the habit of receiving a great many persons, or from the deep sense of the protection conferred on them by the law, or from confidence in their missions, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing, like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

°°°°"During the day, sir," said the attorney, "I am not so miserly of my time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise. Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I may consider necessary. Speak."

°°°°Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he turned over the bundles of papers.

°°°°"You know, perhaps," said the dead man, "that I commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat's famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is a historical fact, recorded in /Victoires et Conquetes/, where it is related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor, after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the enemy's cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers, perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse. Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men, fifteen hundred of them--there might have been more! My death was announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution --for he was fond of me, was the master--wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and bring me into Hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, for he was very busy, 'Go and see whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.' These rascally saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse, and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was probably made out in accordance with the rules of military jurisprudence."

°°°°As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and relate a story so probable though so strange, the young lawyer ceased fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

°°°°"Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud," he said, interrupting the speaker, "Colonel Chabert's widow?"

°°°°"My wife--yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the custom in time of the war, and thrown into the common grave by the men ordered to bury the dead?

°°°°"Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded. Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a ball.

°°°°"When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. the little air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room. I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die. This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard--or I thought I heard, I will assert nothing--groans from the world of dead among whom I was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very indistinct, in spite of my impressions of far more acute suffering I was fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

°°°°"But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such as I have never known elsewhere--literally, the silence of the grave. At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would seem that, thanks to the carelessness and the haste with which we had been pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules! A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unhoped-for help, I must have perished. But with a fury you may imagine, I began to work my way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which had no doubt been thrown over us--I say us, as if there had been others living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms. This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw daylight, but through snow!

°°°°"At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse, who knows, had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow. However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole, where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the moment for saying, 'Respect courage in misfortune!' In short, monsieur, after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy, of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them they got me to their poor hovel.

°°°°"It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy--allow me to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which, from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

°°°°"You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave as naked as I came from my mother's; so that six months afterwards, when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert, and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man, named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

°°°°"Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence, nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond, begging my bread, treated as a madman when I have told my story, without ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert. For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample reason for shutting a man up.

°°°°"At the end of two years' detention, which I was compelled to submit to, after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, 'Here is a poor man who thinks he is Colonel Chabert' to people who would reply, 'Poor fellow!' I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh, monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I----"

°°°°Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study, which Derville respected.

°°°°"One fine day," his visitor resumed, "one spring day, they gave me the key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me. If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name, no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field- Marshal in Austria or Russia. Who knows?"

°°°°"Monsieur," said the attorney, "you have upset all my ideas. I feel as if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you."

°°°°"You are the only person," said the Colonel, with a melancholy look, "who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary documents to begin my lawsuit--"

°°°°"What lawsuit?" said the attorney, who had forgotten his client's painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

°°°°"Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a son. When I tell lawyers these things--men of sense; when I propose-- I, a beggar--to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I--a dead man--bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold politeness, which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler or a madman--it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts, under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!"

°°°°"Pray resume your narrative," said Derville.

°°°°" 'Pray resume it!' " cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer's hand. "That is the first polite word I have heard since----"

°°°°The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing and unutterable eloquence that lies in the eyes, in a gesture, even in silence, entirely convinced Derville, and touched him deeply.

°°°°"Listen, monsieur," said he; "I have this evening won three hundred francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his fortune to make. Proceed."

°°°°The Colonel, as he called himself, sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps it was in obedience to the inexplicable feeling, the latent germ in every man's heart, to which we owe the experiments of alchemists, the passion for glory, the discoveries of astronomy and of physics, everything which prompts man to expand his being by multiplying himself through deeds or ideas. In his mind the /Ego/ was now but a secondary object, just as the vanity of success or the pleasures of winning become dearer to the gambler than the object he has at stake. The young lawyer's words were as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer's office the ten gold pieces which had so long been refused him by so many people, and in so many ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured. There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us, it is like a thunderbolt; they burn us. The poor man's gratitude was too great to find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found his voice.

°°°°"Where was I?" said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier, and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in France.

°°°°"At Stuttgart. You were out of prison," said Derville.

°°°°"You know my wife?" asked the Colonel.

°°°°"Yes," said Derville, with a bow.

°°°°"What is she like?"

°°°°"Still quite charming."

°°°°The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation that is characteristic of men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, with a sort of cheerfulness--for he breathed again, the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave; he had just melted a covering of snow less easily thawed than that which had once before frozen his head; and he drew a deep breath, as if he had just escaped from a dungeon--"Monsieur, if I had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a /sans-culotte/. I was more like an Esquimaux than a Frenchman--I, who had formerly been considered one of the smartest of fops in 1799!--I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

°°°°"Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier's name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; but though I recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin's mouth opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known. It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was, then, unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former friends!

°°°°"I had once saved Boutin's life, but it was only the repayment of a debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but, like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I recalled them to his mind his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me, were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered triumphantly.

°°°°"He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon's first abdication. That news was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

°°°°"We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland, Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies. Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert. That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage, whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose only protector is the Almighty.--Nay, I am wrong! I had a father--the Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see /his Chabert/, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my wife's silence!

°°°°"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar. Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me. I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

°°°°"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu. There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me! Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

°°°°"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur, knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury, "when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

°°°°"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness; well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not know what will become of me!"

°°°°With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

°°°°"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg, it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

°°°°"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I fail, I can die--but not alone."

°°°°The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy, lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

°°°°"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

°°°°"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

°°°°"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to recover; you are rich."

°°°°This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

°°°°"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

°°°°The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville, and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

°°°°"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

°°°°The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs, and held a light for him.

°°°°"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the day."

°°°°When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

°°°°"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.

°°°°About three months after this interview, at night, in Derville's room, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville's account to his eccentric client, came to consult the attorney on a serious matter, and began by begging him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

°°°°"Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?" said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought up the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

°°°°"I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair," replied Derville. "My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty- five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism."

°°°°As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers his head clerk had laid out for him. His eye was struck by the appearance of the stamps--long, square, and triangular, in red and blue ink, which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

°°°°"Ah ha!" said he with a laugh, "here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!"

°°°°He took up the letter and opened it; but he could not read it; it was written in German.

°°°°"Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately," said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

°°°°The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, all perfectly regular and duly witnessed, and legally stamped to serve as evidence in law. He also informed him that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

°°°°"This looks like business," cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. "But look here, my boy," he went on, addressing the notary, "I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?"

°°°°"We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin," interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

°°°°"Well, was it not that ill-used man who has just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients' money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert's estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud."

°°°°"Yes," said Crottat. "It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollections, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at the time of his decease, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury."

°°°°"So that Comte Chabert's personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?"

°°°°"Consequently so it was, old fellow!" said Crottat. "You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other."

°°°°Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint- Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were rather too deep for cab wheels. Looking about him on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, "Vergniaud, dairyman." To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, all painted in white. The gate was open, and no doubt remained open all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels built in the neighborhood of Paris, which are like nothing else, not even the most wretched dwellings in the country, of which they have all the poverty without their poetry.

°°°°Indeed, in the midst of the fields, even a hovel may have a certain grace derived from the pure air, the verdure, the open country--a hill, a serpentine road, vineyards, quickset hedges, moss-grown thatch and rural implements; but poverty in Paris gains dignity only by horror. Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found a legitimate use; they had been collected from the various demolitions which are going on every day in Paris. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, "Fancy Goods." The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed to be the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil, and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall of this frail construction, which seemed rather more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred their numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes, the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough deal boards nailed so as to overlap, and shabbily thatched with rushes.

°°°°Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of the necessity for being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags that were used to clean them, fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat was munching the shoots of a starved and dusty vine that clung to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, was licking them over. The fowls, scared by Derville's approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

°°°°"And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!" said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the general effect of the squalid scene.

°°°°The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, in the hope that they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole thing tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither of them replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity, if I may combine those two words. Derville repeated his questions, but without success. Provoked by the saucy cunning of these three imps, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry which young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

°°°°The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold of his doorway with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely- colored pipe--a technical phrase to a smoker--a humble, short clay pipe of the kind called "/brule-queule/." He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join his benefactor the sooner, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

°°°°"Silence in the ranks!"

°°°°The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

°°°°"Why did you not write to me?" he said to Derville. "Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there," he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer's hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

°°°°Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; and, in fact, Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel's bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread two or three of those old fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating salt-petre, green with mould, and full of cracks, were so excessively damp that on the side where the Colonel's bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the /Bulletins de la Grande Armee/, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel's reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit to Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived in them traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

°°°°"Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?" he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

°°°°"But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!"

°°°°The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the deplorable experience which they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

°°°°"Here," said he to himself, "is a man who has of course spent my money in satisfying a trooper's three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!"

°°°°"To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----" And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--"I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace."

°°°°Derville reflected that there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums of money he had advanced, so he merely said:

°°°°"But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, but where you would have been better lodged?"

°°°°"Why," replied the Colonel, "the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me /gratis/ for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old /Egyptian/--"

°°°°"An Egyptian!"

°°°°"We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read."

°°°°"He might have lodged you better for your money," said Derville.

°°°°"Bah!" said the Colonel, "his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune . . . However, it does very well."

°°°°"Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!"

°°°°"Curse the money! To think I haven't got any!" he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

°°°°Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

°°°°"Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business," said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

°°°°"To me," said the soldier, "it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau."

°°°°"Things are not done so in the legal world," said Derville. "Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing that justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

°°°°"In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets."

°°°°"And my fortune?"

°°°°"Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?"

°°°°"Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?"

°°°°"My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs."

°°°°"And you call that justice!" said the Colonel, in dismay.

°°°°"Why, certainly--"

°°°°"A pretty kind of justice!"

°°°°"So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, that what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor."

°°°°"But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----"

°°°°"I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to."

°°°°"That would be to sell my wife!"

°°°°"With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in the position in which you are, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice."

°°°°"Let us go together."

°°°°"What, just as you are?" said the lawyer. "No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot."

°°°°"Can I possibly gain it?"

°°°°"On every count," replied Derville. "But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor."

°°°°"To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that," said he simply.

°°°°"Well, until then," Derville went on, "will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it."

°°°°Large tears gathered in the poor veteran's faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

°°°°"I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!" he cried. "I will call out: 'I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!'--The statue--he--he will know me."

°°°°"And you will find yourself in Charenton."

°°°°At this terrible name the soldier's transports collapsed.

°°°°"And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?"

°°°°"The war office!" said Derville. "Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire."

°°°°The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

°°°°His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements, which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

°°°°Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

°°°°"Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests."

°°°°"Do what you will," said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death."

°°°°"Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?"

°°°°"That is not my view of it," said the lawyer. "We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud's intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension."

°°°°"Well, proceed then," said Chabert. "I put myself entirely in your hands."

°°°°"I will send you a power of attorney to sign," said Derville. "Good- bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me."

°°°°Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer's hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him excepting with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

°°°°During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer's; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir," said he, taking Derville by the arm, "if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General's."

°°°°"And what then?" replied Derville. "What concern have you with him?-- But who are you?" said the cautious lawyer.

°°°°"I am Louis Vergniaud," he replied at once. "I have a few words to say to you."

°°°°"So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?"

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think? --Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it's neighbors' fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings."

°°°°"He?"

°°°°"Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, 'Really, General----' 'Bah!' says he, 'I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.'--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados-- Do you know him, sir?"

°°°°"But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you."

°°°°"He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it's just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----"

°°°°Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

°°°°"On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!" thought he.

°°°°"All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure."

°°°°"And will that be soon?"

°°°°"Why, yes."

°°°°"Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!" and the cowkeeper's tanned face seemed to expand.

°°°°"Now," said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, "let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but . . ."

°°°°And he set to work to study the Countess' position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves up when concocting their own plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

°°°°But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer's cleverness.

°°°°Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old /Parlement/ of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon's blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor's advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised the restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

°°°°The Emperor fell.

°°°°At the time of Comte Chabert's death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband's fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving of this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband's will; but Napoleon's hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count's marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

°°°°Then came the Restoration. The Count's political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the "Gulf of Revolution should be closed"--for this phrase of the King's, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer's preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

°°°°Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master's influence, and he made the Count's fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness of which most women have a share more or less, understood the man's motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well, that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

°°°°The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess' abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress' capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on the housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess' greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

°°°°At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert's widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

°°°°A speech he made, /a propos/ of Talleyrand's marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess' heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband's return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

°°°°"There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud's position," said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. "How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the /pairie/ by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the /Parlement/ is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King's great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess," thought he as he went up the steps.

°°°°Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

°°°°She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, while playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert's wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

°°°°"The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them."

°°°°A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

°°°°"Good-morning, Monsieur Derville," said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

°°°°"Madame," said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. "I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter."

°°°°"I am so /grieved/, M. le Comte is away--"

°°°°"I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count."

°°°°"Then I will send for Delbecq," said she.

°°°°"He would be of no use to you, clever as he is," replied Derville. "Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!"

°°°°"Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?" said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

°°°°"Madame," he said with cold and piercing solemnity, "you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point."

°°°°"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

°°°°"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

°°°°"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come."

°°°°"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

°°°°"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--"

°°°°"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

°°°°"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----"

°°°°The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's attorney, be so good as to--"

°°°°"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening."

°°°°"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

°°°°"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

°°°°"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

°°°°"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you."

°°°°"And who is he?"

°°°°"Comte Ferraud."

°°°°"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--"

°°°°"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--"

°°°°"He would defend me, monsieur."

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

°°°°"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

°°°°The Countess turned pale.

°°°°"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

°°°°"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?"

°°°°"Compromise!" said Derville.

°°°°"Does he still love me?" she said.

°°°°"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

°°°°The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

°°°°"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.

°°°°A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and seemed to have acquired youth and /impasto/, to borrow a picturesque word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture and a book.

°°°°When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville's office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off, when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a dress which, though simple, was cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was. She wore a pretty drawn bonnet lined with pink, which framed her face to perfection, softening its outlines and making it look younger.

°°°°If the clients were rejuvenescent, the office was unaltered, and presented the same picture as that described at the beginning of this story. Simonnin was eating his breakfast, his shoulder leaning against the window, which was then open, and he was staring up at the blue sky in the opening of the courtyard enclosed by four gloomy houses.

°°°°"Ah, ha!" cried the little clerk, "who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?"

°°°°"The chief is a great magician," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Then there is no trick to play on him this time?" asked Desroches.

°°°°"His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud," said Boucard.

°°°°"What next?" said Godeschal. "Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?"

°°°°"Here she is," answered Simonnin.

°°°°"So you are not deaf, you young rogue!" said Chabert, taking the gutter-jumper by the ear and twisting it, to the delight of the other clerks, who began to laugh, looking at the Colonel with the curious attention due to so singular a personage.

°°°°Comte Chabert was in Derville's private room at the moment when his wife came in by the door of the office.

°°°°"I say, Boucard, there is going to be a queer scene in the chief's room! There is a woman who can spend her days alternately, the odd with Comte Ferraud, and the even with Comte Chabert."

°°°°"And in leap year," said Godeschal, "they must settle the /count/ between them."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen, you can be heard!" said Boucard severely. "I never was in an office where there was so much jesting as there is here over the clients."

°°°°Derville had made the Colonel retire to the bedroom when the Countess was admitted.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert, I have placed you apart. If, however, you should wish it--"

°°°°"It is an attention for which I am obliged to you."

°°°°"I have drawn up the memorandum of an agreement of which you and M. Chabert can discuss the conditions, here, and now. I will go alternately to him and to you, and explain your views respectively."

°°°°"Let me see, monsieur," said the Countess impatiently.

°°°°Derville read aloud:

°°°°" 'Between the undersigned:

°°°°" 'M. Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, Marechal de Camp, and Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, living in Paris, Rue du Petit-Banquier, on the one part;

°°°°" 'And Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the aforesaid M. le Comte Chabert, /nee/--' "

°°°°"Pass over the preliminaries," said she. "Come to the conditions."

°°°°"Madame," said the lawyer, "the preamble briefly sets forth the position in which you stand to each other. Then, by the first clause, you acknowledge, in the presence of three witnesses, of whom two shall be notaries, and one the dairyman with whom your husband has been lodging, to all of whom your secret is known, and who will be absolutely silent--you acknowledge, I say, that the individual designated in the documents subjoined to the deed, and whose identity is to be further proved by an act of recognition prepared by your notary, Alexandre Crottat, is your first husband, Comte Chabert. By the second clause Comte Chabert, to secure your happiness, will undertake to assert his rights only under certain circumstances set forth in the deed.--And these," said Derville, in a parenthesis, "are none other than a failure to carry out the conditions of this secret agreement.--M. Chabert, on his part, agrees to accept judgment on a friendly suit, by which his certificate of death shall be annulled, and his marriage dissolved."

°°°°"That will not suit me in the least," said the Countess with surprise. "I will be a party to no suit; you know why."

°°°°"By the third clause," Derville went on, with imperturbable coolness, "you pledge yourself to secure to Hyacinthe Comte Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock held in his name, to revert to you at his death--"

°°°°"But it is much too dear!" exclaimed the Countess.

°°°°"Can you compromise the matter cheaper?"

°°°°"Possibly."

°°°°"But what do you want, madame?"

°°°°"I want--I will not have a lawsuit. I want--"

°°°°"You want him to remain dead?" said Derville, interrupting her hastily.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, "if twenty-four thousand francs a year are necessary, we will go to law--"

°°°°"Yes, we will go to law," said the Colonel in a deep voice, as he opened the door and stood before his wife, with one hand in his waistcoat and the other hanging by his side--an attitude to which the recollection of his adventure gave horrible significance.

°°°°"It is he," said the Countess to herself.

°°°°"Too dear!" the old soldier exclaimed. "I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you--you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved--"

°°°°"But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!" cried the Countess, in feigned amazement.

°°°°"Indeed!" said the old man, in a tone of intense irony. "Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais Royal----"

°°°°The Countess turned pale. Seeing her grow white under her rouge, the old soldier paused, touched by the acute suffering he was inflicting on the woman he had once so ardently loved; but she shot such a venomous glance at him that he abruptly went on:

°°°°"You were with La--"

°°°°"Allow me, Monsieur Derville," said the Countess to the lawyer. "You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things."

°°°°She rose and went out. Derville rushed after her; but the Countess had taken wings, and seemed to have flown from the place.

°°°°On returning to his private room, he found the Colonel in a towering rage, striding up and down.

°°°°"In those times a man took his wife where he chose," said he. "But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted to appearances. She has no heart."

°°°°"Well, Colonel, was I not right to beg you not to come?--I am now positive of your identity; when you came in, the Countess gave a little start, of which the meaning was unequivocal. But you have lost your chances. Your wife knows that you are unrecognizable."

°°°°"I will kill her!"

°°°°"Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch. Besides you might miss! That would be unpardonable. A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife.--Let me set things straight; you are only a big child. Go now. Take care of yourself; she is capable of setting some trap for you and shutting you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you against a surprise."

°°°°The unhappy Colonel obeyed his young benefactor, and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly went down the dark staircase, lost in gloomy thoughts, and crushed perhaps by the blow just dealt him--the most cruel he could feel, the thrust that could most deeply pierce his heart--when he heard the rustle of a woman's dress on the lowest landing, and his wife stood before him.

°°°°"Come, monsieur," said she, taking his arm with a gesture like those familiar to him of old. Her action and the accent of her voice, which had recovered its graciousness, were enough to allay the Colonel's wrath, and he allowed himself to be led to the carriage.

°°°°"Well, get in!" said she, when the footman had let down the step.

°°°°And as if by magic, he found himself sitting by his wife in the brougham.

°°°°"Where to?" asked the servant.

°°°°"To Groslay," said she.

°°°°The horses started at once, and carried them all across Paris.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, in a tone of voice which betrayed one of those emotions which are rare in our lives, and which agitate every part of our being. At such moments the heart, fibres, nerves, countenance, soul, and body, everything, every pore even, feels a thrill. Life no longer seems to be within us; it flows out, springs forth, is communicated as if by contagion, transmitted by a look, a tone of voice, a gesture, impressing our will on others. The old soldier started on hearing this single word, this first, terrible "monsieur!" But still it was at once a reproach and a pardon, a hope and a despair, a question and an answer. This word included them all; none but an actress could have thrown so much eloquence, so many feelings into a single word. Truth is less complete in its utterance; it does not put everything on the outside; it allows us to see what is within. The Colonel was filled with remorse for his suspicions, his demands, and his anger; he looked down not to betray his agitation.

°°°°"Monsieur," repeated she, after an imperceptible pause, "I knew you at once."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old soldier, "those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes."

°°°°Two large tears rolled hot on to his wife's hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

°°°°"Monsieur," she went on, "could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false as mine now is? If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in the privacy of my family. Ought not such a secret to remain buried in our hearts? You will forgive me, I hope, for my apparent indifference to the woes of a Chabert in whose existence I could not possibly believe. I received your letters," she hastily added, seeing in his face the objection it expressed, "but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing was unrecognizable; and after obtaining Napoleon's signature to my second marriage contract, I could not help believing that some clever swindler wanted to make a fool of me. Therefore, to avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud's peace of mind, and disturbing family ties, I was obliged to take precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right, I ask you?"

°°°°"Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot, the owl, the dolt, not to have calculated better what the consequences of such a position might be.--But where are we going?" he asked, seeing that they had reached the barrier of La Chapelle.

°°°°"To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There, monsieur, we will consider the steps to be taken. I know my duties. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? We need not inform the public of a situation, which for me has its ridiculous side, and let us preserve our dignity. You still love me," she said, with a sad, sweet gaze at the Colonel, "but have not I been authorized to form other ties? In so strange a position, a secret voice bids me trust to your kindness, which is so well known to me. Can I be wrong in taking you as the sole arbiter of my fate? Be at once judge and party to the suit. I trust in your noble character; you will be generous enough to forgive me for the consequences of faults committed in innocence. I may then confess to you: I love M. Ferraud. I believed that I had a right to love him. I do not blush to make this confession to you; even if it offends you, it does not disgrace us. I cannot conceal the facts. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother."

°°°°The Colonel with a wave of his hand bid his wife be silent, and for a mile and a half they sat without speaking a single word. Chabert could fancy he saw the two little ones before him.

°°°°"Rosine."

°°°°"Monsieur?"

°°°°"The dead are very wrong to come to life again."

°°°°"Oh, monsieur, no, no! Do not think me ungrateful. Only, you find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old man in a softened tone, "I no longer feel any resentment against you. We will forget anything," he added, with one of those smiles which always reflect a noble soul; "I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me."

°°°°The Countess gave him a flashing look full of such deep gratitude that poor Chabert would have been glad to sink again into his grave at Eylau. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion, of which the whole reward consists in the assurance that they have made the person they love happy.

°°°°"My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested," said the Countess.

°°°°The conversation turned to other subjects, for it was impossible to dwell very long on this one. Though the couple came back again and again to their singular position, either by some allusion or of serious purpose, they had a delightful drive, recalling the events of their former life together and the times of the Empire. The Countess knew how to lend peculiar charm to her reminiscences, and gave the conversation the tinge of melancholy that was needed to keep it serious. She revived his love without awakening his desires, and allowed her first husband to discern the mental wealth she had acquired while trying to accustom him to moderate his pleasure to that which a father may feel in the society of a favorite daughter.

°°°°The Colonel had known the Countess of the Empire; he found her a Countess of the Restoration.

°°°°At last, by a cross-road, they arrived at the entrance to a large park lying in the little valley which divides the heights of Margency from the pretty village of Groslay. The Countess had there a delightful house, where the Colonel on arriving found everything in readiness for his stay there, as well as for his wife's. Misfortune is a kind of talisman whose virtue consists in its power to confirm our original nature; in some men it increases their distrust and malignancy, just as it improves the goodness of those who have a kind heart.

°°°°Sorrow had made the Colonel even more helpful and good than he had always been, and he could understand some secrets of womanly distress which are unrevealed to most men. Nevertheless, in spite of his loyal trustfulness, he could not help saying to his wife:

°°°°"Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?"

°°°°"Yes," replied she, "if I found Colonel Chabert in Derville's client."

°°°°The appearance of truth she contrived to give to this answer dissipated the slight suspicions which the Colonel was ashamed to have felt. For three days the Countess was quite charming to her first husband. By tender attentions and unfailing sweetness she seemed anxious to wipe out the memory of the sufferings he had endured, and to earn forgiveness for the woes which, as she confessed, she had innocently caused him. She delighted in displaying for him the charms she knew he took pleasure in, while at the same time she assumed a kind of melancholy; for men are more especially accessible to certain ways, certain graces of the heart or of the mind which they cannot resist. She aimed at interesting him in her position, and appealing to his feelings so far as to take possession of his mind and control him despotically.

°°°°Ready for anything to attain her ends, she did not yet know what she was to do with this man; but at any rate she meant to annihilate him socially. On the evening of the third day she felt that in spite of her efforts she could not conceal her uneasiness as to the results of her manoeuvres. To give herself a minute's reprieve she went up to her room, sat down before her writing-table, and laid aside the mask of composure which she wore in Chabert's presence, like an actress who, returning to her dressing-room after a fatiguing fifth act, drops half dead, leaving with the audience an image of herself which she no longer resembles. She proceeded to finish a letter she had begun to Delbecq, whom she desired to go in her name and demand of Derville the deeds relating to Colonel Chabert, to copy them, and to come to her at once to Groslay. She had hardly finished when she heard the Colonel's step in the passage; uneasy at her absence, he had come to look for her.

°°°°"Alas!" she exclaimed, "I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable . . ."

°°°°"Why, what is the matter?" asked the good man.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing!" she replied.

°°°°She rose, left the Colonel, and went down to speak privately to her maid, whom she sent off to Paris, impressing on her that she was herself to deliver to Delbecq the letter just written, and to bring it back to the writer as soon as he had read it. Then the Countess went out to sit on a bench sufficiently in sight for the Colonel to join her as soon as he might choose. The Colonel, who was looking for her, hastened up and sat down by her.

°°°°"Rosine," said he, "what is the matter with you?"

°°°°She did not answer.

°°°°It was one of those glorious, calm evenings in the month of June, whose secret harmonies infuse such sweetness into the sunset. The air was clear, the stillness perfect, so that far away in the park they could hear the voices of some children, which added a kind of melody to the sublimity of the scene.

°°°°"You do not answer me?" the Colonel said to his wife.

°°°°"My husband----" said the Countess, who broke off, started a little, and with a blush stopped to ask him, "What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?"

°°°°"Call him your husband, my poor child," replied the Colonel, in a kind voice. "Is he not the father of your children?"

°°°°"Well, then," she said, "if he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out that I came here, alone, with a stranger, what am I to say to him? Listen, monsieur," she went on, assuming a dignified attitude, "decide my fate, I am resigned to anything--"

°°°°"My dear," said the Colonel, taking possession of his wife's hands, "I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness--"

°°°°"That is impossible!" she exclaimed, with a sudden spasmodic movement. "Remember that you would have to renounce your identity, and in an authenticated form."

°°°°"What?" said the Colonel. "Is not my word enough for you?"

°°°°The word "authenticated" fell on the old man's heart, and roused involuntary distrust. He looked at his wife in a way that made her color, she cast down her eyes, and he feared that he might find himself compelled to despise her. The Countess was afraid lest she had scared the shy modesty, the stern honesty, of a man whose generous temper and primitive virtues were known to her. Though these feelings had brought the clouds to her brow, they immediately recovered their harmony. This was the way of it. A child's cry was heard in the distance.

°°°°"Jules, leave your sister in peace," the Countess called out.

°°°°"What, are your children here?" said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but I told them not to trouble you."

°°°°The old soldier understood the delicacy, the womanly tact of so gracious a precaution, and took the Countess' hand to kiss it.

°°°°"But let them come," said he.

°°°°The little girl ran up to complain of her brother.

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"It was Jules--"

°°°°"It was her--"

°°°°Their little hands were held out to their mother, and the two childish voices mingled; it was an unexpected and charming picture.

°°°°"Poor little things!" cried the Countess, no longer restraining her tears, "I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother's heart cannot be divided; I want them, I want them."

°°°°"Are you making mamma cry?" said Jules, looking fiercely at the Colonel.

°°°°"Silence, Jules!" said the mother in a decided tone.

°°°°The two children stood speechless, examining their mother and the stranger with a curiosity which it is impossible to express in words.

°°°°"Oh yes!" she cried. "If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything . . ."

°°°°This was the decisive speech which gained all that she had hoped from it.

°°°°"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, as if he were ending a sentence already begun in his mind, "I must return underground again. I had told myself so already."

°°°°"Can I accept such a sacrifice?" replied his wife. "If some men have died to save a mistress' honor, they gave their life but once. But in this case you would be giving your life every day. No, no. It is impossible. If it were only your life, it would be nothing; but to sign a declaration that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to sacrifice your honor, and live a lie every hour of the day! Human devotion cannot go so far. Only think!--No. But for my poor children I would have fled with you by this time to the other end of the world."

°°°°"But," said Chabert, "cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn out as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but a little tobacco and the /Constitutionnel/."

°°°°The Countess melted into tears. There was a contest of generosity between the Comtesse Ferraud and Colonel Chabert, and the soldier came out victorious. One evening, seeing this mother with her children, the soldier was bewitched by the touching grace of a family picture in the country, in the shade and the silence; he made a resolution to remain dead, and, frightened no longer at the authentication of a deed, he asked what he could do to secure beyond all risk the happiness of this family.

°°°°"Do exactly as you like," said the Countess. "I declare to you that I will have nothing to do with this affair. I ought not."

°°°°Delbecq had arrived some days before, and in obedience to the Countess' verbal instructions, the intendant had succeeded in gaining the old soldier's confidence. So on the following morning Colonel Chabert went with the erewhile attorney to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had caused the notary to draw up an affidavit in such terms that, after hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

°°°°"Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!" he exclaimed.

°°°°"Indeed, monsieur," said Delbecq, "I should advise you not to sign in haste. In your place I would get at least thirty thousand francs a year out of the bargain. Madame would pay them."

°°°°After annihilating this scoundrel /emeritus/ by the lightning look of an honest man insulted, the Colonel rushed off, carried away by a thousand contrary emotions. He was suspicious, indignant, and calm again by turns.

°°°°Finally he made his way back into the park of Groslay by a gap in a fence, and slowly walked on to sit down and rest, and meditate at his ease, in a little room under a gazebo, from which the road to Saint- Leu could be seen. The path being strewn with the yellowish sand which is used instead of river-gravel, the Countess, who was sitting in the upper room of this little summer-house, did not hear the Colonel's approach, for she was too much preoccupied with the success of her business to pay the smallest attention to the slight noise made by her husband. Nor did the old man notice that his wife was in the room over him.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur Delbecq, has he signed?" the Countess asked her secretary, whom she saw alone on the road beyond the hedge of a haha.

°°°°"No, madame. I do not even know what has become of our man. The old horse reared."

°°°°"Then we shall be obliged to put him into Charenton," said she, "since we have got him."

°°°°The Colonel, who recovered the elasticity of youth to leap the haha, in the twinkling of an eye was standing in front of Delbecq, on whom he bestowed the two finest slaps that ever a scoundrel's cheeks received.

°°°°"And you may add that old horses can kick!" said he.

°°°°His rage spent, the Colonel no longer felt vigorous enough to leap the ditch. He had seen the truth in all its nakedness. The Countess' speech and Delbecq's reply had revealed the conspiracy of which he was to be the victim. The care taken of him was but a bait to entrap him in a snare. That speech was like a drop of subtle poison, bringing on in the old soldier a return of all his sufferings, physical and moral. He came back to the summer-house through the park gate, walking slowly like a broken man.

°°°°Then for him there was to be neither peace nor truce. From this moment he must begin the odious warfare with this woman of which Derville had spoken, enter on a life of litigation, feed on gall, drink every morning of the cup of bitterness. And then--fearful thought!--where was he to find the money needful to pay the cost of the first proceedings? He felt such disgust of life, that if there had been any water at hand he would have thrown himself into it; that if he had had a pistol, he would have blown out his brains. Then he relapsed into the indecision of mind which, since his conversation with Derville at the dairyman's had changed his character.

°°°°At last, having reached the kiosque, he went up to the gazebo, where little rose-windows afforded a view over each lovely landscape of the valley, and where he found his wife seated on a chair. The Countess was gazing at the distance, and preserved a calm countenance, showing that impenetrable face which women can assume when resolved to do their worst. She wiped her eyes as if she had been weeping, and played absently with the pink ribbons of her sash. Nevertheless, in spite of her apparent assurance, she could not help shuddering slightly when she saw before her her venerable benefactor, standing with folded arms, his face pale, his brow stern.

°°°°"Madame," he said, after gazing at her fixedly for a moment and compelling her to blush, "Madame, I do not curse you--I scorn you. I can now thank the chance that has divided us. I do not feel even a desire for revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on the strength of my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps have made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of the sunshine.--Farewell!"

°°°°The Countess threw herself at his feet; she would have detained him by taking his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust, saying:

°°°°"Do not touch me!"

°°°°The Countess' expression when she heard her husband's retreating steps is quite indescribable. Then, with the deep perspicacity given only by utter villainy, or by fierce worldly selfishness, she knew that she might live in peace on the word and the contempt of this loyal veteran.

°°°°Chabert, in fact, disappeared. The dairyman failed in business, and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel, perhaps, took up some similar industry for a time. Perhaps, like a stone flung into a chasm, he went falling from ledge to ledge, to be lost in the mire of rags that seethes through the streets of Paris.

°°°°Six months after this event, Derville, hearing no more of Colonel Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed that they had no doubt come to a compromise, which the Countess, out of revenge, had had arranged by some other lawyer. So one morning he added up the sums he had advanced to the said Chabert with the costs, and begged the Comtesse Ferraud to claim from M. le Comte Chabert the amount of the bill, assuming that she would know where to find her first husband.

°°°°The very next day Comte Ferraud's man of business, lately appointed President of the County Court in a town of some importance, wrote this distressing note to Derville:

°°°°"MONSIEUR,--

°°°°"Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your   client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the   individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he   came forward under false pretences. "Yours, etc.,                DELBECQ."

°°°°"One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half," cried Derville. "They don't deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand- franc notes!"

°°°°Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader to whom he wished to speak, and who was employed in the Police Court. As chance would have it, Derville went into Court Number 6 at the moment when the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months' imprisonment as a vagabond, and subsequently to be taken to the Mendicity House of Detention, a sentence which, by magistrates' law, is equivalent to perpetual imprisonment. On hearing the name of Hyacinthe, Derville looked at the deliquent, sitting between two /gendarmes/ on the bench for the accused, and recognized in the condemned man his false Colonel Chabert.

°°°°The old soldier was placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In spite of his rags, in spite of the misery stamped on his countenance, it gave evidence of noble pride. His eye had a stoical expression which no magistrate ought to have misunderstood; but as soon as a man has fallen into the hands of justice, he is no more than a moral entity, a matter of law or of fact, just as to statists he has become a zero.

°°°°When the veteran was taken back to the lock-up, to be removed later with the batch of vagabonds at that moment at the bar, Derville availed himself of the privilege accorded to lawyers of going wherever they please in the Courts, and followed him to the lock-up, where he stood scrutinizing him for some minutes, as well as the curious crew of beggars among whom he found himself. The passage to the lock-up at that moment afforded one of those spectacles which, unfortunately, neither legislators, nor philanthropists, nor painters, nor writers come to study. Like all the laboratories of the law, this ante-room is a dark and malodorous place; along the walls runs a wooden seat, blackened by the constant presence there of the wretches who come to this meeting-place of every form of social squalor, where not one of them is missing.

°°°°A poet might say that the day was ashamed to light up this dreadful sewer through which so much misery flows! There is not a spot on that plank where some crime has not sat, in embryo or matured; not a corner where a man has never stood who, driven to despair by the blight which justice has set upon him after his first fault, has not there begun a career, at the end of which looms the guillotine or the pistol-snap of the suicide. All who fall on the pavement of Paris rebound against these yellow-gray walls, on which a philanthropist who was not a speculator might read a justification of the numerous suicides complained of by hypocritical writers who are incapable of taking a step to prevent them--for that justification is written in that ante- room, like a preface to the dramas of the Morgue, or to those enacted on the Place de la Greve.

°°°°At this moment Colonel Chabert was sitting among these men--men with coarse faces, clothed in the horrible livery of misery, and silent at intervals, or talking in a low tone, for three gendarmes on duty paced to and fro, their sabres clattering on the floor.

°°°°"Do you recognize me?" said Derville to the old man, standing in front of him.

°°°°"Yes, sir," said Chabert, rising.

°°°°"If you are an honest man," Derville went on in an undertone, "how could you remain in my debt?"

°°°°The old soldier blushed as a young girl might when accused by her mother of a clandestine love affair.

°°°°"What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?" cried he in a loud voice.

°°°°"Paid me?" said Derville. "She wrote to me that you were a swindler."

°°°°The Colonel cast up his eyes in a sublime impulse of horror and imprecation, as if to call heaven to witness to this fresh subterfuge.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, in a voice that was calm by sheer huskiness, "get the gendarmes to allow me to go into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored."

°°°°At a word from Derville to the sergeant he was allowed to take his client into the room, where Hyacinthe wrote a few lines, and addressed them to the Comtesse Ferraud.

°°°°"Send her that," said the soldier, "and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is not the less there," and he laid his hand on his heart. "Yes, it is there, deep and sincere. But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all."

°°°°"What!" said Derville. "Did you not stipulate for an allowance?"

°°°°"Do not speak of it!" cried the old man. "You cannot conceive how deep my contempt is for the outside life to which most men cling. I was suddenly attacked by a sickness--disgust of humanity. When I think that Napoleon is at Saint-Helena, everything on earth is a matter of indifference to me. I can no longer be a soldier; that is my only real grief. After all," he added with a gesture of childish simplicity, "it is better to enjoy luxury of feeling than of dress. For my part, I fear nobody's contempt."

°°°°And the Colonel sat down on his bench again.

°°°°Derville went away. On returning to his office, he sent Godeschal, at that time his second clerk, to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert's lawyer.

°°°°In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now himself an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, to whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal's staff among beggars by living on at Bicetre as poor women live on at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures who are lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners, which consists in drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords to its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

°°°°"I say, Derville," said Godeschal to his traveling companion, "look at that old fellow. Isn't he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy."

°°°°Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

°°°°"That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?"

°°°°"Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious," said Godeschal.

°°°°"That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger's glare she shot at him at that moment."

°°°°This opening having excited Godeschal's curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

°°°°Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

°°°°"Good-morning, Colonel Chabert," said Derville.

°°°°"Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe," replied the veteran. "I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7," he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--"Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?" he asked after a moment's silence. "He is not married! He is very lucky!"

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Godeschal. "Would you like something to buy snuff?"

°°°°With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

°°°°"Brave troopers!"

°°°°He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

°°°°"Fire! both arms! /Vive Napoleon/!" And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

°°°°"The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish," said Derville.

°°°°"Childish! he?" said another old pauper, who was looking on. "Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, 'Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.'--'I was too young to be there,' said Hyacinthe. 'But I was at Jena.' And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions."

°°°°"What a destiny!" exclaimed Derville. "Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow," Derville went on after a pause, "there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

°°°°"How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris."

°°°°"I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches' office," replied Godeschal.

°°°°PARIS, February-March 1832.

°°°°End



°°°°Father Goriot

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage

°°°°To the great and illustrious Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a token of admiration for his works and genius. DE BALZAC.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans) is an elderly person, who for the past forty years has kept a lodging-house in the Rue Nueve- Sainte-Genevieve, in the district that lies between the Latin Quarter and the Faubourg Saint-Marcel. Her house (known in the neighborhood as the Maison Vauquer) receives men and women, old and young, and no word has ever been breathed against her respectable establishment; but, at the same time, it must be said that as a matter of fact no young woman has been under her roof for thirty years, and that if a young man stays there for any length of time it is a sure sign that his allowance must be of the slenderest. In 1819, however, the time when this drama opens, there was an almost penniless young girl among Mme. Vauquer's boarders.

°°°°That word drama has been somewhat discredited of late; it has been overworked and twisted to strange uses in these days of dolorous literature; but it must do service again here, not because this story is dramatic in the restricted sense of the word, but because some tears may perhaps be shed intra et extra muros before it is over.

°°°°Will any one without the walls of Paris understand it? It is open to doubt. The only audience who could appreciate the results of close observation, the careful reproduction of minute detail and local color, are dwellers between the heights of Montrouge and Montmartre, in a vale of crumbling stucco watered by streams of black mud, a vale of sorrows which are real and joys too often hollow; but this audience is so accustomed to terrible sensations, that only some unimaginable and well-neigh impossible woe could produce any lasting impression there. Now and again there are tragedies so awful and so grand by reason of the complication of virtues and vices that bring them about, that egotism and selfishness are forced to pause and are moved to pity; but the impression that they receive is like a luscious fruit, soon consumed. Civilization, like the car of Juggernaut, is scarcely stayed perceptibly in its progress by a heart less easy to break than the others that lie in its course; this also is broken, and Civilization continues on her course triumphant. And you, too, will do the like; you who with this book in your white hand will sink back among the cushions of your armchair, and say to yourself, "Perhaps this may amuse me." You will read the story of Father Goriot's secret woes, and, dining thereafter with an unspoiled appetite, will lay the blame of your insensibility upon the writer, and accuse him of exaggeration, of writing romances. Ah! once for all, this drama is neither a fiction nor a romance! ALL IS TRUE,--so true, that every one can discern the elements of the tragedy in his own house, perhaps in his own heart.

°°°°The lodging-house is Mme. Vauquer's own property. It is still standing in the lower end of the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, just where the road slopes so sharply down to the Rue de l'Arbalete, that wheeled traffic seldom passes that way, because it is so stony and steep. This position is sufficient to account for the silence prevalent in the streets shut in between the dome of the Pantheon and the dome of the Val-de-Grace, two conspicuous public buildings which give a yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies beneath the shadow of their leaden- hued cupolas.

°°°°In that district the pavements are clean and dry, there is neither mud nor water in the gutters, grass grows in the chinks of the walls. The most heedless passer-by feels the depressing influences of a place where the sound of wheels creates a sensation; there is a grim look about the houses, a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls. A Parisian straying into a suburb apparently composed of lodging-houses and public institutions would see poverty and dullness, old age lying down to die, and joyous youth condemned to drudgery. It is the ugliest quarter of Paris, and, it may be added, the least known. But, before all things, the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve is like a bronze frame for a picture for which the mind cannot be too well prepared by the contemplation of sad hues and sober images. Even so, step by step the daylight decreases, and the cicerone's droning voice grows hollower as the traveler descends into the Catacombs. The comparison holds good! Who shall say which is more ghastly, the sight of the bleached skulls or of dried-up human hearts?

°°°°The front of the lodging-house is at right angles to the road, and looks out upon a little garden, so that you see the side of the house in section, as it were, from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. Beneath the wall of the house front there lies a channel, a fathom wide, paved with cobble-stones, and beside it runs a graveled walk bordered by geraniums and oleanders and pomegranates set in great blue and white glazed earthenware pots. Access into the graveled walk is afforded by a door, above which the words MAISON VAUQUER may be read, and beneath, in rather smaller letters, "Lodgings for both sexes, etc."

°°°°During the day a glimpse into the garden is easily obtained through a wicket to which a bell is attached. On the opposite wall, at the further end of the graveled walk, a green marble arch was painted once upon a time by a local artist, and in this semblance of a shrine a statue representing Cupid is installed; a Parisian Cupid, so blistered and disfigured that he looks like a candidate for one of the adjacent hospitals, and might suggest an allegory to lovers of symbolism. The half-obliterated inscription on the pedestal beneath determines the date of this work of art, for it bears witness to the widespread enthusiasm felt for Voltaire on his return to Paris in 1777:

°°°°"Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;   He is, or was, or ought to be."

°°°°At night the wicket gate is replaced by a solid door. The little garden is no wider than the front of the house; it is shut in between the wall of the street and the partition wall of the neighboring house. A mantle of ivy conceals the bricks and attracts the eyes of passers-by to an effect which is picturesque in Paris, for each of the walls is covered with trellised vines that yield a scanty dusty crop of fruit, and furnish besides a subject of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her lodgers; every year the widow trembles for her vintage.

°°°°A straight path beneath the walls on either side of the garden leads to a clump of lime-trees at the further end of it; LINE- trees, as Mme. Vauquer persists in calling them, in spite of the fact that she was a de Conflans, and regardless of repeated corrections from her lodgers.

°°°°The central space between the walls is filled with artichokes and rows of pyramid fruit-trees, and surrounded by a border of lettuce, pot-herbs, and parsley. Under the lime-trees there are a few green-painted garden seats and a wooden table, and hither, during the dog-days, such of the lodgers as are rich enough to indulge in a cup of coffee come to take their pleasure, though it is hot enough to roast eggs even in the shade.

°°°°The house itself is three stories high, without counting the attics under the roof. It is built of rough stone, and covered with the yellowish stucco that gives a mean appearance to almost every house in Paris. There are five windows in each story in the front of the house; all the blinds visible through the small square panes are drawn up awry, so that the lines are all at cross purposes. At the side of the house there are but two windows on each floor, and the lowest of all are adorned with a heavy iron grating.

°°°°Behind the house a yard extends for some twenty feet, a space inhabited by a happy family of pigs, poultry, and rabbits; the wood-shed is situated on the further side, and on the wall between the wood-shed and the kitchen window hangs the meat-safe, just above the place where the sink discharges its greasy streams. The cook sweeps all the refuse out through a little door into the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, and frequently cleanses the yard with copious supplies of water, under pain of pestilence.

°°°°The house might have been built on purpose for its present uses. Access is given by a French window to the first room on the ground floor, a sitting-room which looks out upon the street through the two barred windows already mentioned. Another door opens out of it into the dining-room, which is separated from the kitchen by the well of the staircase, the steps being constructed partly of wood, partly of tiles, which are colored and beeswaxed. Nothing can be more depressing than the sight of that sitting- room. The furniture is covered with horse hair woven in alternate dull and glossy stripes. There is a round table in the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from Telemaque are depicted, the various classical personages being colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

°°°°The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the language, and which should be called the odeur de pension. The damp atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy, musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet, in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining dining- room.

°°°°The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which the lodgers' table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine, are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long table is so greasy that a waggish externe will write his name on the surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky, worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one- eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire, parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet, its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

°°°°This apartment is in all its glory at seven o'clock in the morning, when Mme. Vauquer's cat appears, announcing the near approach of his mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated countenance, and a nose like a parrot's beak set in the middle of it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn; there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and interpretation of her lodging- house, as surely as her lodging-house implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital. The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room, and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its mistress.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who "have seen a deal of trouble." She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still, "she is a good woman at bottom," said the lodgers who believed that the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

°°°°What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head. How had she lost her money? "Through trouble," was her answer. He had treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody, because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every possible misfortune.

°°°°Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress' shuffling footsteps, hastened to serve the lodgers' breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these externes usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty francs a month.

°°°°At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme. Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary- general in the service of the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred francs a year.

°°°°The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on the third floor were also let-- one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle. Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli, Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as "Father Goriot." The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of passage, to impecunious students, who like "Father Goriot" and Mlle. Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of better.

°°°°At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him. Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that their parents' hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as by those who had brought it to pass.

°°°°Above the third story there was a garret where the linen was hung to dry, and a couple of attics. Christophe, the man-of-all-work, slept in one, and Sylvie, the stout cook, in the other. Beside the seven inmates thus enumerated, taking one year with another, some eight law or medical students dined in the house, as well as two or three regular comers who lived in the neighborhood. There were usually eighteen people at dinner, and there was room, if need be, for twenty at Mme. Vauquer's table; at breakfast, however, only the seven lodgers appeared. It was almost like a family party. Every one came down in dressing-gown and slippers, and the conversation usually turned on anything that had happened the evening before; comments on the dress or appearance of the dinner contingent were exchanged in friendly confidence.

°°°°These seven lodgers were Mme. Vauquer's spoiled children. Among them she distributed, with astronomical precision, the exact proportion of respect and attention due to the varying amounts they paid for their board. One single consideration influenced all these human beings thrown together by chance. The two second- floor lodgers only paid seventy-two francs a month. Such prices as these are confined to the Faubourg Saint-Marcel and the district between La Bourbe and the Salpetriere; and, as might be expected, poverty, more or less apparent, weighed upon them all, Mme. Couture being the sole exception to the rule.

°°°°The dreary surroundings were reflected in the costumes of the inmates of the house; all were alike threadbare. The color of the men's coats were problematical; such shoes, in more fashionable quarters, are only to be seen lying in the gutter; the cuffs and collars were worn and frayed at the edges; every limp article of clothing looked like the ghost of its former self. The women's dresses were faded, old-fashioned, dyed and re-dyed; they wore gloves that were glazed with hard wear, much-mended lace, dingy ruffles, crumpled muslin fichus. So much for their clothing; but, for the most part, their frames were solid enough; their constitutions had weathered the storms of life; their cold, hard faces were worn like coins that have been withdrawn from circulation, but there were greedy teeth behind the withered lips. Dramas brought to a close or still in progress are foreshadowed by the sight of such actors as these, not the dramas that are played before the footlights and against a background of painted canvas, but dumb dramas of life, frost-bound dramas that sere hearts like fire, dramas that do not end with the actors' lives.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau, that elderly young lady, screened her weak eyes from the daylight by a soiled green silk shade with a rim of brass, an object fit to scare away the Angel of Pity himself. Her shawl, with its scanty, draggled fringe, might have covered a skeleton, so meagre and angular was the form beneath it. Yet she must have been pretty and shapely once. What corrosive had destroyed the feminine outlines? Was it trouble, or vice, or greed? Had she loved too well? Had she been a second-hand clothes dealer, a frequenter of the backstairs of great houses, or had she been merely a courtesan? Was she expiating the flaunting triumphs of a youth overcrowded with pleasures by an old age in which she was shunned by every passer-by? Her vacant gaze sent a chill through you; her shriveled face seemed like a menace. Her voice was like the shrill, thin note of the grasshopper sounding from the thicket when winter is at hand. She said that she had nursed an old gentleman, ill of catarrh of the bladder, and left to die by his children, who thought that he had nothing left. His bequest to her, a life annuity of a thousand francs, was periodically disputed by his heirs, who mingled slander with their persecutions. In spite of the ravages of conflicting passions, her face retained some traces of its former fairness and fineness of tissue, some vestiges of the physical charms of her youth still survived.

°°°°M. Poiret was a sort of automaton. He might be seen any day sailing like a gray shadow along the walks of the Jardin des Plantes, on his head a shabby cap, a cane with an old yellow ivory handle in the tips of his thin fingers; the outspread skirts of his threadbare overcoat failed to conceal his meagre figure; his breeches hung loosely on his shrunken limbs; the thin, blue-stockinged legs trembled like those of a drunken man; there was a notable breach of continuity between the dingy white waistcoat and crumpled shirt frills and the cravat twisted about a throat like a turkey gobbler's; altogether, his appearance set people wondering whether this outlandish ghost belonged to the audacious race of the sons of Japhet who flutter about on the Boulevard Italien. What devouring kind of toil could have so shriveled him? What devouring passions had darkened that bulbous countenance, which would have seemed outrageous as a caricature? What had he been? Well, perhaps he had been part of the machinery of justice, a clerk in the office to which the executioner sends in his accounts,--so much for providing black veils for parricides, so much for sawdust, so much for pulleys and cord for the knife. Or he might have been a receiver at the door of a public slaughter-house, or a sub-inspector of nuisances. Indeed, the man appeared to have been one of the beasts of burden in our great social mill; one of those Parisian Ratons whom their Bertrands do not even know by sight; a pivot in the obscure machinery that disposes of misery and things unclean; one of those men, in short, at sight of whom we are prompted to remark that, "After all, we cannot do without them."

°°°°Stately Paris ignores the existence of these faces bleached by moral or physical suffering; but, then, Paris is in truth an ocean that no line can plumb. You may survey its surface and describe it; but no matter how numerous and painstaking the toilers in this sea, there will always be lonely and unexplored regions in its depths, caverns unknown, flowers and pearls and monsters of the deep overlooked or forgotten by the divers of literature. The Maison Vauquer is one of these curious monstrosities.

°°°°Two, however, of Mme. Vauquer's boarders formed a striking contrast to the rest. There was a sickly pallor, such as is often seen in anaemic girls, in Mlle. Victorine Taillefer's face; and her unvarying expression of sadness, like her embarrassed manner and pinched look, was in keeping with the general wretchedness of the establishment in the Rue Nueve-Saint-Genevieve, which forms a background to this picture; but her face was young, there was youthfulness in her voice and elasticity in her movements. This young misfortune was not unlike a shrub, newly planted in an uncongenial soil, where its leaves have already begun to wither. The outlines of her figure, revealed by her dress of the simplest and cheapest materials, were also youthful. There was the same kind of charm about her too slender form, her faintly colored face and light-brown hair, that modern poets find in mediaeval statuettes; and a sweet expression, a look of Christian resignation in the dark gray eyes. She was pretty by force of contrast; if she had been happy, she would have been charming. Happiness is the poetry of woman, as the toilette is her tinsel. If the delightful excitement of a ball had made the pale face glow with color; if the delights of a luxurious life had brought the color to the wan cheeks that were slightly hollowed already; if love had put light into the sad eyes, then Victorine might have ranked among the fairest; but she lacked the two things which create woman a second time--pretty dresses and love- letters.

°°°°A book might have been made of her story. Her father was persuaded that he had sufficient reason for declining to acknowledge her, and allowed her a bare six hundred francs a year; he had further taken measures to disinherit his daughter, and had converted all his real estate into personalty, that he might leave it undivided to his son. Victorine's mother had died broken-hearted in Mme. Couture's house; and the latter, who was a near relation, had taken charge of the little orphan. Unluckily, the widow of the commissary-general to the armies of the Republic had nothing in the world but her jointure and her widow's pension, and some day she might be obliged to leave the helpless, inexperienced girl to the mercy of the world. The good soul, therefore, took Victorine to mass every Sunday, and to confession once a fortnight, thinking that, in any case, she would bring up her ward to be devout. She was right; religion offered a solution of the problem of the young girl's future. The poor child loved the father who refused to acknowledge her. Once every year she tried to see him to deliver her mother's message of forgiveness, but every year hitherto she had knocked at that door in vain; her father was inexorable. Her brother, her only means of communication, had not come to see her for four years, and had sent her no assistance; yet she prayed to God to unseal her father's eyes and to soften her brother's heart, and no accusations mingled with her prayers. Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exhausted the vocabulary of abuse, and failed to find words that did justice to the banker's iniquitous conduct; but while they heaped execrations on the millionaire, Victorine's words were as gentle as the moan of the wounded dove, and affection found expression even in the cry drawn from her by pain.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac was a thoroughly southern type; he had a fair complexion, blue eyes, black hair. In his figure, manner, and his whole bearing it was easy to see that he had either come of a noble family, or that, from his earliest childhood, he had been gently bred. If he was careful of his wardrobe, only taking last year's clothes into daily wear, still upon occasion he could issue forth as a young man of fashion. Ordinarily he wore a shabby coat and waistcoat, the limp black cravat, untidily knotted, that students affect, trousers that matched the rest of his costume, and boots that had been resoled.

°°°°Vautrin (the man of forty with the dyed whiskers) marked a transition stage between these two young people and the others. He was the kind of man that calls forth the remark: "He looks a jovial sort!" He had broad shoulders, a well-developed chest, muscular arms, and strong square-fisted hands; the joints of his fingers were covered with tufts of fiery red hair. His face was furrowed by premature wrinkles; there was a certain hardness about it in spite of his bland and insinuating manner. His bass voice was by no means unpleasant, and was in keeping with his boisterous laughter. He was always obliging, always in good spirits; if anything went wrong with one of the locks, he would soon unscrew it, take it to pieces, file it, oil and clean and set it in order, and put it back in its place again; "I am an old hand at it," he used to say. Not only so, he knew all about ships, the sea, France, foreign countries, men, business, law, great houses and prisons,--there was nothing that he did not know. If any one complained rather more than usual, he would offer his services at once. He had several times lent money to Mme. Vauquer, or to the boarders; but, somehow, those whom he obliged felt that they would sooner face death than fail to repay him; a certain resolute look, sometimes seen on his face, inspired fear of him, for all his appearance of easy good-nature. In the way he spat there was an imperturbable coolness which seemed to indicate that this was a man who would not stick at a crime to extricate himself from a false position. His eyes, like those of a pitiless judge, seemed to go to the very bottom of all questions, to read all natures, all feelings and thoughts. His habit of life was very regular; he usually went out after breakfast, returning in time for dinner, and disappeared for the rest of the evening, letting himself in about midnight with a latch key, a privilege that Mme. Vauquer accorded to no other boarder. But then he was on very good terms with the widow; he used to call her "mamma," and put his arm round her waist, a piece of flattery perhaps not appreciated to the full! The worthy woman might imagine this to be an easy feat; but, as a matter of fact, no arm but Vautrin's was long enough to encircle her.

°°°°It was a characteristic trait of his generously to pay fifteen francs a month for the cup of coffee with a dash of brandy in it, which he took after dinner. Less superficial observers than young men engulfed by the whirlpool of Parisian life, or old men, who took no interest in anything that did not directly concern them, would not have stopped short at the vaguely unsatisfactory impression that Vautrin made upon them. He knew or guessed the concerns of every one about him; but none of them had been able to penetrate his thoughts, or to discover his occupation. He had deliberately made his apparent good-nature, his unfailing readiness to oblige, and his high spirits into a barrier between himself and the rest of them, but not seldom he gave glimpses of appalling depths of character. He seemed to delight in scourging the upper classes of society with the lash of his tongue, to take pleasure in convicting it of inconsistency, in mocking at law and order with some grim jest worthy of Juvenal, as if some grudge against the social system rankled in him, as if there were some mystery carefully hidden away in his life.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer felt attracted, perhaps unconsciously, by the strength of the one man, and the good looks of the other; her stolen glances and secret thoughts were divided between them; but neither of them seemed to take any notice of her, although some day a chance might alter her position, and she would be a wealthy heiress. For that matter, there was not a soul in the house who took any trouble to investigate the various chronicles of misfortunes, real or imaginary, related by the rest. Each one regarded the others with indifference, tempered by suspicion; it was a natural result of their relative positions. Practical assistance not one could give, this they all knew, and they had long since exhausted their stock of condolence over previous discussions of their grievances. They were in something the same position as an elderly couple who have nothing left to say to each other. The routine of existence kept them in contact, but they were parts of a mechanism which wanted oil. There was not one of them but would have passed a blind man begging in the street, not one that felt moved to pity by a tale of misfortune, not one who did not see in death the solution of the all- absorbing problem of misery which left them cold to the most terrible anguish in others.

°°°°The happiest of these hapless beings was certainly Mme. Vauquer, who reigned supreme over this hospital supported by voluntary contributions. For her, the little garden, which silence, and cold, and rain, and drought combined to make as dreary as an Asian steppe, was a pleasant shaded nook; the gaunt yellow house, the musty odors of a back shop had charms for her, and for her alone. Those cells belonged to her. She fed those convicts condemned to penal servitude for life, and her authority was recognized among them. Where else in Paris would they have found wholesome food in sufficient quantity at the prices she charged them, and rooms which they were at liberty to make, if not exactly elegant or comfortable, at any rate clean and healthy? If she had committed some flagrant act of injustice, the victim would have borne it in silence.

°°°°Such a gathering contained, as might have been expected, the elements out of which a complete society might be constructed. And, as in a school, as in the world itself, there was among the eighteen men and women who met round the dinner table a poor creature, despised by all the others, condemned to be the butt of all their jokes. At the beginning of Eugene de Rastignac's second twelvemonth, this figure suddenly started out into bold relief against the background of human forms and faces among which the law student was yet to live for another two years to come. This laughing-stock was the retired vermicelli-merchant, Father Goriot, upon whose face a painter, like the historian, would have concentrated all the light in his picture.

°°°°How had it come about that the boarders regarded him with a half- malignant contempt? Why did they subject the oldest among their number to a kind of persecution, in which there was mingled some pity, but no respect for his misfortunes? Had he brought it on himself by some eccentricity or absurdity, which is less easily forgiven or forgotten than more serious defects? The question strikes at the root of many a social injustice. Perhaps it is only human nature to inflict suffering on anything that will endure suffering, whether by reason of its genuine humility, or indifference, or sheer helplessness. Do we not, one and all, like to feel our strength even at the expense of some one or of something? The poorest sample of humanity, the street arab, will pull the bell handle at every street door in bitter weather, and scramble up to write his name on the unsullied marble of a monument.

°°°°In the year 1813, at the age of sixty-nine or thereabouts, "Father Goriot" had sold his business and retired--to Mme. Vauquer's boarding house. When he first came there he had taken the rooms now occupied by Mme. Couture; he had paid twelve hundred francs a year like a man to whom five louis more or less was a mere trifle. For him Mme. Vauquer had made various improvements in the three rooms destined for his use, in consideration of a certain sum paid in advance, so it was said, for the miserable furniture, that is to say, for some yellow cotton curtains, a few chairs of stained wood covered with Utrecht velvet, several wretched colored prints in frames, and wall papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained. Possibly it was the careless generosity with which Father Goriot allowed himself to be overreached at this period of his life (they called him Monsieur Goriot very respectfully then) that gave Mme. Vauquer the meanest opinion of his business abilities; she looked on him as an imbecile where money was concerned.

°°°°Goriot had brought with him a considerable wardrobe, the gorgeous outfit of a retired tradesman who denies himself nothing. Mme. Vauquer's astonished eyes beheld no less than eighteen cambric- fronted shirts, the splendor of their fineness being enhanced by a pair of pins each bearing a large diamond, and connected by a short chain, an ornament which adorned the vermicelli-maker's shirt front. He usually wore a coat of corn-flower blue; his rotund and portly person was still further set off by a clean white waistcoat, and a gold chain and seals which dangled over that broad expanse. When his hostess accused him of being "a bit of a beau," he smiled with the vanity of a citizen whose foible is gratified. His cupboards (ormoires, as he called them in the popular dialect) were filled with a quantity of plate that he brought with him. The widow's eyes gleamed as she obligingly helped him to unpack the soup ladles, table-spoons, forks, cruet- stands, tureens, dishes, and breakfast services--all of silver, which were duly arranged upon shelves, besides a few more or less handsome pieces of plate, all weighing no inconsiderable number of ounces; he could not bring himself to part with these gifts that reminded him of past domestic festivals.

°°°°"This was my wife's present to me on the first anniversary of our wedding day," he said to Mme. Vauquer, as he put away a little silver posset dish, with two turtle-doves billing on the cover. "Poor dear! she spent on it all the money she had saved before we were married. Do you know, I would sooner scratch the earth with my nails for a living, madame, than part with that. But I shall be able to take my coffee out of it every morning for the rest of my days, thank the Lord! I am not to be pitied. There's not much fear of my starving for some time to come."

°°°°Finally, Mme. Vauquer's magpie's eye had discovered and read certain entries in the list of shareholders in the funds, and, after a rough calculation, was disposed to credit Goriot (worthy man) with something like ten thousand francs a year. From that day forward Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans), who, as a matter of fact, had seen forty-eight summers, though she would only own to thirty-nine of them--Mme. Vauquer had her own ideas. Though Goriot's eyes seemed to have shrunk in their sockets, though they were weak and watery, owing to some glandular affection which compelled him to wipe them continually, she considered him to be a very gentlemanly and pleasant-looking man. Moreover, the widow saw favorable indications of character in the well-developed calves of his legs and in his square-shaped nose, indications still further borne out by the worthy man's full-moon countenance and look of stupid good-nature. This, in all probability, was a strongly-build animal, whose brains mostly consisted in a capacity for affection. His hair, worn in ailes de pigeon, and duly powdered every morning by the barber from the Ecole Polytechnique, described five points on his low forehead, and made an elegant setting to his face. Though his manners were somewhat boorish, he was always as neat as a new pin and he took his snuff in a lordly way, like a man who knows that his snuff- box is always likely to be filled with maccaboy, so that when Mme. Vauquer lay down to rest on the day of M. Goriot's installation, her heart, like a larded partridge, sweltered before the fire of a burning desire to shake off the shroud of Vauquer and rise again as Goriot. She would marry again, sell her boarding-house, give her hand to this fine flower of citizenship, become a lady of consequence in the quarter, and ask for subscriptions for charitable purposes; she would make little Sunday excursions to Choisy, Soissy, Gentilly; she would have a box at the theatre when she liked, instead of waiting for the author's tickets that one of her boarders sometimes gave her, in July; the whole Eldorado of a little Parisian household rose up before Mme. Vauquer in her dreams. Nobody knew that she herself possessed forty thousand francs, accumulated sou by sou, that was her secret; surely as far as money was concerned she was a very tolerable match. "And in other respects, I am quite his equal," she said to herself, turning as if to assure herself of the charms of a form that the portly Sylvie found moulded in down feathers every morning.

°°°°For three months from that day Mme. Veuve Vauquer availed herself of the services of M. Goriot's coiffeur, and went to some expense over her toilette, expense justifiable on the ground that she owed it to herself and her establishment to pay some attention to appearances when such highly-respectable persons honored her house with their presence. She expended no small amount of ingenuity in a sort of weeding process of her lodgers, announcing her intention of receiving henceforward none but people who were in every way select. If a stranger presented himself, she let him know that M. Goriot, one of the best known and most highly- respected merchants in Paris, had singled out her boarding-house for a residence. She drew up a prospectus headed MAISON VAUQUER, in which it was asserted that hers was "one of the oldest and most highly recommended boarding-houses in the Latin Quarter." "From the windows of the house," thus ran the prospectus, "there is a charming view of the Vallee des Gobelins (so there is--from the third floor), and a BEAUTIFUL garden, EXTENDING down to AN AVENUE OF LINDENS at the further end." Mention was made of the bracing air of the place and its quiet situation.

°°°°It was this prospectus that attracted Mme. la Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil, a widow of six and thirty, who was awaiting the final settlement of her husband's affairs, and of another matter regarding a pension due to her as the wife of a general who had died "on the field of battle." On this Mme. Vauquer saw to her table, lighted a fire daily in the sitting-room for nearly six months, and kept the promise of her prospectus, even going to some expense to do so. And the Countess, on her side, addressed Mme. Vauquer as "my dear," and promised her two more boarders, the Baronne de Vaumerland and the widow of a colonel, the late Comte de Picquoisie, who were about to leave a boarding-house in the Marais, where the terms were higher than at the Maison Vauquer. Both these ladies, moreover, would be very well to do when the people at the War Office had come to an end of their formalities. "But Government departments are always so dilatory," the lady added.

°°°°After dinner the two widows went together up to Mme. Vauquer's room, and had a snug little chat over some cordial and various delicacies reserved for the mistress of the house. Mme. Vauquer's ideas as to Goriot were cordially approved by Mme. de l'Ambermesnil; it was a capital notion, which for that matter she had guessed from the very first; in her opinion the vermicelli maker was an excellent man.

°°°°"Ah! my dear lady, such a well-preserved man of his age, as sound as my eyesight--a man who might make a woman happy!" said the widow.

°°°°The good-natured Countess turned to the subject of Mme. Vauquer's dress, which was not in harmony with her projects. "You must put yourself on a war footing," said she.

°°°°After much serious consideration the two widows went shopping together--they purchased a hat adorned with ostrich feathers and a cap at the Palais Royal, and the Countess took her friend to the Magasin de la Petite Jeannette, where they chose a dress and a scarf. Thus equipped for the campaign, the widow looked exactly like the prize animal hung out for a sign above an a la mode beef shop; but she herself was so much pleased with the improvement, as she considered it, in her appearance, that she felt that she lay under some obligation to the Countess; and, though by no means open-handed, she begged that lady to accept a hat that cost twenty francs. The fact was that she needed the Countess' services on the delicate mission of sounding Goriot; the countess must sing her praises in his ears. Mme. de l'Ambermesnil lent herself very good-naturedly to this manoeuvre, began her operations, and succeeded in obtaining a private interview; but the overtures that she made, with a view to securing him for herself, were received with embarrassment, not to say a repulse. She left him, revolted by his coarseness.

°°°°"My angel," said she to her dear friend, "you will make nothing of that man yonder. He is absurdly suspicious, and he is a mean curmudgeon, an idiot, a fool; you would never be happy with him."

°°°°After what had passed between M. Goriot and Mme. de l'Ambermesnil, the Countess would no longer live under the same roof. She left the next day, forgot to pay for six months' board, and left behind her wardrobe, cast-off clothing to the value of five francs. Eagerly and persistently as Mme. Vauquer sought her quondam lodger, the Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil was never heard of again in Paris. The widow often talked of this deplorable business, and regretted her own too confiding disposition. As a matter of fact, she was as suspicious as a cat; but she was like many other people, who cannot trust their own kin and put themselves at the mercy of the next chance comer--an odd but common phenomenon, whose causes may readily be traced to the depths of the human heart.

°°°°Perhaps there are people who know that they have nothing more to look for from those with whom they live; they have shown the emptiness of their hearts to their housemates, and in their secret selves they are conscious that they are severely judged, and that they deserve to be judged severely; but still they feel an unconquerable craving for praises that they do not hear, or they are consumed by a desire to appear to possess, in the eyes of a new audience, the qualities which they have not, hoping to win the admiration or affection of strangers at the risk of forfeiting it again some day. Or, once more, there are other mercenary natures who never do a kindness to a friend or a relation simply because these have a claim upon them, while a service done to a stranger brings its reward to self-love. Such natures feel but little affection for those who are nearest to them; they keep their kindness for remoter circles of acquaintance, and show most to those who dwell on its utmost limits. Mme. Vauquer belonged to both these essentially mean, false, and execrable classes.

°°°°"If I had been there at the time," Vautrin would say at the end of the story, I would have shown her up, and that misfortune would not have befallen you. I know that kind of phiz!"

°°°°Like all narrow natures, Mme. Vauquer was wont to confine her attention to events, and did not go very deeply into the causes that brought them about; she likewise preferred to throw the blame of her own mistakes on other people, so she chose to consider that the honest vermicelli maker was responsible for her misfortune. It had opened her eyes, so she said, with regard to him. As soon as she saw that her blandishments were in vain, and that her outlay on her toilette was money thrown away, she was not slow to discover the reason of his indifference. It became plain to her at once that there was SOME OTHER ATTRACTION, to use her own expression. In short, it was evident that the hope she had so fondly cherished was a baseless delusion, and that she would "never make anything out of that man yonder," in the Countess' forcible phrase. The Countess seemed to have been a judge of character. Mme. Vauquer's aversion was naturally more energetic than her friendship, for her hatred was not in proportion to her love, but to her disappointed expectations. The human heart may find here and there a resting-place short of the highest height of affection, but we seldom stop in the steep, downward slope of hatred. Still, M. Goriot was a lodger, and the widow's wounded self-love could not vent itself in an explosion of wrath; like a monk harassed by the prior of his convent, she was forced to stifle her sighs of disappointment, and to gulp down her craving for revenge. Little minds find gratification for their feelings, benevolent or otherwise, by a constant exercise of petty ingenuity. The widow employed her woman's malice to devise a system of covert persecution. She began by a course of retrenchment--various luxuries which had found their way to the table appeared there no more.

°°°°"No more gherkins, no more anchovies; they have made a fool of me!" she said to Sylvie one morning, and they returned to the old bill of fare.

°°°°The thrifty frugality necessary to those who mean to make their way in the world had become an inveterate habit of life with M. Goriot. Soup, boiled beef, and a dish of vegetables had been, and always would be, the dinner he liked best, so Mme. Vauquer found it very difficult to annoy a boarder whose tastes were so simple. He was proof against her malice, and in desperation she spoke to him and of him slightingly before the other lodgers, who began to amuse themselves at his expense, and so gratified her desire for revenge.

°°°°Towards the end of the first year the widow's suspicions had reached such a pitch that she began to wonder how it was that a retired merchant with a secure income of seven or eight thousand livres, the owner of such magnificent plate and jewelry handsome enough for a kept mistress, should be living in her house. Why should he devote so small a proportion of his money to his expenses? Until the first year was nearly at an end, Goriot had dined out once or twice every week, but these occasions came less frequently, and at last he was scarcely absent from the dinner- table twice a month. It was hardly expected that Mme. Vauquer should regard the increased regularity of her boarder's habits with complacency, when those little excursions of his had been so much to her interest. She attributed the change not so much to a gradual diminution of fortune as to a spiteful wish to annoy his hostess. It is one of the most detestable habits of a Liliputian mind to credit other people with its own malignant pettiness.

°°°°Unluckily, towards the end of the second year, M. Goriot's conduct gave some color to the idle talk about him. He asked Mme. Vauquer to give him a room on the second floor, and to make a corresponding reduction in her charges. Apparently, such strict economy was called for, that he did without a fire all through the winter. Mme. Vauquer asked to be paid in advance, an arrangement to which M. Goriot consented, and thenceforward she spoke of him as "Father Goriot."

°°°°What had brought about this decline and fall? Conjecture was keen, but investigation was difficult. Father Goriot was not communicative; in the sham countess' phrase he was "a curmudgeon." Empty-headed people who babble about their own affairs because they have nothing else to occupy them, naturally conclude that if people say nothing of their doings it is because their doings will not bear being talked about; so the highly respectable merchant became a scoundrel, and the late beau was an old rogue. Opinion fluctuated. Sometimes, according to Vautrin, who came about this time to live in the Maison Vauquer, Father Goriot was a man who went on 'Change and DABBLED (to use the sufficiently expressive language of the Stock Exchange) in stocks and shares after he had ruined himself by heavy speculation. Sometimes it was held that he was one of those petty gamblers who nightly play for small stakes until they win a few francs. A theory that he was a detective in the employ of the Home Office found favor at one time, but Vautrin urged that "Goriot was not sharp enough for one of that sort." There were yet other solutions; Father Goriot was a skinflint, a shark of a money- lender, a man who lived by selling lottery tickets. He was by turns all the most mysterious brood of vice and shame and misery; yet, however vile his life might be, the feeling of repulsion which he aroused in others was not so strong that he must be banished from their society--he paid his way. Besides, Goriot had his uses, every one vented his spleen or sharpened his wit on him; he was pelted with jokes and belabored with hard words. The general consensus of opinion was in favor of a theory which seemed the most likely; this was Mme. Vauquer's view. According to her, the man so well preserved at his time of life, as sound as her eyesight, with whom a woman might be very happy, was a libertine who had strange tastes. These are the facts upon which Mme. Vauquer's slanders were based.

°°°°Early one morning, some few months after the departure of the unlucky Countess who had managed to live for six months at the widow's expense, Mme. Vauquer (not yet dressed) heard the rustle of a silk dress and a young woman's light footstep on the stair; some one was going to Goriot's room. He seemed to expect the visit, for his door stood ajar. The portly Sylvie presently came up to tell her mistress that a girl too pretty to be honest, "dressed like a goddess," and not a speck of mud on her laced cashmere boots, had glided in from the street like a snake, had found the kitchen, and asked for M. Goriot's room. Mme. Vauquer and the cook, listening, overheard several words affectionately spoken during the visit, which lasted for some time. When M. Goriot went downstairs with the lady, the stout Sylvie forthwith took her basket and followed the lover-like couple, under pretext of going to do her marketing.

°°°°"M. Goriot must be awfully rich, all the same, madame," she reported on her return, "to keep her in such style. Just imagine it! There was a splendid carriage waiting at the corner of the Place de l'Estrapade, and SHE got into it."

°°°°While they were at dinner that evening, Mme. Vauquer went to the window and drew the curtain, as the sun was shining into Goriot's eyes.

°°°°"You are beloved of fair ladies, M. Goriot--the sun seeks you out," she said, alluding to his visitor. "Peste! you have good taste; she was very pretty."

°°°°"That was my daughter," he said, with a kind of pride in his voice, and the rest chose to consider this as the fatuity of an old man who wishes to save appearances.

°°°°A month after this visit M. Goriot received another. The same daughter who had come to see him that morning came again after dinner, this time in evening dress. The boarders, in deep discussion in the dining-room, caught a glimpse of a lovely, fair-haired woman, slender, graceful, and much too distinguished- looking to be a daughter of Father Goriot's.

°°°°"Two of them!" cried the portly Sylvie, who did not recognize the lady of the first visit.

°°°°A few days later, and another young lady--a tall, well-moulded brunette, with dark hair and bright eyes--came to ask for M. Goriot.

°°°°"Three of them!" said Sylvie.

°°°°Then the second daughter, who had first come in the morning to see her father, came shortly afterwards in the evening. She wore a ball dress, and came in a carriage.

°°°°"Four of them!" commented Mme. Vauquer and her plump handmaid. Sylvie saw not a trace of resemblance between this great lady and the girl in her simple morning dress who had entered her kitchen on the occasion of her first visit.

°°°°At that time Goriot was paying twelve hundred francs a year to his landlady, and Mme. Vauquer saw nothing out of the common in the fact that a rich man had four or five mistresses; nay, she thought it very knowing of him to pass them off as his daughters. She was not at all inclined to draw a hard-and-fast line, or to take umbrage at his sending for them to the Maison Vauquer; yet, inasmuch as these visits explained her boarder's indifference to her, she went so far (at the end of the second year) as to speak of him as an "ugly old wretch." When at length her boarder declined to nine hundred francs a year, she asked him very insolently what he took her house to be, after meeting one of these ladies on he stairs. Father Goriot answered that the lady was his eldest daughter.

°°°°"So you have two or three dozen daughters, have you?" said Mme. Vauquer sharply.

°°°°"I have only two," her boarder answered meekly, like a ruined man who is broken in to all the cruel usage of misfortune.

°°°°Towards the end of the third year Father Goriot reduced his expenses still further; he went up to the third story, and now paid forty-five francs a month. He did without snuff, told his hairdresser that he no longer required his services, and gave up wearing powder. When Goriot appeared for the first time in this condition, an exclamation of astonishment broke from his hostess at the color of his hair--a dingy olive gray. He had grown sadder day by day under the influence of some hidden trouble; among all the faces round the table, his was the most woe-begone. There was no longer any doubt. Goriot was an elderly libertine, whose eyes had only been preserved by the skill of the physician from the malign influence of the remedies necessitated by the state of his health. The disgusting color of his hair was a result of his excesses and of the drugs which he had taken that he might continue his career. The poor old man's mental and physical condition afforded some grounds for the absurd rubbish talked about him. When his outfit was worn out, he replaced the fine linen by calico at fourteen sous the ell. His diamonds, his gold snuff-box, watch-chain and trinkets, disappeared one by one. He had left off wearing the corn-flower blue coat, and was sumptuously arrayed, summer as well as winter, in a coarse chestnut-brown coat, a plush waistcoat, and doeskin breeches. He grew thinner and thinner; his legs were shrunken, his cheeks, once so puffed out by contented bourgeois prosperity, were covered with wrinkles, and the outlines of the jawbones were distinctly visible; there were deep furrows in his forehead. In the fourth year of his residence in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve he was no longer like his former self. The hale vermicelli manufacturer, sixty-two years of age, who had looked scarce forty, the stout, comfortable, prosperous tradesman, with an almost bucolic air, and such a brisk demeanor that it did you good to look at him; the man with something boyish in his smile, had suddenly sunk into his dotage, and had become a feeble, vacillating septuagenarian.

°°°°The keen, bright blue eyes had grown dull, and faded to a steel- gray color; the red inflamed rims looked as though they had shed tears of blood. He excited feelings of repulsion in some, and of pity in others. The young medical students who came to the house noticed the drooping of his lower lip and the conformation of the facial angle; and, after teasing him for some time to no purpose, they declared that cretinism was setting in.

°°°°One evening after dinner Mme. Vauquer said half banteringly to him, "So those daughters of yours don't come to see you any more, eh?" meaning to imply her doubts as to his paternity; but Father Goriot shrank as if his hostess had touched him with a sword- point.

°°°°"They come sometimes," he said in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Aha! you still see them sometimes?" cried the students. "Bravo, Father Goriot!"

°°°°The old man scarcely seemed to hear the witticisms at his expense that followed on the words; he had relapsed into the dreamy state of mind that these superficial observers took for senile torpor, due to his lack of intelligence. If they had only known, they might have been deeply interested by the problem of his condition; but few problems were more obscure. It was easy, of course, to find out whether Goriot had really been a vermicelli manufacturer; the amount of his fortune was readily discoverable; but the old people, who were most inquisitive as to his concerns, never went beyond the limits of the Quarter, and lived in the lodging-house much as oysters cling to a rock. As for the rest, the current of life in Paris daily awaited them, and swept them away with it; so soon as they left the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, they forgot the existence of the old man, their butt at dinner. For those narrow souls, or for careless youth, the misery in Father Goriot's withered face and its dull apathy were quite incompatible with wealth or any sort of intelligence. As for the creatures whom he called his daughters, all Mme. Vauquer's boarders were of her opinion. With the faculty for severe logic sedulously cultivated by elderly women during long evenings of gossip till they can always find an hypothesis to fit all circumstances, she was wont to reason thus:

°°°°"If Father Goriot had daughters of his own as rich as those ladies who came here seemed to be, he would not be lodging in my house, on the third floor, at forty-five francs a month; and he would not go about dressed like a poor man."

°°°°No objection could be raised to these inferences. So by the end of the month of November 1819, at the time when the curtain rises on this drama, every one in the house had come to have a very decided opinion as to the poor old man. He had never had either wife or daughter; excesses had reduced him to this sluggish condition; he was a sort of human mollusk who should be classed among the capulidoe, so one of the dinner contingent, an employe at the Museum, who had a pretty wit of his own. Poiret was an eagle, a gentleman, compared with Goriot. Poiret would join the talk, argue, answer when he was spoken to; as a matter of fact, his talk, arguments, and responses contributed nothing to the conversation, for Poiret had a habit of repeating what the others said in different words; still, he did join in the talk; he was alive, and seemed capable of feeling; while Father Goriot (to quote the Museum official again) was invariably at zero--Reaumur.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac had just returned to Paris in a state of mind not unknown to young men who are conscious of unusual powers, and to those whose faculties are so stimulated by a difficult position, that for the time being they rise above the ordinary level.

°°°°Rastignac's first year of study for the preliminary examinations in law had left him free to see the sights of Paris and to enjoy some of its amusements. A student has not much time on his hands if he sets himself to learn the repertory of every theatre, and to study the ins and outs of the labyrinth of Paris. To know its customs; to learn the language, and become familiar with the amusements of the capital, he must explore its recesses, good and bad, follow the studies that please him best, and form some idea of the treasures contained in galleries and museums.

°°°°At this stage of his career a student grows eager and excited about all sorts of follies that seem to him to be of immense importance. He has his hero, his great man, a professor at the College de France, paid to talk down to the level of his audience. He adjusts his cravat, and strikes various attitudes for the benefit of the women in the first galleries at the Opera- Comique. As he passes through all these successive initiations, and breaks out of his sheath, the horizons of life widen around him, and at length he grasps the plan of society with the different human strata of which it is composed.

°°°°If he begins by admiring the procession of carriages on sunny afternoons in the Champs-Elysees, he soon reaches the further stage of envying their owners. Unconsciously, Eugene had served his apprenticeship before he went back to Angouleme for the long vacation after taking his degrees as bachelor of arts and bachelor of law. The illusions of childhood had vanished, so also had the ideas he brought with him from the provinces; he had returned thither with an intelligence developed, with loftier ambitions, and saw things as they were at home in the old manor house. His father and mother, his two brothers and two sisters, with an aged aunt, whose whole fortune consisted in annuities, lived on the little estate of Rastignac. The whole property brought in about three thousand francs; and though the amount varied with the season (as must always be the case in a vine- growing district), they were obliged to spare an unvarying twelve hundred francs out of their income for him. He saw how constantly the poverty, which they had generously hidden from him, weighed upon them; he could not help comparing the sisters, who had seemed so beautiful to his boyish eyes, with women in Paris, who had realized the beauty of his dreams. The uncertain future of the whole family depended upon him. It did not escape his eyes that not a crumb was wasted in the house, nor that the wine they drank was made from the second pressing; a multitude of small things, which it is useless to speak of in detail here, made him burn to distinguish himself, and his ambition to succeed increased tenfold.

°°°°He meant, like all great souls, that his success should be owing entirely to his merits; but his was pre-eminently a southern temperament, the execution of his plans was sure to be marred by the vertigo that seizes on youth when youth sees itself alone in a wide sea, uncertain how to spend its energies, whither to steer its course, how to adapt its sails to the winds. At first he determined to fling himself heart and soul into his work, but he was diverted from this purpose by the need of society and connections; then he saw how great an influence women exert in social life, and suddenly made up his mind to go out into this world to seek a protectress there. Surely a clever and high- spirited young man, whose wit and courage were set off to advantage by a graceful figure and the vigorous kind of beauty that readily strikes a woman's imagination, need not despair of finding a protectress. These ideas occurred to him in his country walks with his sisters, whom he had once joined so gaily. The girls thought him very much changed.

°°°°His aunt, Mme. de Marcillac, had been presented at court, and had moved among the brightest heights of that lofty region. Suddenly the young man's ambition discerned in those recollections of hers, which had been like nursery fairy tales to her nephews and nieces, the elements of a social success at least as important as the success which he had achieved at the Ecole de Droit. He began to ask his aunt about those relations; some of the old ties might still hold good. After much shaking of the branches of the family tree, the old lady came to the conclusion that of all persons who could be useful to her nephew among the selfish genus of rich relations, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was the least likely to refuse. To this lady, therefore, she wrote in the old-fashioned style, recommending Eugene to her; pointing out to her nephew that if he succeeded in pleasing Mme. de Beauseant, the Vicomtesse would introduce him to other relations. A few days after his return to Paris, therefore, Rastignac sent his aunt's letter to Mme. de Beauseant. The Vicomtesse replied by an invitation to a ball for the following evening. This was the position of affairs at the Maison Vauquer at the end of November 1819.

°°°°A few days later, after Mme. de Beauseant's ball, Eugene came in at two o'clock in the morning. The persevering student meant to make up for the lost time by working until daylight. It was the first time that he had attempted to spend the night in this way in that silent quarter. The spell of a factitious energy was upon him; he had beheld the pomp and splendor of the world. He had not dined at the Maison Vauquer; the boarders probably would think that he would walk home at daybreak from the dance, as he had done sometimes on former occasions, after a fete at the Prado, or a ball at the Odeon, splashing his silk stockings thereby, and ruining his pumps.

°°°°It so happened that Christophe took a look into the street before drawing the bolts of the door; and Rastignac, coming in at that moment, could go up to his room without making any noise, followed by Christophe, who made a great deal. Eugene exchanged his dress suit for a shabby overcoat and slippers, kindled a fire with some blocks of patent fuel, and prepared for his night's work in such a sort that the faint sounds he made were drowned by Christophe's heavy tramp on the stairs.

°°°°Eugene sat absorbed in thought for a few moments before plunging into his law books. He had just become aware of the fact that the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was one of the queens of fashion, that her house was thought to be the pleasantest in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. And not only so, she was, by right of her fortune, and the name she bore, one of the most conspicuous figures in that aristocratic world. Thanks to the aunt, thanks to Mme. de Marcillac's letter of introduction, the poor student had been kindly received in that house before he knew the extent of the favor thus shown to him. It was almost like a patent of nobility to be admitted to those gilded salons; he had appeared in the most exclusive circle in Paris, and now all doors were open for him. Eugene had been dazzled at first by the brilliant assembly, and had scarcely exchanged a few words with the Vicomtesse; he had been content to single out a goddess among this throng of Parisian divinities, one of those women who are sure to attract a young man's fancy.

°°°°The Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud was tall and gracefully made; she had one of the prettiest figures in Paris. Imagine a pair of great dark eyes, a magnificently moulded hand, a shapely foot. There was a fiery energy in her movements; the Marquis de Ronquerolles had called her "a thoroughbred," "a pure pedigree," these figures of speech have replaced the "heavenly angel" and Ossianic nomenclature; the old mythology of love is extinct, doomed to perish by modern dandyism. But for Rastignac, Mme. Anastasie de Restaud was the woman for whom he had sighed. He had contrived to write his name twice upon the list of partners upon her fan, and had snatched a few words with her during the first quadrille.

°°°°"Where shall I meet you again, Madame?" he asked abruptly, and the tones of his voice were full of the vehement energy that women like so well.

°°°°"Oh, everywhere!" said she, "in the Bois, at the Bouffons, in my own house."

°°°°With the impetuosity of his adventurous southern temper, he did all he could to cultivate an acquaintance with this lovely countess, making the best of his opportunities in the quadrille and during a waltz that she gave him. When he told her that he was a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's, the Countess, whom he took for a great lady, asked him to call at her house, and after her parting smile, Rastignac felt convinced that he must make this visit. He was so lucky as to light upon some one who did not laugh at his ignorance, a fatal defect among the gilded and insolent youth of that period; the coterie of Maulincourts, Maximes de Trailles, de Marsays, Ronquerolles, Ajuda-Pintos, and Vandenesses who shone there in all the glory of coxcombry among the best-dressed women of fashion in Paris--Lady Brandon, the Duchesse de Langeais, the Comtesse de Kergarouet, Mme. de Serizy, the Duchesse de Carigliano, the Comtesse Ferraud, Mme. de Lanty, the Marquise d'Aiglemont, Mme. Firmiani, the Marquise de Listomere and the Marquise d'Espard, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and the Grandlieus. Luckily, therefore, for him, the novice happened upon the Marquis de Montriveau, the lover of the Duchesse de Langeais, a general as simple as a child; from him Rastignac learned that the Comtesse lived in the Rue du Helder.

°°°°Ah, what it is to be young, eager to see the world, greedily on the watch for any chance that brings you nearer the woman of your dreams, and behold two houses open their doors to you! To set foot in the Vicomtesse de Beauseant's house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; to fall on your knees before a Comtesse de Restaud in the Chaussee d'Antin; to look at one glance across a vista of Paris drawing-rooms, conscious that, possessing sufficient good looks, you may hope to find aid and protection there in a feminine heart! To feel ambitious enough to spurn the tight-rope on which you must walk with the steady head of an acrobat for whom a fall is impossible, and to find in a charming woman the best of all balancing poles.

°°°°He sat there with his thoughts for a while, Law on the one hand, and Poverty on the other, beholding a radiant vision of a woman rise above the dull, smouldering fire. Who would not have paused and questioned the future as Eugene was doing? who would not have pictured it full of success? His wondering thoughts took wings; he was transported out of the present into that blissful future; he was sitting by Mme. de Restaud's side, when a sort of sigh, like the grunt of an overburdened St. Joseph, broke the silence of the night. It vibrated through the student, who took the sound for a death groan. He opened his door noiselessly, went out upon the landing, and saw a thin streak of light under Father Goriot's door. Eugene feared that his neighbor had been taken ill; he went over and looked through the keyhole; the old man was busily engaged in an occupation so singular and so suspicious that Rastignac thought he was only doing a piece of necessary service to society to watch the self-styled vermicelli maker's nocturnal industries.

°°°°The table was upturned, and Goriot had doubtless in some way secured a silver plate and cup to the bar before knotting a thick rope round them; he was pulling at this rope with such enormous force that they were being crushed and twisted out of shape; to all appearance he meant to convert the richly wrought metal into ingots.

°°°°"Peste! what a man!" said Rastignac, as he watched Goriot's muscular arms; there was not a sound in the room while the old man, with the aid of the rope, was kneading the silver like dough. "Was he then, indeed, a thief, or a receiver of stolen goods, who affected imbecility and decrepitude, and lived like a beggar that he might carry on his pursuits the more securely?" Eugene stood for a moment revolving these questions, then he looked again through the keyhole.

°°°°Father Goriot had unwound his coil of rope; he had covered the table with a blanket, and was now employed in rolling the flattened mass of silver into a bar, an operation which he performed with marvelous dexterity.

°°°°"Why, he must be as strong as Augustus, King of Poland!" said Eugene to himself when the bar was nearly finished.

°°°°Father Goriot looked sadly at his handiwork, tears fell from his eyes, he blew out the dip which had served him for a light while he manipulated the silver, and Eugene heard him sigh as he lay down again.

°°°°"He is mad," thought the student.

°°°°"Poor child!" Father Goriot said aloud. Rastignac, hearing those words, concluded to keep silence; he would not hastily condemn his neighbor. He was just in the doorway of his room when a strange sound from the staircase below reached his ears; it might have been made by two men coming up in list slippers. Eugene listened; two men there certainly were, he could hear their breathing. Yet there had been no sound of opening the street door, no footsteps in the passage. Suddenly, too, he saw a faint gleam of light on the second story; it came from M. Vautrin's room.

°°°°"There are a good many mysteries here for a lodging-house!" he said to himself.

°°°°He went part of the way downstairs and listened again. The rattle of gold reached his ears. In another moment the light was put out, and again he distinctly heard the breathing of two men, but no sound of a door being opened or shut. The two men went downstairs, the faint sounds growing fainter as they went.

°°°°"Who is there?" cried Mme. Vauquer out of her bedroom window.

°°°°"I, Mme. Vauquer," answered Vautrin's deep bass voice. "I am coming in."

°°°°"That is odd! Christophe drew the bolts," said Eugene, going back to his room. "You have to sit up at night, it seems, if you really mean to know all that is going on about you in Paris."

°°°°These incidents turned his thought from his ambitious dreams; he betook himself to his work, but his thought wandered back to Father Goriot's suspicious occupation; Mme. de Restaud's face swam again and again before his eyes like a vision of a brilliant future; and at last he lay down and slept with clenched fists. When a young man makes up his mind that he will work all night, the chances are that seven times out of ten he will sleep till morning. Such vigils do not begin before we are turned twenty.

°°°°The next morning Paris was wrapped in one of the dense fogs that throw the most punctual people out in their calculations as to the time; even the most business-like folk fail to keep their appointments in such weather, and ordinary mortals wake up at noon and fancy it is eight o'clock. On this morning it was half- past nine, and Mme. Vauquer still lay abed. Christophe was late, Sylvie was late, but the two sat comfortably taking their coffee as usual. It was Sylvie's custom to take the cream off the milk destined for the boarders' breakfast for her own, and to boil the remainder for some time, so that madame should not discover this illegal exaction.

°°°°"Sylvie," said Christophe, as he dipped a piece of toast into the coffee, "M. Vautrin, who is not such a bad sort, all the same, had two people come to see him again last night. If madame says anything, mind you say nothing about it."

°°°°"Has he given you something?"

°°°°"He gave me a five-franc piece this month, which is as good as saying, 'Hold your tongue.' "

°°°°"Except him and Mme. Couture, who doesn't look twice at every penny, there's no one in the house that doesn't try to get back with the left hand all that they give with the right at New Year," said Sylvie.

°°°°"And, after all," said Christophe, "what do they give you? A miserable five-franc piece. There is Father Goriot, who has cleaned his shoes himself these two years past. There is that old beggar Poiret, who goes without blacking altogether; he would sooner drink it than put it on his boots. Then there is that whipper-snapper of a student, who gives me a couple of francs, Two francs will not pay for my brushes, and he sells his old clothes, and gets more for them than they are worth. Oh! they're a shabby lot!"

°°°°"Pooh!" said Sylvie, sipping her coffee, "our places are the best in the Quarter, that I know. But about that great big chap Vautrin, Christophe; has any one told you anything about him?"

°°°°"Yes. I met a gentleman in the street a few days ago; he said to me, 'There's a gentleman in your place, isn't there? a tall man that dyes his whiskers?' I told him, 'No, sir; they aren't dyed. A gay fellow like him hasn't the time to do it.' And when I told M. Vautrin about it afterwards, he said, 'Quite right, my boy. That is the way to answer them. There is nothing more unpleasant than to have your little weaknesses known; it might spoil many a match.' "

°°°°"Well, and for my part," said Sylvie, "a man tried to humbug me at the market wanting to know if I had seen him put on his shirt. Such bosh! There," she cried, interrupting herself, "that's a quarter to ten striking at the Val-de-Grace, and not a soul stirring!"

°°°°"Pooh! they are all gone out. Mme. Couture and the girl went out at eight o'clock to take the wafer at Saint-Etienne. Father Goriot started off somewhere with a parcel, and the student won't be back from his lecture till ten o'clock. I saw them go while I was sweeping the stairs; Father Goriot knocked up against me, and his parcel was as hard as iron. What is the old fellow up to, I wonder? He is as good as a plaything for the rest of them; they can never let him alone; but he is a good man, all the same, and worth more than all of them put together. He doesn't give you much himself, but he sometimes sends you with a message to ladies who fork out famous tips; they are dressed grandly, too."

°°°°"His daughters, as he calls them, eh? There are a dozen of them."

°°°°"I have never been to more than two--the two who came here."

°°°°"There is madame moving overhead; I shall have to go, or she will raise a fine racket. Just keep an eye on the milk, Christophe; don't let the cat get at it."

°°°°Sylvie went up to her mistress' room.

°°°°"Sylvie! How is this? It's nearly ten o'clock, and you let me sleep like a dormouse! Such a thing has never happened before."

°°°°"It's the fog; it is that thick, you could cut it with a knife."

°°°°"But how about breakfast?"

°°°°"Bah! the boarders are possessed, I'm sure. They all cleared out before there was a wink of daylight."

°°°°"Do speak properly, Sylvie," Mme. Vauquer retorted; "say a blink of daylight."

°°°°"Ah, well, madame, whichever you please. Anyhow, you can have breakfast at ten o'clock. La Michonnette and Poiret have neither of them stirred. There are only those two upstairs, and they are sleeping like the logs they are."

°°°°"But, Sylvie, you put their names together as if----"

°°°°"As if what?" said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. "The two of them make a pair."

°°°°"It is a strange thing, isn't it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last night after Christophe had bolted the door?"

°°°°"Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?"

°°°°"Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears on the table, those at five a penny."

°°°°A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all haste.

°°°°"Mistigris!" she cried.

°°°°The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

°°°°"Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!" she said. "Sylvie! Sylvie!"

°°°°"Yes, madame; what is it?"

°°°°"Just see what the cat has done!"

°°°°"It is all that stupid Christophe's fault. I told him to stop and lay the table. What has become of him? Don't you worry, madame; Father Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won't know the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats."

°°°°"I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?" said Mme. Vauquer, setting the plates round the table.

°°°°"Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"I have overslept myself," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same."

°°°°The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the sitting-room, singing loudly:

°°°°" 'Tis the same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance . .

°°°°"Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!" he cried at the sight of his hostess, and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

°°°°"There! have done----"

°°°°" 'Impertinence!' Say it!" he answered. "Come, say it! Now, isn't that what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah! I am a nice man, am I not?

°°°°"For the locks of brown and the golden hair   A sighing lover . . .

°°°°"Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

°°°°. . . . led by chance."

°°°°"What?" asked the widow.

°°°°"Father Goriot in the goldsmith's shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there, and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that's not used to the trade."

°°°°"Really? You don't say so?"

°°°°"Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair. He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went into a money-lender's house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father's bones, a Turk, a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob HIM, for he puts all his coin into the Bank."

°°°°"Then what was Father Goriot doing there?"

°°°°"Doing?" said Vautrin. "Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----"

°°°°"There he is!" cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Christophe," cried Father Goriot's voice, "come upstairs with me."

°°°°Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

°°°°"Where are you going?" Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

°°°°"Out on an errand for M. Goriot."

°°°°"What may that be?" said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe's hand. "Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud," he read. "Where are you going with it?" he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

°°°°"To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands myself."

°°°°"What is there inside it?" said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the light. "A banknote? No." He peered into the envelope. "A receipted account!" he cried. "My word! 'tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you, old chap," he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe's head, and spinning the man round like a thimble; "you will have a famous tip."

°°°°By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme. Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

°°°°"The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance."

°°°°When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

°°°°"Where have you been this morning, fair lady?" said Mme. Vauquer, turning to Mme. Couture.

°°°°"We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She is trembling like a leaf," Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

°°°°"Warm yourself, Victorine," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften your father's heart," said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the orphan girl; "but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl needs a dowry nowadays."

°°°°"Poor child!" said Mme. Vauquer. "Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself."

°°°°Victorine's eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

°°°°"If we could only see him!" said the Commissary-General's widow; "if I could speak to him myself and give him his wife's last letter! I have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my handwriting----"

°°°°" 'Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!' " exclaimed Vautrin, breaking in upon her. "So that is how you are, is it? In a few days' time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall see."

°°°°"Oh! sir," said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin, who showed no sign of being touched by it, "if you know of any way of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his affection and my mother's honor are more to me than all the money in the world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----"

°°°°"The same old story everywhere," sang Vautrin, with a satirical intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven people thus assembled bade each other good- morning, and took their places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student's footstep was heard outside.

°°°°"Ah! here you are, M. Eugene," said Sylvie; "every one is breakfasting at home to-day."

°°°°The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside Goriot.

°°°°"I have just met with a queer adventure," he said, as he helped himself abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer's eyes gauged as usual.

°°°°"An adventure?" queried Poiret.

°°°°"Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?" Vautrin asked of Poiret. "M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing."

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

°°°°"Tell us about your adventure!" demanded M. Vautrin.

°°°°"Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a king---"

°°°°"Fisher," put in Vautrin, interrupting.

°°°°"What do you mean, sir?" said Eugene sharply.

°°°°"I said 'fisher,' because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than kings."

°°°°"Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a king," said Poiret the ditto-ist, "because----"

°°°°"In fact"--the law-student cut him short--"I danced with one of the handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this divine countess about nine o'clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how my heart beat! I began to think----"

°°°°"That she was coming here," said Vautrin, with a keen look at the student. "I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman's heart, you will find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder."

°°°°The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

°°°°"Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!" cried Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

°°°°"It is just as I guessed," said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme. Vauquer's ear.

°°°°Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own thoughts than he did at that moment.

°°°°"Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! there you are!" answered Vautrin. "Old Father Goriot there knew it quite well! and why should I not know it too?"

°°°°"M. Goriot?" the student cried.

°°°°"What is it?" asked the old man. "So she was very beautiful, was she, yesterday night?"

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"Look at the old wretch," said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; "how his eyes light up!"

°°°°"Then does he really keep her?" said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to the student.

°°°°"Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty," Eugene answered. Father Goriot watched him with eager eyes. "If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there, my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list, and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a galloping horse, or a woman dancing."

°°°°"So the wheel turns," said Vautrin; "yesterday night at a duchess' ball, this morning in a money-lender's office, on the lowest rung of the ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers' hearts to find something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside down. Just a Parisienne through and through!"

°°°°Father Goriot's face, which had shone at the student's words like the sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of Vautrin's.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. Vauquer, "but where is your adventure? Did you speak to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?"

°°°°"She did not see me," said Eugene. "But only think of meeting one of the prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o'clock! She could not have reached home after the ball till two o'clock this morning. Wasn't it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of adventures."

°°°°"Pshaw! much funnier things than THAT happen here!" exclaimed Vautrin.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

°°°°"Well, did you see?" said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest of the circle. "He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain."

°°°°"Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de Restaud is anything to Father Goriot," cried the student.

°°°°"Well, and if you don't," broke in Vautrin, "we are not set on convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed to be like the sound of a trumpet to a trooper's horse. "Aha!" said Vautrin, stopping in his speech to give her a searching glance, "so we have had our little experiences, have we?"

°°°°The old maid lowered her eyes like a nun who sees a statue.

°°°°"Well," he went on, "when folk of that kind get a notion into their heads, they cannot drop it. They must drink the water from some particular spring--it is stagnant as often as not; but they will sell their wives and families, they will sell their own souls to the devil to get it. For some this spring is play, or the stock-exchange, or music, or a collection of pictures or insects; for others it is some woman who can give them the dainties they like. You might offer these last all the women on earth--they would turn up their noses; they will have the only one who can gratify their passion. It often happens that the woman does not care for them at all, and treats them cruelly; they buy their morsels of satisfaction very dear; but no matter, the fools are never tired of it; they will take their last blanket to the pawnbroker's to give their last five-franc piece to her. Father Goriot here is one of that sort. He is discreet, so the Countess exploits him--just the way of the gay world. The poor old fellow thinks of her and of nothing else. In all other respects you see he is a stupid animal; but get him on that subject, and his eyes sparkle like diamonds. That secret is not difficult to guess. He took some plate himself this morning to the melting-pot, and I saw him at Daddy Gobseck's in the Rue des Gres. And now, mark what follows--he came back here, and gave a letter for the Comtesse de Restaud to that noodle of a Christophe, who showed us the address; there was a receipted bill inside it. It is clear that it was an urgent matter if the Countess also went herself to the old money lender. Father Goriot has financed her handsomely. There is no need to tack a tale together; the thing is self-evident. So that shows you, sir student, that all the time your Countess was smiling, dancing, flirting, swaying her peach-flower crowned head, with her gown gathered into her hand, her slippers were pinching her, as they say; she was thinking of her protested bills, or her lover's protested bills."

°°°°"You have made me wild to know the truth," cried Eugene; "I will go to call on Mme. de Restaud to-morrow."

°°°°"Yes," echoed Poiret; "you must go and call on Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"And perhaps you will find Father Goriot there, who will take payment for the assistance he politely rendered."

°°°°Eugene looked disgusted. "Why, then, this Paris of yours is a slough."

°°°°"And an uncommonly queer slough, too," replied Vautrin. "The mud splashes you as you drive through it in your carriage--you are a respectable person; you go afoot and are splashed--you are a scoundrel. You are so unlucky as to walk off with something or other belonging to somebody else, and they exhibit you as a curiosity in the Place du Palais-de-Justice; you steal a million, and you are pointed out in every salon as a model of virtue. And you pay thirty millions for the police and the courts of justice, for the maintenance of law and order! A pretty slate of things it is!"

°°°°"What," cried Mme. Vauquer, "has Father Goriot really melted down his silver posset-dish?"

°°°°"There were two turtle-doves on the lid, were there not?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that there were."

°°°°"Then, was he fond of it?" said Eugene. "He cried while he was breaking up the cup and plate. I happened to see him by accident."

°°°°"It was dear to him as his own life," answered the widow.

°°°°"There! you see how infatuated the old fellow is!" cried Vautrin. "The woman yonder can coax the soul out of him"

°°°°The student went up to his room. Vautrin went out, and a few moments later Mme. Couture and Victorine drove away in a cab which Sylvie had called for them. Poiret gave his arm to Mlle. Michonneau, and they went together to spend the two sunniest hours of the day in the Jardin des Plantes.

°°°°"Well, those two are as good as married," was the portly Sylvie's comment. "They are going out together to-day for the first time. They are such a couple of dry sticks that if they happen to strike against each other they will draw sparks like flint and steel."

°°°°"Keep clear of Mlle. Michonneau's shawl, then, said Mme. Vauquer, laughing; "it would flare up like tinder."

°°°°At four o'clock that evening, when Goriot came in, he saw, by the light of two smoky lamps, that Victorine's eyes were red. Mme. Vauquer was listening to the history of the visit made that morning to M. Taillefer; it had been made in vain. Taillefer was tired of the annual application made by his daughter and her elderly friend; he gave them a personal interview in order to arrive at an understanding with them.

°°°°"My dear lady," said Mme. Couture, addressing Mme. Vauquer, "just imagine it; he did not even ask Victorine to sit down, she was standing the whole time. He said to me quite coolly, without putting himself in a passion, that we might spare ourselves the trouble of going there; that the young lady (he would not call her his daughter) was injuring her cause by importuning him (IMPORTUNING! once a year, the wretch!); that as Victorine's mother had nothing when he married her, Victorine ought not to expect anything from him; in fact, he said the most cruel things, that made the poor child burst out crying. The little thing threw herself at her father's feet and spoke up bravely; she said that she only persevered in her visits for her mother's sake; that she would obey him without a murmur, but that she begged him to read her poor dead mother's farewell letter. She took it up and gave it to him, saying the most beautiful things in the world, most beautifully expressed; I do not know where she learned them; God

°°°°must have put them into her head, for the poor child was inspired to speak so nicely that it made me cry like a fool to hear her talk. And what do you think the monster was doing all the time? Cutting his nails! He took the letter that poor Mme. Taillefer had soaked with tears, and flung it on to the chimney-piece. 'That is all right,' he said. He held out his hands to raise his daughter, but she covered them with kisses, and he drew them away again. Scandalous, isn't it? And his great booby of a son came in and took no notice of his sister."

°°°°"What inhuman wretches they must be!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"And then they both went out of the room," Mme. Couture went on, without heeding the worthy vermicelli maker's exclamation; "father and son bowed to me, and asked me to excuse them on account of urgent business! That is the history of our call. Well, he has seen his daughter at any rate. How he can refuse to acknowledge her I cannot think, for they are as alike as two peas."

°°°°The boarders dropped in one after another, interchanging greetings and empty jokes that certain classes of Parisians regard as humorous and witty. Dulness is their prevailing ingredient, and the whole point consists in mispronouncing a word or a gesture. This kind of argot is always changing. The essence of the jest consists in some catchword suggested by a political event, an incident in the police courts, a street song, or a bit of burlesque at some theatre, and forgotten in a month. Anything and everything serves to keep up a game of battledore and shuttlecock with words and ideas. The diorama, a recent invention, which carried an optical illusion a degree further than panoramas, had given rise to a mania among art students for ending every word with RAMA. The Maison Vauquer had caught the infection from a young artist among the boarders.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur-r-r Poiret," said the employe from the Museum, "how is your health-orama?" Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned to Mme. Couture and Victorine with a "Ladies, you seem melancholy."

°°°°"Is dinner ready?" cried Horace Bianchon, a medical student, and a friend of Rastignac's; "my stomach is sinking usque ad talones."

°°°°"There is an uncommon frozerama outside," said Vautrin. "Make room there, Father Goriot! Confound it, your foot covers the whole front of the stove."

°°°°"Illustrious M. Vautrin," put in Bianchon, "why do you say frozerama? It is incorrect; it should be frozenrama."

°°°°"No, it shouldn't," said the official from the Museum; "frozerama is right by the same rule that you say 'My feet are froze.' "

°°°°"Ah! ah!"

°°°°"Here is his Excellency the Marquis de Rastignac, Doctor of the Law of Contraries," cried Bianchon, seizing Eugene by the throat, and almost throttling him.

°°°°"Hallo there! hallo!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau came noiselessly in, bowed to the rest of the party, and took her place beside the three women without saying a word.

°°°°"That old bat always makes me shudder," said Bianchon in a low voice, indicating Mlle. Michonneau to Vautrin. "I have studied Gall's system, and I am sure she has the bump of Judas."

°°°°"Then you have seen a case before?" said Vautrin.

°°°°"Who has not?" answered Bianchon. "Upon my word, that ghastly old maid looks just like one of the long worms that will gnaw a beam through, give them time enough."

°°°°"That is the way, young man," returned he of the forty years and the dyed whiskers:

°°°°"The rose has lived the life of a rose--   A morning's space."

°°°°"Aha! here is a magnificent soupe-au-rama," cried Poiret as Christophe came in bearing the soup with cautious heed.

°°°°"I beg your pardon, sir," said Mme. Vauquer; "it is soupe aux choux."

°°°°All the young men roared with laughter.

°°°°"Had you there, Poiret!"

°°°°"Poir-r-r-rette! she had you there!"

°°°°"Score two points to Mamma Vauquer," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Did any of you notice the fog this morning?" asked the official.

°°°°"It was a frantic fog," said Bianchon, "a fog unparalleled, doleful, melancholy, sea-green, asthmatical--a Goriot of a fog!"

°°°°"A Goriorama," said the art student, "because you couldn't see a thing in it."

°°°°"Hey! Milord Gaoriotte, they air talking about yoo-o-ou!"

°°°°Father Goriot, seated at the lower end of the table, close to the door through which the servant entered, raised his face; he had smelt at a scrap of bread that lay under his table napkin, an old trick acquired in his commercial capacity, that still showed itself at times.

°°°°"Well," Madame Vauquer cried in sharp tones, that rang above the rattle of spoons and plates and the sound of other voices, "and is there anything the matter with the bread?"

°°°°"Nothing whatever, madame," he answered; "on the contrary, it is made of the best quality of corn; flour from Etampes."

°°°°"How could you tell?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"By the color, by the flavor."

°°°°"You knew the flavor by the smell, I suppose," said Mme. Vauquer. "You have grown so economical, you will find out how to live on the smell of cooking at last."

°°°°"Take out a patent for it, then," cried the Museum official; "you would make a handsome fortune."

°°°°"Never mind him," said the artist; "he does that sort of thing to delude us into thinking that he was a vermicelli maker."

°°°°"Your nose is a corn-sampler, it appears?" inquired the official.

°°°°"Corn WHAT?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"Corn-el."

°°°°"Corn-et."

°°°°"Corn-elian."

°°°°"Corn-ice."

°°°°"Corn-ucopia."

°°°°"Corn-crake."

°°°°"Corn-cockle."

°°°°"Corn-orama."

°°°°The eight responses came like a rolling fire from every part of the room, and the laughter that followed was the more uproarious because poor Father Goriot stared at the others with a puzzled look, like a foreigner trying to catch the meaning of words in a language which he does not understand.

°°°°"Corn? . . ." he said, turning to Vautrin, his next neighbor.

°°°°"Corn on your foot, old man!" said Vautrin, and he drove Father Goriot's cap down over his eyes by a blow on the crown.

°°°°The poor old man thus suddenly attacked was for a moment too bewildered to do anything. Christophe carried off his plate, thinking that he had finished his soup, so that when Goriot had pushed back his cap from his eyes his spoon encountered the table. Every one burst out laughing. "You are a disagreeable joker, sir," said the old man, "and if you take any further liberties with me----"

°°°°"Well, what then, old boy?" Vautrin interrupted.

°°°°"Well, then, you shall pay dearly for it some day----"

°°°°"Down below, eh?" said the artist, "in the little dark corner where they put naughty boys."

°°°°"Well, mademoiselle," Vautrin said, turning to Victorine, "you are eating nothing. So papa was refractory, was he?"

°°°°"A monster!" said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"Mademoiselle might make application for aliment pending her suit; she is not eating anything. Eh! eh! just see how Father Goriot is staring at Mlle. Victorine."

°°°°The old man had forgotten his dinner, he was so absorbed in gazing at the poor girl; the sorrow in her face was unmistakable,--the slighted love of a child whose father would not recognize her.

°°°°"We are mistaken about Father Goriot, my dear boy," said Eugene in a low voice. "He is not an idiot, nor wanting in energy. Try your Gall system on him, and let me know what you think. I saw him crush a silver dish last night as if it had been made of wax; there seems to be something extra-ordinary going on in his mind just now, to judge by his face. His life is so mysterious that it must be worth studying. Oh! you may laugh, Bianchon; I am not joking."

°°°°"The man is a subject, is he?" said Bianchon; "all right! I will dissect him, if he will give me the chance."

°°°°"No; feel his bumps."

°°°°"Hm!--his stupidity might perhaps be contagious."

°°°°The next day Rastignac dressed himself very elegantly, and about three o'clock in the afternoon went to call on Mme. de Restaud. On the way thither he indulged in the wild intoxicating dreams which fill a young head so full of delicious excitement. Young men at his age take no account of obstacles nor of dangers; they see success in every direction; imagination has free play, and turns their lives into a romance; they are saddened or discouraged by the collapse of one of the visionary schemes that have no existence save in their heated fancy. If youth were not ignorant and timid, civilization would be impossible.

°°°°Eugene took unheard-of pains to keep himself in a spotless condition, but on his way through the streets he began to think about Mme. de Restaud and what he should say to her. He equipped himself with wit, rehearsed repartees in the course of an imaginary conversation, and prepared certain neat speeches a la Talleyrand, conjuring up a series of small events which should prepare the way for the declaration on which he had based his future; and during these musings the law student was bespattered with mud, and by the time he reached the Palais Royal he was obliged to have his boots blacked and his trousers brushed.

°°°°"If I were rich," he said, as he changed the five-franc piece he had brought with him in case anything might happen, "I would take a cab, then I could think at my ease."

°°°°At last he reached the Rue du Helder, and asked for the Comtesse de Restaud. He bore the contemptuous glances of the servants, who had seen him cross the court on foot, with the cold fury of a man who knows that he will succeed some day. He understood the meaning of their glances at once, for he had felt his inferiority as soon as he entered the court, where a smart cab was waiting. All the delights of life in Paris seemed to be implied by this visible and manifest sign of luxury and extravagance. A fine horse, in magnificent harness, was pawing the ground, and all at once the law student felt out of humor with himself. Every compartment in his brain which he had thought to find so full of wit was bolted fast; he grew positively stupid. He sent up his name to the Countess, and waited in the ante-chamber, standing on one foot before a window that looked out upon the court; mechanically he leaned his elbow against the sash, and stared before him. The time seemed long; he would have left the house but for the southern tenacity of purpose which works miracles when it is single-minded.

°°°°"Madame is in her boudoir, and cannot see any one at present, sir," said the servant. "She gave me no answer; but if you will go into the dining-room, there is some one already there."

°°°°Rastignac was impressed with a sense of the formidable power of the lackey who can accuse or condemn his masters by a word; he coolly opened the door by which the man had just entered the ante-chamber, meaning, no doubt, to show these insolent flunkeys that he was familiar with the house; but he found that he had thoughtlessly precipitated himself into a small room full of dressers, where lamps were standing, and hot-water pipes, on which towels were being dried; a dark passage and a back staircase lay beyond it. Stifled laughter from the ante-chamber added to his confusion.

°°°°"This way to the drawing-room, sir," said the servant, with the exaggerated respect which seemed to be one more jest at his expense.

°°°°Eugene turned so quickly that he stumbled against a bath. By good luck, he managed to keep his hat on his head, and saved it from immersion in the water; but just as he turned, a door opened at the further end of the dark passage, dimly lighted by a small lamp. Rastignac heard voices and the sound of a kiss; one of the speakers was Mme. de Restaud, the other was Father Goriot. Eugene followed the servant through the dining-room into the drawing- room; he went to a window that looked out into the courtyard, and stood there for a while. He meant to know whether this Goriot was really the Goriot that he knew. His heart beat unwontedly fast; he remembered Vautrin's hideous insinuations. A well-dressed young man suddenly emerged from the room almost as Eugene entered it, saying impatiently to the servant who stood at the door: "I am going, Maurice. Tell Madame la Comtesse that I waited more than half an hour for her."

°°°°Whereupon this insolent being, who, doubtless, had a right to be insolent, sang an Italian trill, and went towards the window where Eugene was standing, moved thereto quite as much by a desire to see the student's face as by a wish to look out into the courtyard.

°°°°"But M. le Comte had better wait a moment longer; madame is disengaged," said Maurice, as he returned to the ante-chamber.

°°°°Just at that moment Father Goriot appeared close to the gate; he had emerged from a door at the foot of the back staircase. The worthy soul was preparing to open his umbrella regardless of the fact that the great gate had opened to admit a tilbury, in which a young man with a ribbon at his button-hole was seated. Father Goriot had scarcely time to start back and save himself. The horse took fright at the umbrella, swerved, and dashed forward towards the flight of steps. The young man looked round in annoyance, saw Father Goriot, and greeted him as he went out with constrained courtesy, such as people usually show to a money- lender so long as they require his services, or the sort of respect they feel it necessary to show for some one whose reputation has been blown upon, so that they blush to acknowledge his acquaintance. Father Goriot gave him a little friendly nod and a good-natured smile. All this happened with lightning speed. Eugene was so deeply interested that he forgot that he was not alone till he suddenly heard the Countess' voice.

°°°°"Oh! Maxime, were you going away?" she said reproachfully, with a shade of pique in her manner. The Countess had not seen the incident nor the entrance of the tilbury. Rastignac turned abruptly and saw her standing before him, coquettishly dressed in a loose white cashmere gown with knots of rose-colored ribbon here and there; her hair was carelessly coiled about her head, as is the wont of Parisian women in the morning; there was a soft fragrance about her--doubtless she was fresh from a bath;--her graceful form seemed more flexible, her beauty more luxuriant. Her eyes glistened. A young man can see everything at a glance; he feels the radiant influence of woman as a plant discerns and absorbs its nutriment from the air; he did not need to touch her hands to feel their cool freshness. He saw faint rose tints through the cashmere of the dressing gown; it had fallen slightly open, giving glimpses of a bare throat, on which the student's eyes rested. The Countess had no need of the adventitious aid of corsets; her girdle defined the outlines of her slender waist; her throat was a challenge to love; her feet, thrust into slippers, were daintily small. As Maxime took her hand and kissed it, Eugene became aware of Maxime's existence, and the Countess saw Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! is that you M. de Rastignac? I am very glad to see you," she said, but there was something in her manner that a shrewd observer would have taken as a hint to depart.

°°°°Maxime, as the Countess Anastasie had called the young man with the haughty insolence of bearing, looked from Eugene to the lady, and from the lady to Eugene; it was sufficiently evident that he wished to be rid of the latter. An exact and faithful rendering of the glance might be given in the words: "Look here, my dear; I hope you intend to send this little whipper-snapper about his business."

°°°°The Countess consulted the young man's face with an intent submissiveness that betrays all the secrets of a woman's heart, and Rastignac all at once began to hate him violently. To begin with, the sight of the fair carefully arranged curls on the other's comely head had convinced him that his own crop was hideous; Maxime's boots, moreover, were elegant and spotless, while his own, in spite of all his care, bore some traces of his recent walk; and, finally, Maxime's overcoat fitted the outline of his figure gracefully, he looked like a pretty woman, while Eugene was wearing a black coat at half-past two. The quick- witted child of the Charente felt the disadvantage at which he was placed beside this tall, slender dandy, with the clear gaze and the pale face, one of those men who would ruin orphan children without scruple. Mme. de Restaud fled into the next room without waiting for Eugene to speak; shaking out the skirts of her dressing-gown in her flight, so that she looked like a white butterfly, and Maxime hurried after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant's ball; he guessed the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he said to himself, "This is my rival; I mean to cut him out."

°°°°Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls's eye twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and so sulkily, that Anastasie's fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, "Why do you not go?" a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make their exit.

°°°°Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

°°°°"Madame," he began, "I hastened to call upon you----"

°°°°He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess; he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime with a cordial "Good morning," that astonished Eugene not a little. The young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

°°°°"M. de Restaud," said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law student.

°°°°Eugene bowed profoundly.

°°°°"This gentleman," she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband, "is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last ball."

°°°°Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs! These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house, produced a magical effect. The Count's stiff manner relaxed at once as he returned the student's bow.

°°°°"Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance," he said.

°°°°Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a fairy's wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open again; Rastignac's carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer's lodging- house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

°°°°"I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct," the Comte de Restaud said, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, they are extinct," answered the law student. "My great- uncle, the Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family. They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault, Mme. de Beauseant's grandfather on the mother's side. We are the younger branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King's service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated."

°°°°"Was not your great-uncle in command of the Vengeur before 1789?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the Warwick."

°°°°Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who should say, "If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that fellow, it is all over with us." Anastasie understood the glance that M. de Trailles gave her. With a woman's admirable tact, she began to smile and said:

°°°°"Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the Warwick and the Vengeur."

°°°°She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the boudoir. The morganatic couple (to use a convenient German expression which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

°°°°"Anastasie!" he cried pettishly, "just stay a moment, dear; you know very well that----"

°°°°"I am coming back in a minute," she interrupted; "I have a commission for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it."

°°°°She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her husband's voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands' characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, "You are busy, I do not want to interrupt you; good-day," and he went.

°°°°"Just wait a moment, Maxime!" the Count called after him.

°°°°"Come and dine with us," said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure that Rastignac had taken his leave.

°°°°The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover, for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate, hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair typical Parisian.

°°°°"Anastasie!" the Count called again to his wife.

°°°°"Poor Maxime!" she said, addressing the young man. "Come, we must resign ourselves. This evening----"

°°°°"I hope, Nasie," he said in her ear, "that you will give orders not to admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you will compel me to kill him."

°°°°"Are you mad, Maxime?" she said. "A young lad of a student is, on the contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him."

°°°°Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip, and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had been closed after him.

°°°°"What do you think, dear?" cried the Count, her husband, "this gentleman's family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted."

°°°°"Delighted to find that we have acquaintances in common," said the Countess, with a preoccupied manner.

°°°°"More than you think," said Eugene, in a low voice.

°°°°"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

°°°°"Why, only just now," said the student, "I saw a gentleman go out at the gate, Father Goriot, my next door neighbor in the house where I am lodging."

°°°°At the sound of this name, and the prefix that embellished it, the Count, who was stirring the fire, let the tongs fall as though they had burned his fingers, and rose to his feet.

°°°°"Sir," he cried, "you might have called him 'Monsieur Goriot'!"

°°°°The Countess turned pale at first at the sight of her husband's vexation, then she reddened; clearly she was embarrassed, her answer was made in a tone that she tried to make natural, and with an air of assumed carelessness:

°°°°"You could not know any one who is dearer to us both . . ."

°°°°She broke off, glanced at the piano as if some fancy had crossed her mind, and asked, "Are you fond of music, M. de Rastignac?"

°°°°"Exceedingly," answered Eugene, flushing, and disconcerted by a dim suspicion that he had somehow been guilty of a clumsy piece of folly.

°°°°"Do you sing?" she cried, going to the piano, and, sitting down before it, she swept her fingers over the keyboard from end to end. R-r-r-rah!

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°The Comte de Restaud walked to and fro.

°°°°"That is a pity; you are without one great means of success.--Ca- ro, ca-a-ro, ca-a-a-ro, non du-bi-ta-re," sang the Countess.

°°°°Eugene had a second time waved a magic wand when he uttered Goriot's name, but the effect seemed to be entirely opposite to that produced by the formula "related to Mme. de Beauseant." His position was not unlike that of some visitor permitted as a favor to inspect a private collection of curiosities, when by inadvertence he comes into collision with a glass case full of sculptured figures, and three or four heads, imperfectly secured, fall at the shock. He wished the earth would open and swallow him. Mme. de Restaud's expression was reserved and chilly, her eyes had grown indifferent, and sedulously avoided meeting those of the unlucky student of law.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "you wish to talk with M. de Restaud; permit me to wish you good-day----"

°°°°The Countess interrupted him by a gesture, saying hastily, "Whenever you come to see us, both M. de Restaud and I shall be delighted to see you."

°°°°Eugene made a profound bow and took his leave, followed by M. de Restaud, who insisted, in spite of his remonstrances, on accompanying him into the hall.

°°°°"Neither your mistress nor I are at home to that gentleman when he calls," the Count said to Maurice.

°°°°As Eugene set foot on the steps, he saw that it was raining.

°°°°"Come," said he to himself, "somehow I have just made a mess of it, I do not know how. And now I am going to spoil my hat and coat into the bargain. I ought to stop in my corner, grind away at law, and never look to be anything but a boorish country magistrate. How can I go into society, when to manage properly you want a lot of cabs, varnished boots, gold watch chains, and all sorts of things; you have to wear white doeskin gloves that cost six francs in the morning, and primrose kid gloves every evening? A fig for that old humbug of a Goriot!"

°°°°When he reached the street door, the driver of a hackney coach, who had probably just deposited a wedding party at their door, and asked nothing better than a chance of making a little money for himself without his employer's knowledge, saw that Eugene had no umbrella, remarked his black coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, and varnished boots, and stopped and looked at him inquiringly. Eugene, in the blind desperation that drives a young man to plunge deeper and deeper into an abyss, as if he might hope to find a fortunate issue in its lowest depths, nodded in reply to the driver's signal, and stepped into the cab; a few stray petals of orange blossom and scraps of wire bore witness to its recent occupation by a wedding party.

°°°°"Where am I to drive, sir?" demanded the man, who, by this time, had taken off his white gloves.

°°°°"Confound it!" Eugene said to himself, "I am in for it now, and at least I will not spend cab-hire for nothing!--Drive to the Hotel Beauseant," he said aloud.

°°°°"Which?" asked the man, a portentous word that reduced Eugene to confusion. This young man of fashion, species incerta, did not know that there were two Hotels Beauseant; he was not aware how rich he was in relations who did not care about him.

°°°°"The Vicomte de Beauseant, Rue----"

°°°°"De Grenelle," interrupted the driver, with a jerk of his head. "You see, there are the hotels of the Marquis and Comte de Beauseant in the Rue Saint-Dominique," he added, drawing up the step.

°°°°"I know all about that," said Eugene, severely.--"Everybody is laughing at me to-day, it seems!" he said to himself, as he deposited his hat on the opposite seat. "This escapade will cost me a king's ransom, but, at any rate, I shall call on my so- called cousin in a thoroughly aristocratic fashion. Goriot has cost me ten francs already, the old scoundrel. My word! I will tell Mme. de Beauseant about my adventure; perhaps it may amuse her. Doubtless she will know the secret of the criminal relation between that handsome woman and the old rat without a tail. It would be better to find favor in my cousin's eyes than to come in contact with that shameless woman, who seems to me to have very expensive tastes. Surely the beautiful Vicomtesse's personal interest would turn the scale for me, when the mere mention of her name produces such an effect. Let us look higher. If you set yourself to carry the heights of heaven, you must face God."

°°°°The innumerable thoughts that surged through his brain might be summed up in these phrases. He grew calmer, and recovered something of his assurance as he watched the falling rain. He told himself that though he was about to squander two of the precious five-franc pieces that remained to him, the money was well laid out in preserving his coat, boots, and hat; and his cabman's cry of "Gate, if you please," almost put him in spirits. A Swiss, in scarlet and gold, appeared, the great door groaned on its hinges, and Rastignac, with sweet satisfaction, beheld his equipage pass under the archway and stop before the flight of steps beneath the awning. The driver, in a blue-and-red greatcoat, dismounted and let down the step. As Eugene stepped out of the cab, he heard smothered laughter from the peristyle. Three or four lackeys were making merry over the festal appearance of the vehicle. In another moment the law student was enlightened as to the cause of their hilarity; he felt the full force of the contrast between his equipage and one of the smartest broughams in Paris; a coachman, with powdered hair, seemed to find it difficult to hold a pair of spirited horses, who stood chafing the bit. In Mme. de Restaud's courtyard, in the Chaussee d'Antin, he had seen the neat turnout of a young man of six-and-twenty; in the Faubourg Saint-Germain he found the luxurious equipage of a man of rank; thirty thousand francs would not have purchased it.

°°°°"Who can be here?" said Eugene to himself. He began to understand, though somewhat tardily, that he must not expect to find many women in Paris who were not already appropriated, and that the capture of one of these queens would be likely to cost something more than bloodshed. "Confound it all! I expect my cousin also has her Maxime."

°°°°He went up the steps, feeling that he was a blighted being. The glass door was opened for him; the servants were as solemn as jackasses under the curry comb. So far, Eugene had only been in the ballroom on the ground floor of the Hotel Beauseant; the fete had followed so closely on the invitation, that he had not had time to call on his cousin, and had therefore never seen Mme. de Beauseant's apartments; he was about to behold for the first time a great lady among the wonderful and elegant surroundings that reveal her character and reflect her daily life. He was the more curious, because Mme. de Restaud's drawing-room had provided him with a standard of comparison.

°°°°At half-past four the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was visible. Five minutes earlier she would not have received her cousin, but Eugene knew nothing of the recognized routine of various houses in Paris. He was conducted up the wide, white-painted, crimson- carpeted staircase, between the gilded balusters and masses of flowering plants, to Mme. de Beauseant's apartments. He did not know the rumor current about Mme. de Beauseant, one of the biographies told, with variations, in whispers, every evening in the salons of Paris.

°°°°For three years past her name had been spoken of in connection with that of one of the most wealthy and distinguished Portuguese nobles, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto. It was one of those innocent liaisons which possess so much charm for the two thus attached to each other that they find the presence of a third person intolerable. The Vicomte de Beauseant, therefore, had himself set an example to the rest of the world by respecting, with as good a grace as might be, this morganatic union. Any one who came to call on the Vicomtesse in the early days of this friendship was sure to find the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto there. As, under the circumstances, Mme. de Beauseant could not very well shut her door against these visitors, she gave them such a cold reception, and showed so much interest in the study of the ceiling, that no one could fail to understand how much he bored her; and when it became known in Paris that Mme. de Beauseant was bored by callers between two and four o'clock, she was left in perfect solitude during that interval. She went to the Bouffons or to the Opera with M. de Beauseant and M. d'Ajuda-Pinto; and M. de Beauseant, like a well-bred man of the world, always left his wife and the Portuguese as soon as he had installed them. But M. d'Ajuda-Pinto must marry, and a Mlle. de Rochefide was the young lady. In the whole fashionable world there was but one person who as yet knew nothing of the arrangement, and that was Mme. de Beauseant. Some of her friends had hinted at the possibility, and she had laughed at them, believing that envy had prompted those ladies to try to make mischief. And now, though the bans were about to be published, and although the handsome Portuguese had come that day to break the news to the Vicomtesse, he had not found courage as yet to say one word about his treachery. How was it? Nothing is doubtless more difficult than the notification of an ultimatum of this kind. There are men who feel more at their ease when they stand up before another man who threatens their lives with sword or pistol than in the presence of a woman who, after two hours of lamentations and reproaches, falls into a dead swoon and requires salts. At this moment, therefore, M. d'Ajuda-Pinto was on thorns, and anxious to take his leave. He told himself that in some way or other the news would reach Mme. de Beauseant; he would write, it would be much better to do it by letter, and not to utter the words that should stab her to the heart.

°°°°So when the servant announced M. Eugene de Rastignac, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto trembled with joy. To be sure, a loving woman shows even more ingenuity in inventing doubts of her lover than in varying the monotony of his happiness; and when she is about to be forsaken, she instinctively interprets every gesture as rapidly as Virgil's courser detected the presence of his companion by snuffing the breeze. It was impossible, therefore, that Mme. de Beauseant should not detect that involuntary thrill of satisfaction; slight though it was, it was appalling in its artlessness.

°°°°Eugene had yet to learn that no one in Paris should present himself in any house without first making himself acquainted with the whole history of its owner, and of its owner's wife and family, so that he may avoid making any of the terrible blunders which in Poland draw forth the picturesque exclamation, "Harness five bullocks to your cart!" probably because you will need them all to pull you out of the quagmire into which a false step has plunged you. If, down to the present day, our language has no name for these conversational disasters, it is probably because they are believed to be impossible, the publicity given in Paris to every scandal is so prodigious. After the awkward incident at Mme. de Restaud's, no one but Eugene could have reappeared in his character of bullock-driver in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room. But if Mme. de Restaud and M. de Trailles had found him horribly in the way, M. d'Ajuda hailed his coming with relief.

°°°°"Good-bye," said the Portuguese, hurrying to the door, as Eugene made his entrance into a dainty little pink-and-gray drawing- room, where luxury seemed nothing more than good taste.

°°°°"Until this evening," said Mme. de Beauseant, turning her head to give the Marquis a glance. "We are going to the Bouffons, are we not?"

°°°°"I cannot go," he said, with his fingers on the door handle.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant rose and beckoned to him to return. She did not pay the slightest attention to Eugene, who stood there dazzled by the sparkling marvels around him; he began to think that this was some story out of the Arabian Nights made real, and did not know where to hide himself, when the woman before him seemed to be unconscious of his existence. The Vicomtesse had raised the forefinger of her right hand, and gracefully signed to the Marquis to seat himself beside her. The Marquis felt the imperious sway of passion in her gesture; he came back towards her. Eugene watched him, not without a feeling of envy.

°°°°"That is the owner of the brougham!" he said to himself. "But is it necessary to have a pair of spirited horses, servants in livery, and torrents of gold to draw a glance from a woman here in Paris?"

°°°°The demon of luxury gnawed at his heart, greed burned in his veins, his throat was parched with the thirst of gold.

°°°°He had a hundred and thirty francs every quarter. His father, mother, brothers, sisters, and aunt did not spend two hundred francs a month among them. This swift comparison between his present condition and the aims he had in view helped to benumb his faculties.

°°°°"Why not?" the Vicomtesse was saying, as she smiled at the Portuguese. "Why cannot you come to the Italiens?"

°°°°"Affairs! I am to dine with the English Ambassador."

°°°°"Throw him over."

°°°°When a man once enters on a course of deception, he is compelled to add lie to lie. M. d'Ajuda therefore said, smiling, "Do you lay your commands on me?"

°°°°"Yes, certainly."

°°°°"That was what I wanted to have you say to me," he answered, dissembling his feelings in a glance which would have reassured any other woman.

°°°°He took the Vicomtesse's hand, kissed it, and went.

°°°°Eugene ran his fingers through his hair, and constrained himself to bow. He thought that now Mme. de Beauseant would give him her attention; but suddenly she sprang forward, rushed to a window in the gallery, and watched M. d'Ajuda step into his carriage; she listened to the order that he gave, and heard the Swiss repeat it to the coachman:

°°°°"To M. de Rochefide's house."

°°°°Those words, and the way in which M. d'Ajuda flung himself back in the carriage, were like a lightning flash and a thunderbolt for her; she walked back again with a deadly fear gnawing at her heart. The most terrible catastrophes only happen among the heights. The Vicomtesse went to her own room, sat down at a table, and took up a sheet of dainty notepaper.

°°°°"When, instead of dining with the English Ambassador,"   she wrote, "you go to the Rochefides, you owe me an   explanation, which I am waiting to hear."

°°°°She retraced several of the letters, for her hand was trembling so that they were indistinct; then she signed the note with an initial C for "Claire de Bourgogne," and rang the bell.

°°°°"Jacques," she said to the servant, who appeared immediately, "take this note to M. de Rochefide's house at half-past seven and ask for the Marquis d'Ajuda. If M. d'Ajuda is there, leave the note without waiting for an answer; if he is not there, bring the note back to me."

°°°°"Madame la Vicomtess, there is a visitor in the drawing-room."

°°°°"Ah! yes, of course," she said, opening the door.

°°°°Eugene was beginning to feel very uncomfortable, but at last the Vicomtesse appeared; she spoke to him, and the tremulous tones of her voice vibrated through his heart.

°°°°"Pardon me, monsieur," she said; "I had a letter to write. Now I am quite at liberty."

°°°°She scarcely knew what she was saying, for even as she spoke she thought, "Ah! he means to marry Mlle. de Rochefide? But is he still free? This evening the marriage shall be broken off, or else . . . But before to-morrow I shall know."

°°°°"Cousin . . ." the student replied.

°°°°"Eh?" said the Countess, with an insolent glance that sent a cold shudder through Eugene; he understood what that "Eh?" meant; he had learned a great deal in three hours, and his wits were on the alert. He reddened:

°°°°"Madame . . ." he began; he hesitated a moment, and then went on. "Pardon me; I am in such need of protection that the nearest scrap of relationship could do me no harm."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant smiled but there was sadness in her smile; even now she felt forebodings of the coming pain, the air she breathed was heavy with the storm that was about to burst.

°°°°"If you knew how my family are situated," he went on, "you would love to play the part of a beneficent fairy godmother who graciously clears the obstacles from the path of her protege."

°°°°"Well, cousin," she said, laughing, "and how can I be of service to you?"

°°°°"But do I know even that? I am distantly related to you, and this obscure and remote relationship is even now a perfect godsend to me. You have confused my ideas; I cannot remember the things that I meant to say to you. I know no one else here in Paris. . . . Ah! if I could only ask you to counsel me, ask you to look upon me as a poor child who would fain cling to the hem of your dress, who would lay down his life for you."

°°°°"Would you kill a man for me?"

°°°°"Two," said Eugene.

°°°°"You, child. Yes, you are a child," she said, keeping back the tears that came to her eyes; "you would love sincerely."

°°°°"Oh!" he cried, flinging up his head.

°°°°The audacity of the student's answer interested the Vicomtesse in him. The southern brain was beginning to scheme for the first time. Between Mme. de Restaud's blue boudoir and Mme. de Beauseant's rose-colored drawing-room he had made a three years' advance in a kind of law which is not a recognized study in Paris, although it is a sort of higher jurisprudence, and, when well understood, is a highroad to success of every kind.

°°°°"Ah! that is what I meant to say!" said Eugene. "I met Mme. de Restaud at your ball, and this morning I went to see her.

°°°°"You must have been very much in the way," said Mme. de Beauseant, smiling as she spoke.

°°°°"Yes, indeed. I am a novice, and my blunders will set every one against me, if you do not give me your counsel. I believe that in Paris it is very difficult to meet with a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion who would be willing to teach me, what you women can explain so well--life. I shall find a M. de Trailles everywhere. So I have come to you to ask you to give me a key to a puzzle, to entreat you to tell me what sort of blunder I made this morning. I mentioned an old man----"

°°°°"Madame la Duchess de Langeais," Jacques cut the student short; Eugene gave expression to his intense annoyance by a gesture.

°°°°"If you mean to succeed," said the Vicomtesse in a low voice, "in the first place you must not be so demonstrative."

°°°°"Ah! good morning, dear," she continued, and rising and crossing the room, she grasped the Duchess' hands as affectionately as if they had been sisters; the Duchess responded in the prettiest and most gracious way.

°°°°"Two intimate friends!" said Rastignac to himself. "Henceforward I shall have two protectresses; those two women are great friends, no doubt, and this newcomer will doubtless interest herself in her friend's cousin."

°°°°"To what happy inspiration do I owe this piece of good fortune, dear Antoinette?" asked Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°"Well, I saw M. d'Ajuda-Pinto at M. de Rochefide's door, so I thought that if I came I should find you alone."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant's mouth did not tighten, her color did not rise, her expression did not alter, or rather, her brow seemed to clear as the Duchess uttered those deadly words.

°°°°"If I had known that you were engaged----" the speaker added, glancing at Eugene.

°°°°"This gentleman is M. Eugene de Rastignac, one of my cousins," said the Vicomtesse. "Have you any news of General de Montriveau?" she continued. "Serizy told me yesterday that he never goes anywhere now; has he been to see you to-day?"

°°°°It was believed that the Duchess was desperately in love with M. de Montriveau, and that he was a faithless lover; she felt the question in her very heart, and her face flushed as she answered:

°°°°"He was at the Elysee yesterday."

°°°°"In attendance?"

°°°°"Claire," returned the Duchess, and hatred overflowed in the glances she threw at Mme. de Beauseant; "of course you know that M. d'Ajuda-Pinto is going to marry Mlle. de Rochefide; the bans will be published to-morrow."

°°°°This thrust was too cruel; the Vicomtesse's face grew white, but she answered, laughing, "One of those rumors that fools amuse themselves with. What should induce M. d'Ajuda to take one of the noblest names in Portugal to the Rochefides? The Rochefides were only ennobled yesterday."

°°°°"But Bertha will have two hundred thousand livres a year, they say."

°°°°"M. d'Ajuda is too wealthy to marry for money."

°°°°"But, my dear, Mlle. de Rochefide is a charming girl."

°°°°"Indeed?"

°°°°"And, as a matter of fact, he is dining with them to-day; the thing is settled. It is very surprising to me that you should know so little about it."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant turned to Rastignac. "What was the blunder that you made, monsieur?" she asked. "The poor boy is only just launched into the world, Antoinette, so that he understands nothing of all this that we are speaking of. Be merciful to him, and let us finish our talk to-morrow. Everything will be announced to-morrow, you know, and your kind informal communication can be accompanied by official confirmation."

°°°°The Duchess gave Eugene one of those insolent glances that measure a man from head to foot, and leave him crushed and annihilated.

°°°°"Madame, I have unwittingly plunged a dagger into Mme. de Restaud's heart; unwittingly--therein lies my offence," said the student of law, whose keen brain had served him sufficiently well, for he had detected the biting epigrams that lurked beneath this friendly talk. "You continue to receive, possibly you fear, those who know the amount of pain that they deliberately inflict; but a clumsy blunderer who has no idea how deeply he wounds is looked upon as a fool who does not know how to make use of his opportunities, and every one despise him."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant gave the student a glance, one of those glances in which a great soul can mingle dignity and gratitude. It was like balm to the law student, who was still smarting under the Duchess' insolent scrutiny; she had looked at him as an auctioneer might look at some article to appraise its value.

°°°°"Imagine, too, that I had just made some progress with the Comte de Restaud; for I should tell you, madame," he went on, turning to the Duchess with a mixture of humility and malice in his manner, "that as yet I am only a poor devil of a student, very much alone in the world, and very poor----"

°°°°"You should not tell us that, M. de Rastignac. We women never care about anything that no one else will take."

°°°°"Bah!" said Eugene. "I am only two-and-twenty, and I must make up my mind to the drawbacks of my time of life. Besides, I am confessing my sins, and it would be impossible to kneel in a more charming confessional; you commit your sins in one drawing-room, and receive absolution for them in another."

°°°°The Duchess' expression grew colder, she did not like the flippant tone of these remarks, and showed that she considered them to be in bad taste by turning to the Vicomtesse with--"This gentleman has only just come----"

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant began to laugh outright at her cousin and at the Duchess both.

°°°°"He has only just come to Paris, dear, and is in search of some one who will give him lessons in good taste."

°°°°"Mme. la Duchesse," said Eugene, "is it not natural to wish to be initiated into the mysteries which charm us?" ("Come, now," he said to himself, "my language is superfinely elegant, I'm sure.")

°°°°"But Mme. de Restaud is herself, I believe, M. de Trailles' pupil," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Of that I had no idea, madame," answered the law student, "so I rashly came between them. In fact, I got on very well with the lady's husband, and his wife tolerated me for a time until I took it into my head to tell them that I knew some one of whom I had just caught a glimpse as he went out by a back staircase, a man who had given the Countess a kiss at the end of a passage."

°°°°"Who was it?" both women asked together.

°°°°"An old man who lives at the rate of two louis a month in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, where I, a poor student, lodge likewise. He is a truly unfortunate creature, everybody laughs at him--we all call him 'Father Goriot.' "

°°°°"Why, child that you are," cried the Vicomtesse, "Mme. de Restaud was a Mlle. Goriot!"

°°°°"The daughter of a vermicelli manufacturer," the Duchess added; "and when the little creature went to Court, the daughter of a pastry-cook was presented on the same day. Do you remember, Claire? The King began to laugh, and made some joke in Latin about flour. People--what was it?--people----"

°°°°"Ejusdem farinae," said Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that was it," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Oh! is that her father?" the law student continued, aghast.

°°°°"Yes, certainly; the old man had two daughters; he dotes on them, so to speak, though they will scarcely acknowledge him."

°°°°"Didn't the second daughter marry a banker with a German name?" the Vicomtesse asked, turning to Mme. de Langeais, "a Baron de Nucingen? And her name is Delphine, is it not? Isn't she a fair- haired woman who has a side-box at the Opera? She comes sometimes to the Bouffons, and laughs loudly to attract attention."

°°°°The Duchess smiled and said:

°°°°"I wonder at you, dear. Why do you take so much interest in people of that kind? One must have been as madly in love as Restaud was, to be infatuated with Mlle. Anastasie and her flour sacks. Oh! he will not find her a good bargain! She is in M. de Trailles' hands, and he will ruin her."

°°°°"And they do not acknowledge their father!" Eugene repeated.

°°°°"Oh! well, yes, their father, the father, a father," replied the Vicomtesse, "a kind father who gave them each five or six hundred thousand francs, it is said, to secure their happiness by marrying them well; while he only kept eight or ten thousand livres a year for himself, thinking that his daughters would always be his daughters, thinking that in them he would live his life twice over again, that in their houses he should find two homes, where he would be loved and looked up to, and made much of. And in two years' time both his sons-in-law had turned him out of their houses as if he were one of the lowest outcasts."

°°°°Tears came into Eugene's eyes. He was still under the spell of youthful beliefs, he had just left home, pure and sacred feelings had been stirred within him, and this was his first day on the battlefield of civilization in Paris. Genuine feeling is so infectious that for a moment the three looked at each other in silence.

°°°°"Eh, mon Dieu!" said Mme. de Langeais; "yes, it seems very horrible, and yet we see such things every day. Is there not a reason for it? Tell me, dear, have you ever really thought what a son-in-law is? A son-in-law is the man for whom we bring up, you and I, a dear little one, bound to us very closely in innumerable ways; for seventeen years she will be the joy of her family, its 'white soul,' as Lamartine says, and suddenly she will become its scourge. When HE comes and takes her from us, his love from the very beginning is like an axe laid to the root of all the old affection in our darling's heart, and all the ties that bound her to her family are severed. But yesterday our little daughter thought of no one but her mother and father, as we had no thought that was not for her; by to-morrow she will have become a hostile stranger. The tragedy is always going on under our eyes. On the one hand you see a father who has sacrificed himself to his son, and his daughter-in-law shows him the last degree of insolence. On the other hand, it is the son-in-law who turns his wife's mother out of the house. I sometimes hear it said that there is nothing dramatic about society in these days; but the Drama of the Son-in-law is appalling, to say nothing of our marriages, which have come to be very poor farces. I can explain how it all came about in the old vermicelli maker's case. I think I recollect that Foriot----"

°°°°"Goriot, madame."

°°°°"Yes, that Moriot was once President of his Section during the Revolution. He was in the secret of the famous scarcity of grain, and laid the foundation of his fortune in those days by selling flour for ten times its cost. He had as much flour as he wanted. My grandmother's steward sold him immense quantities. No doubt Noriot shared the plunder with the Committee of Public Salvation, as that sort of person always did. I recollect the steward telling my grandmother that she might live at Grandvilliers in complete security, because her corn was as good as a certificate of civism. Well, then, this Loriot, who sold corn to those butchers, has never had but one passion, they say--he idolizes his daughters. He settled one of them under Restaud's roof, and grafted the other into the Nucingen family tree, the Baron de Nucingen being a rich banker who had turned Royalist. You can quite understand that so long as Bonaparte was Emperor, the two sons-in-law could manage to put up with the old Ninety-three; but after the restoration of the Bourbons, M. de Restaud felt bored by the old man's society, and the banker was still more tired of it. His daughters were still fond of him; they wanted 'to keep the goat and the cabbage,' so they used to see Joriot whenever there was no one there, under pretence of affection. 'Come to- day, papa, we shall have you all to ourselves, and that will be much nicer!' and all that sort of thing. As for me, dear, I believe that love has second-sight: poor Ninety-three; his heart must have bled. He saw that his daughters were ashamed of him, that if they loved their husbands his visits must make mischief. So he immolated himself. He made the sacrifice because he was a father; he went into voluntary exile. His daughters were satisfied, so he thought that he had done the best thing he could; but it was a family crime, and father and daughters were accomplices. You see this sort of thing everywhere. What could this old Doriot have been but a splash of mud in his daughters' drawing-rooms? He would only have been in the way, and bored other people, besides being bored himself. And this that happened between father and daughters may happen to the prettiest woman in

°°°°Paris and the man she loves the best; if her love grows tiresome, he will go; he will descend to the basest trickery to leave her. It is the same with all love and friendship. Our heart is a treasury; if you pour out all its wealth at once, you are bankrupt. We show no more mercy to the affection that reveals its utmost extent than we do to another kind of prodigal who has not a penny left. Their father had given them all he had. For twenty years he had given his whole heart to them; then, one day, he gave them all his fortune too. The lemon was squeezed; the girls left the rest in the gutter."

°°°°"The world is very base," said the Vicomtesse, plucking at the threads of her shawl. She did not raise her head as she spoke; the words that Mme. de Langeais had meant for her in the course of her story had cut her to the quick.

°°°°"Base? Oh, no," answered the Duchess; "the world goes its own way, that is all. If I speak in this way, it is only to show that I am not duped by it. I think as you do," she said, pressing the Vicomtesse's hand. "The world is a slough; let us try to live on the heights above it."

°°°°She rose to her feet and kissed Mme. de Beauseant on the forehead as she said: "You look very charming to-day, dear. I have never seen such a lovely color in your cheeks before."

°°°°Then she went out with a slight inclination of the head to the cousin.

°°°°"Father Goriot is sublime!" said Eugene to himself, as he remembered how he had watched his neighbor work the silver vessel into a shapeless mass that night.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant did not hear him; she was absorbed in her own thoughts. For several minutes the silence remained unbroken till the law student became almost paralyzed with embarrassment, and was equally afraid to go or stay or speak a word.

°°°°"The world is basely ungrateful and ill-natured," said the Vicomtesse at last. "No sooner does a trouble befall you than a friend is ready to bring the tidings and to probe your heart with the point of a dagger while calling on you to admire the handle. Epigrams and sarcasms already! Ah! I will defend myself!"

°°°°She raised her head like the great lady that she was, and lightnings flashed from her proud eyes.

°°°°"Ah!" she said, as she saw Eugene, "are you there?"

°°°°"Still," he said piteously.

°°°°"Well, then, M. de Rastignac, deal with the world as it deserves. You are determined to succeed? I will help you. You shall sound the depths of corruption in woman; you shall measure the extent of man's pitiful vanity. Deeply as I am versed in such learning, there were pages in the book of life that I had not read. Now I know all. The more cold-blooded your calculations, the further you will go. Strike ruthlessly; you will be feared. Men and women for you must be nothing more than post-horses; take a fresh relay, and leave the last to drop by the roadside; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition. You will be nothing here, you see, unless a woman interests herself in you; and she must be young and wealthy, and a woman of the world. Yet, if you have a heart, lock it carefully away like a treasure; do not let any one suspect it, or you will be lost; you would cease to be the executioner, you would take the victim's place. And if ever you should love, never let your secret escape you! Trust no one until you are very sure of the heart to which you open your heart. Learn to mistrust every one; take every precaution for the sake of the love which does not exist as yet. Listen, Miguel"-- the name slipped from her so naturally that she did not notice her mistake--"there is something still more appalling than the ingratitude of daughters who have cast off their old father and wish that he were dead, and that is a rivalry between two sisters. Restaud comes of a good family, his wife has been received into their circle; she has been presented at court; and her sister, her wealthy sister, Mme. Delphine de Nucingen, the wife of a great capitalist, is consumed with envy, and ready to die of spleen. There is gulf set between the sisters--indeed, they are sisters no longer--the two women who refuse to acknowledge their father do not acknowledge each other. So Mme. de Nucingen would lap up all the mud that lies between the Rue Saint-Lazare and the Rue de Grenelle to gain admittance to my salon. She fancied that she should gain her end through de Marsay; she has made herself de Marsay's slave, and she bores him. De Marsay cares very little about her. If you will introduce her to me, you will be her darling, her Benjamin; she will idolize you. If, after that, you can love her, do so; if not, make her useful. I will ask her to come once or twice to one of my great crushes, but I will never receive her here in the morning. I will bow to her when I see her, and that will be quite sufficient. You have shut the Comtesse de Restaud's door against you by mentioning Father Goriot's name. Yes, my good friend, you may call at her house twenty times, and every time out of the twenty you will find that she is not at home. The servants have their orders, and will not admit you. Very well, then, now let Father Goriot gain the right of entry into her sister's house for you. The beautiful Mme. de Nucingen will give the signal for a battle. As soon as she singles you out, other women will begin to lose their heads about you, and her enemies and rivals and intimate friends will all try to take you from her. There are women who will fall in love with a man because another woman has chosen him; like the city madams, poor things, who copy our millinery, and hope thereby to acquire our manners. You will have a success, and in Paris success is everything; it is the key of power. If the women credit you with wit and talent, the men will follow suit so long as you do not undeceive them yourself. There will be nothing you may not aspire to; you will go everywhere, and you will find out what the world is--an assemblage of fools and knaves. But you must be neither the one nor the other. I am giving you my name like Ariadne's clue of thread to take with you into the labyrinth; make no unworthy use of it," she said, with a queenly glance and curve of her throat; "give it back to me unsullied. And now, go; leave me. We women also have our battles to fight."

°°°°"And if you should ever need some one who would gladly set a match to a train for you----"

°°°°"Well?" she asked.

°°°°He tapped his heart, smiled in answer to his cousin's smile, and went.

°°°°It was five o'clock, and Eugene was hungry; he was afraid lest he should not be in time for dinner, a misgiving which made him feel that it was pleasant to be borne so quickly across Paris. This sensation of physical comfort left his mind free to grapple with the thoughts that assailed him. A mortification usually sends a young man of his age into a furious rage; he shakes his fist at society, and vows vengeance when his belief in himself is shaken. Just then Rastignac was overwhelmed by the words, "You have shut the Countess' door against you."

°°°°"I shall call!" he said to himself, "and if Mme. de Beauseant is right, if I never find her at home--I . . . well, Mme. de Restaud shall meet me in every salon in Paris. I will learn to fence and have some pistol practice, and kill that Maxime of hers!"

°°°°"And money?" cried an inward monitor. "How about money, where is that to come from?" And all at once the wealth displayed in the Countess de Restaud's drawing-room rose before his eyes. That was the luxury which Goriot's daughter had loved too well, the gilding, the ostentatious splendor, the unintelligent luxury of the parvenu, the riotous extravagance of a courtesan. Then the attractive vision suddenly went under an eclipse as he remembered the stately grandeur of the Hotel de Beauseant. As his fancy wandered among these lofty regions in the great world of Paris, innumerable dark thoughts gathered in his heart; his ideas widened, and his conscience grew more elastic. He saw the world as it is; saw how the rich lived beyond the jurisdiction of law and public opinion, and found in success the ultima ratio mundi.

°°°°"Vautrin is right, success is virtue!" he said to himself.

°°°°Arrived in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, he rushed up to his room for ten francs wherewith to satisfy the demands of the cabman, and went in to dinner. He glanced round the squalid room, saw the eighteen poverty-stricken creatures about to feed like cattle in their stalls, and the sight filled him with loathing. The transition was too sudden, and the contrast was so violent that it could not but act as a powerful stimulant; his ambition developed and grew beyond all social bounds. On the one hand, he beheld a vision of social life in its most charming and refined forms, of quick-pulsed youth, of fair, impassioned faces invested with all the charm of poetry, framed in a marvelous setting of luxury or art; and, on the other hand, he saw a sombre picture, the miry verge beyond these faces, in which passion was extinct and nothing was left of the drama but the cords and pulleys and bare mechanism. Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, the words uttered in anger by the forsaken lady, her petulant offer, came to his mind, and poverty was a ready expositor. Rastignac determined to open two parallel trenches so as to insure success; he would be a learned doctor of law and a man of fashion. Clearly he was still a child! Those two lines are asymptotes, and will never meet.

°°°°"You are very dull, my lord Marquis," said Vautrin, with one of the shrewd glances that seem to read the innermost secrets of another mind.

°°°°"I am not in the humor to stand jokes from people who call me 'my lord Marquis,' " answered Eugene. "A marquis here in Paris, if he is not the veriest sham, ought to have a hundred thousand livres a year at least; and a lodger in the Maison Vauquer is not exactly Fortune's favorite."

°°°°Vautrin's glance at Rastignac was half-paternal, half- contemptuous. "Puppy!" it seemed to say; "I should make one mouthful of him!" Then he answered:

°°°°"You are in a bad humor; perhaps your visit to the beautiful Comtesse de Restaud was not a success."

°°°°"She has shut her door against me because I told her that her father dined at our table," cried Rastignac.

°°°°Glances were exchanged all round the room; Father Goriot looked down.

°°°°"You have sent some snuff into my eye," he said to his neighbor, turning a little aside to rub his hand over his face.

°°°°"Any one who molests Father Goriot will have henceforward to reckon with me," said Eugene, looking at the old man's neighbor; "he is worth all the rest of us put together.--I am not speaking of the ladies," he added, turning in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer.

°°°°Eugene's remarks produced a sensation, and his tone silenced the dinner-table. Vautrin alone spoke. "If you are going to champion Father Goriot, and set up for his responsible editor into the bargain, you had need be a crack shot and know how to handle the foils," he said, banteringly.

°°°°"So I intend," said Eugene.

°°°°"Then you are taking the field today?"

°°°°"Perhaps," Rastignac answered. "But I owe no account of myself to any one, especially as I do not try to find out what other people do of a night."

°°°°Vautrin looked askance at Rastignac.

°°°°"If you do not mean to be deceived by the puppets, my boy, you must go behind and see the whole show, and not peep through holes in the curtain. That is enough," he added, seeing that Eugene was about to fly into a passion. "We can have a little talk whenever you like."

°°°°There was a general feeling of gloom and constraint. Father Goriot was so deeply dejected by the student's remark that he did not notice the change in the disposition of his fellow-lodgers, nor know that he had met with a champion capable of putting an end to the persecution.

°°°°"Then, M. Goriot sitting there is the father of a countess," said Mme. Vauquer in a low voice.

°°°°"And of a baroness," answered Rastignac.

°°°°"That is about all he is capable of," said Bianchon to Rastignac; "I have taken a look at his head; there is only one bump--the bump of Paternity; he must be an ETERNAL FATHER."

°°°°Eugene was too intent on his thoughts to laugh at Bianchon's joke. He determined to profit by Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, and was asking himself how he could obtain the necessary money. He grew grave. The wide savannas of the world stretched before his eyes; all things lay before him, nothing was his. Dinner came to an end, the others went, and he was left in the dining-room.

°°°°"So you have seen my daughter?" Goriot spoke tremulously, and the sound of his voice broke in upon Eugene's dreams. The young man took the elder's hand, and looked at him with something like kindness in his eyes.

°°°°"You are a good and noble man," he said. "We will have some talk about your daughters by and by."

°°°°He rose without waiting for Goriot's answer, and went to his room. There he wrote the following letter to his mother:--

°°°°"My Dear Mother,--Can you nourish your child from your breast again? I am in a position to make a rapid fortune, but I want twelve hundred francs--I must have them at all costs. Say nothing about this to my father; perhaps he might make objections, and unless I have the money, I may be led to put an end to myself, and so escape the clutches of despair. I will tell you everything when I see you. I will not begin to try to describe my present situation; it would take volumes to put the whole story clearly and fully. I have not been gambling, my kind mother, I owe no one a penny; but if you would preserve the life that you gave me, you must send me the sum I mention. As a matter of fact, I go to see the Vicomtesse de Beauseant; she is using her influence for me; I am obliged to go into society, and I have not a penny to lay out on clean gloves. I can manage to exist on bread and water, or go without food, if need be, but I cannot do without the tools with which they cultivate the vineyards in this country. I must resolutely make up my mind at once to make my way, or stick in the mire for the rest of my days. I know that all your hopes are set on me, and I want to realize them quickly. Sell some of your old jewelry, my kind mother; I will give you other jewels very soon. I know enough of our affairs at home to know all that such a sacrifice means, and you must not think that I would lightly ask you to make it; I should be a monster if I could. You must think of my entreaty as a cry forced from me by imperative necessity. Our whole future lies in the subsidy with which I must begin my first campaign, for life in Paris is one continual battle. If you cannot otherwise procure the whole of the money, and are forced to sell our aunt's lace, tell her that I will send her some still handsomer," and so forth.

°°°°He wrote to ask each of his sisters for their savings--would they despoil themselves for him, and keep the sacrifice a secret from the family? To his request he knew that they would not fail to respond gladly, and he added to it an appeal to their delicacy by touching the chord of honor that vibrates so loudly in young and high-strung natures.

°°°°Yet when he had written the letters, he could not help feeling misgivings in spite of his youthful ambition; his heart beat fast, and he trembled. He knew the spotless nobleness of the lives buried away in the lonely manor house; he knew what trouble and what joy his request would cause his sisters, and how happy they would be as they talked at the bottom of the orchard of that dear brother of theirs in Paris. Visions rose before his eyes; a sudden strong light revealed his sisters secretly counting over their little store, devising some girlish stratagem by which the money could be sent to him incognito, essaying, for the first time in their lives, a piece of deceit that reached the sublime in its unselfishness.

°°°°"A sister's heart is a diamond for purity, a deep sea of tenderness!" he said to himself. He felt ashamed of those letters.

°°°°What power there must be in the petitions put up by such hearts; how pure the fervor that bears their souls to Heaven in prayer! What exquisite joy they would find in self-sacrifice! What a pang for his mother's heart if she could not send him all that he asked for! And this noble affection, these sacrifices made at such terrible cost, were to serve as the ladder by which he meant to climb to Delphine de Nucingen. A few tears, like the last grains of incense flung upon the sacred alter fire of the hearth, fell from his eyes. He walked up and down, and despair mingled with his emotion. Father Goriot saw him through the half-open door.

°°°°"What is the matter, sir?" he asked from the threshold.

°°°°"Ah! my good neighbor, I am as much a son and brother as you are a father. You do well to fear for the Comtesse Anastasie; there is one M. Maxime de Trailles, who will be her ruin."

°°°°Father Goriot withdrew, stammering some words, but Eugene failed to catch their meaning.

°°°°The next morning Rastignac went out to post his letters. Up to the last moment he wavered and doubted, but he ended by flinging them into the box. "I shall succeed!" he said to himself. So says the gambler; so says the great captain; but the three words that have been the salvation of some few, have been the ruin of many more.

°°°°A few days after this Eugene called at Mme. de Restaud's house; she was not at home. Three times he tried the experiment, and three times he found her doors closed against him, though he was careful to choose an hour when M. de Trailles was not there. The Vicomtesse was right.

°°°°The student studied no longer. He put in an appearance at lectures simply to answer to his name, and after thus attesting his presence, departed forthwith. He had been through a reasoning process familiar to most students. He had seen the advisability of deferring his studies to the last moment before going up for his examinations; he made up his mind to cram his second and third years' work into the third year, when he meant to begin to work in earnest, and to complete his studies in law with one great effort. In the meantime he had fifteen months in which to navigate the ocean of Paris, to spread the nets and set the lines that would bring him a protectress and a fortune. Twice during that week he saw Mme. de Beauseant; he did not go to her house until he had seen the Marquis d'Ajuda drive away.

°°°°Victory for yet a few more days was with the great lady, the most poetic figure in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; and the marriage of the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto with Mlle. de Rochefide was postponed. The dread of losing her happiness filled those days with a fever of joy unknown before, but the end was only so much the nearer. The Marquis d'Ajuda and the Rochefides agreed that this quarrel and reconciliation was a very fortunate thing; Mme. de Beauseant (so they hoped) would gradually become reconciled to the idea of the marriage, and in the end would be brought to sacrifice d'Ajuda's morning visits to the exigencies of a man's career, exigencies which she must have foreseen. In spite of the most solemn promises, daily renewed, M. d'Ajuda was playing a part, and the Vicomtesse was eager to be deceived. "Instead of taking a leap heroically from the window, she is falling headlong down the staircase," said her most intimate friend, the Duchesse de Langeais. Yet this after-glow of happiness lasted long enough for the Vicomtesse to be of service to her young cousin. She had a half-superstitious affection for him. Eugene had shown her sympathy and devotion at a crisis when a woman sees no pity, no real comfort in any eyes; when if a man is ready with soothing flatteries, it is because he has an interested motive.

°°°°Rastignac made up his mind that he must learn the whole of Goriot's previous history; he would come to his bearings before attempting to board the Maison de Nucingen. The results of his inquiries may be given briefly as follows:--

°°°°In the days before the Revolution, Jean-Joachim Goriot was simply a workman in the employ of a vermicelli maker. He was a skilful, thrifty workman, sufficiently enterprising to buy his master's business when the latter fell a chance victim to the disturbances of 1789. Goriot established himself in the Rue de la Jussienne, close to the Corn Exchange. His plain good sense led him to accept the position of President of the Section, so as to secure for his business the protection of those in power at that dangerous epoch. This prudent step had led to success; the foundations of his fortune were laid in the time of the Scarcity (real or artificial), when the price of grain of all kinds rose enormously in Paris. People used to fight for bread at the bakers' doors; while other persons went to the grocers' shops and bought Italian paste foods without brawling over it. It was during this year that Goriot made the money, which, at a later time, was to give him all the advantage of the great capitalist over the small buyer; he had, moreover, the usual luck of average ability; his mediocrity was the salvation of him. He excited no one's envy, it was not even suspected that he was rich till the peril of being rich was over, and all his intelligence was concentrated, not on political, but on commercial speculations. Goriot was an authority second to none on all questions relating to corn, flour, and "middlings"; and the production, storage, and quality of grain. He could estimate the yield of the harvest, and foresee market prices; he bought his cereals in Sicily, and imported Russian wheat. Any one who had heard him hold forth on the regulations that control the importation and exportation of grain, who had seen his grasp of the subject, his clear insight into the principles involved, his appreciation of weak points in the way that the system worked, would have thought that here was the stuff of which a minister is made. Patient, active, and persevering, energetic and prompt in action, he surveyed his business horizon with an eagle eye. Nothing there took him by surprise; he foresaw all things, knew all that was happening, and kept his own counsel; he was a diplomatist in his quick comprehension of a situation; and in the routine of business he was as patient and plodding as a soldier on the march. But beyond this business horizon he could not see. He used to spend his hours of leisure on the threshold of his shop, leaning against the framework of the door. Take him from his dark little counting-house, and he became once more the rough, slow-witted workman, a man who cannot understand a piece of reasoning, who is indifferent to all intellectual pleasures, and falls asleep at the play, a Parisian Dolibom in short, against whose stupidity other minds are powerless.

°°°°Natures of this kind are nearly all alike; in almost all of them you will find some hidden depth of sublime affection. Two all- absorbing affections filled the vermicelli maker's heart to the exclusion of every other feeling; into them he seemed to put all the forces of his nature, as he put the whole power of his brain into the corn trade. He had regarded his wife, the only daughter of a rich farmer of La Brie, with a devout admiration; his love for her had been boundless. Goriot had felt the charm of a lovely and sensitive nature, which, in its delicate strength, was the very opposite of his own. Is there any instinct more deeply implanted in the heart of man than the pride of protection, a protection which is constantly exerted for a fragile and defenceless creature? Join love thereto, the warmth of gratitude that all generous souls feel for the source of their pleasures, and you have the explanation of many strange incongruities in human nature.

°°°°After seven years of unclouded happiness, Goriot lost his wife. It was very unfortunate for him. She was beginning to gain an ascendency over him in other ways; possibly she might have brought that barren soil under cultivation, she might have widened his ideas and given other directions to his thoughts. But when she was dead, the instinct of fatherhood developed in him till it almost became a mania. All the affection balked by death seemed to turn to his daughters, and he found full satisfaction for his heart in loving them. More or less brilliant proposals were made to him from time to time; wealthy merchants or farmers with daughters vied with each other in offering inducements to him to marry again; but he determined to remain a widower. His father-in-law, the only man for whom he felt a decided friendship, gave out that Goriot had made a vow to be faithful to his wife's memory. The frequenters of the Corn Exchange, who could not comprehend this sublime piece of folly, joked about it among themselves, and found a ridiculous nickname for him. One of them ventured (after a glass over a bargain) to call him by it, and a blow from the vermicelli maker's fist sent him headlong into a gutter in the Rue Oblin. He could think of nothing else when his children were concerned; his love for them made him fidgety and anxious; and this was so well known, that one day a competitor, who wished to get rid of him to secure the field to himself, told Goriot that Delphine had just been knocked down by a cab. The vermicelli maker turned ghastly pale, left the Exchange at once, and did not return for several days afterwards; he was ill in consequence of the shock and the subsequent relief on discovering that it was a false alarm. This time, however, the offender did not escape with a bruised shoulder; at a critical moment in the man's affairs, Goriot drove him into bankruptcy, and forced him to disappear from the Corn Exchange.

°°°°As might have been expected, the two girls were spoiled. With an income of sixty thousand francs, Goriot scarcely spent twelve hundred on himself, and found all his happiness in satisfying the whims of the two girls. The best masters were engaged, that Anastasie and Delphine might be endowed with all the accomplishments which distinguish a good education. They had a chaperon--luckily for them, she was a woman who had good sense and good taste;--they learned to ride; they had a carriage for their use; they lived as the mistress of a rich old lord might live; they had only to express a wish, their father would hasten to give them their most extravagant desires, and asked nothing of them in return but a kiss. Goriot had raised the two girls to the level of the angels; and, quite naturally, he himself was left beneath them. Poor man! he loved them even for the pain that they gave him.

°°°°When the girls were old enough to be married, they were left free to choose for themselves. Each had half her father's fortune as her dowry; and when the Comte de Restaud came to woo Anastasie for her beauty, her social aspirations led her to leave her father's house for a more exalted sphere. Delphine wished for money; she married Nucingen, a banker of German extraction, who became a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire. Goriot remained a vermicelli maker as before. His daughters and his sons-in-law began to demur; they did not like to see him still engaged in trade, though his whole life was bound up with his business. For five years he stood out against their entreaties, then he yielded, and consented to retire on the amount realized by the sale of his business and the savings of the last few years. It was this capital that Mme. Vauquer, in the early days of his residence with her, had calculated would bring in eight or ten thousand livres in a year. He had taken refuge in her lodging- house, driven there by despair when he knew that his daughters were compelled by their husbands not only to refuse to receive him as an inmate in their houses, but even to see him no more except in private.

°°°°This was all the information which Rastignac gained from a M. Muret who had purchased Goriot's business, information which confirmed the Duchesse de Langeais' suppositions, and herewith the preliminary explanation of this obscure but terrible Parisian tragedy comes to an end.

°°°°Towards the end of the first week in December Rastignac received two letters--one from his mother, and one from his eldest sister. His heart beat fast, half with happiness, half with fear, at the sight of the familiar handwriting. Those two little scraps of paper contained life or death for his hopes. But while he felt a shiver of dread as he remembered their dire poverty at home, he knew their love for him so well that he could not help fearing that he was draining their very life-blood. His mother's letter ran as follows:--

°°°°"My Dear Child,--I am sending you the money that you asked for. Make a good use of it. Even to save your life I could not raise so large a sum a second time without your father's knowledge, and there would be trouble about it. We should be obliged to mortgage the land. It is impossible to judge of the merits of schemes of which I am ignorant; but what sort of schemes can they be, that you should fear to tell me about them? Volumes of explanation would not have been needed; we mothers can understand at a word, and that word would have spared me the anguish of uncertainty. I do not know how to hide the painful impression that your letter has made upon me, my dear son. What can you have felt when you were moved to send this chill of dread through my heart? It must have been very painful to you to write the letter that gave me so much pain as I read it. To what courses are you committed? You are going to appear to be something that you are not, and your whole life and success depends upon this? You are about to see a society into which you cannot enter without rushing into expense that you cannot afford, without losing precious time that is needed for your studies. Ah! my dear Eugene, believe your mother, crooked ways cannot lead to great ends. Patience and endurance are the two qualities most needed in your position. I am not scolding you; I do not want any tinge of bitterness to spoil our offering. I am only talking like a mother whose trust in you is as great as her foresight for you. You know the steps that you must take, and I, for my part, know the purity of heart, and how good your intentions are; so I can say to you without a doubt, 'Go forward, beloved!' If I tremble, it is because I am a mother, but my prayers and blessings will be with you at every step. Be very careful, dear boy. You must have a man's prudence, for it lies with you to shape the destinies of five others who are dear to you, and must look to you. Yes, our fortunes depend upon you, and your success is ours. We all pray to God to be with you in all that you do. Your aunt Marcillac has been most generous beyond words in this matter; she saw at once how it was, even down to your gloves. 'But I have a weakness for the eldest!' she said gaily. You must love your aunt very much, dear Eugene. I shall wait till you have succeeded before telling you all that she has done for you, or her money would burn your fingers. You, who are young, do not know what it is to part with something that is a piece of your past! But what would we not sacrifice for your sakes? Your aunt says that I am to send you a kiss on the forehead from her, and that kiss is to bring you luck again and again, she says. She would have written you herself, the dear kind-hearted woman, but she is troubled with the gout in her fingers just now. Your father is very well. The vintage of 1819 has turned out better than we expected. Good-bye, dear boy; I will say nothing about your sisters, because Laure is writing to you, and I must let her have the pleasure of giving you all the home news. Heaven send that you may succeed! Oh! yes, dear Eugene, you must succeed. I have come, through you, to a knowledge of a pain so sharp that I do not think I could endure it a second time. I have come to know what it is to be poor, and to long for money for my children's sake. There, good-bye! Do not leave us for long without news of you; and here, at the last, take a kiss from your mother."

°°°°By the time Eugene had finished the letter he was in tears. He thought of Father Goriot crushing his silver keepsake into a shapeless mass before he sold it to meet his daughter's bill of exchange.

°°°°"Your mother has broken up her jewels for you," he said to himself; "your aunt shed tears over those relics of hers before she sold them for your sake. What right have you to heap execrations on Anastasie? You have followed her example; you have selfishly sacrificed others to your own future, and she sacrifices her father to her lover; and of you two, which is the worse?"

°°°°He was ready to renounce his attempts; he could not bear to take that money. The fires of remorse burned in his heart, and gave him intolerable pain, the generous secret remorse which men seldom take into account when they sit in judgment upon their fellow-men; but perhaps the angels in heaven, beholding it, pardon the criminal whom our justice condemns. Rastignac opened his sister's letter; its simplicity and kindness revived his heart.

°°°°"Your letter came just at the right time, dear brother. Agathe and I had thought of so many different ways of spending our money, that we did not know what to buy with it; and now you have come in, and, like the servant who upset all the watches that belonged to the King of Spain, you have restored harmony; for, really and truly, we did not know which of all the things we wanted we wanted most, and we were always quarreling about it, never thinking, dear Eugene, of a way of spending our money which would satisfy us completely. Agathe jumped for you. Indeed, we have been like two mad things all day, 'to such a prodigious degree' (as aunt would say), that mother said, with her severe expression, 'Whatever can be the matter with you, mesdemoiselles?' I think if we had been scolded a little, we should have been still better pleased. A woman ought to be very glad to suffer for one she loves! I, however, in my inmost soul, was doleful and cross in the midst of all my joy. I shall make a bad wife, I am afraid, I am too fond of spending. I had bought two sashes and a nice little stiletto for piercing eyelet-holes in my stays, trifles that I really did not want, so that I have less than that slow-coach Agathe, who is so economical, and hoards her money like a magpie. She had two hundred francs! And I have only one hundred and fifty! I am nicely punished; I could throw my sash down the well; it will be painful to me to wear it now. Poor dear, I have robbed you. And Agathe was so nice about it. She said, 'Let us send the three hundred and fifty francs in our two names!' But I could not help telling you everything just as it happened.

°°°°"Do you know how we managed to keep your commandments? We took our glittering hoard, we went out for a walk, and when once fairly on the highway we ran all the way to Ruffec, where we handed over the coin, without more ado, to M. Grimbert of the Messageries Royales. We came back again like swallows on the wing. 'Don't you think that happiness has made us lighter?' Agathe said. We said all sorts of things, which I shall not tell you, Monsieur le Parisien, because they were all about you. Oh, we love you dearly, dear brother; it was all summed up in those few words. As for keeping the secret, little masqueraders like us are capable of anything (according to our aunt), even of holding our tongues. Our mother has been on a mysterious journey to Angouleme, and the aunt went with her, not without solemn councils, from which we were shut out, and M. le Baron likewise. They are silent as to the weighty political considerations that prompted their mission, and conjectures are rife in the State of Rastignac. The Infantas are embroidering a muslin robe with open- work sprigs for her Majesty the Queen; the work progresses in the most profound secrecy. There be but two more breadths to finish. A decree has gone forth that no wall shall be built on the side of Verteuil, but that a hedge shall be planted instead thereof. Our subjects may sustain some disappointment of fruit and espaliers, but strangers will enjoy a fair prospect. Should the heir-presumptive lack pocket-handkerchiefs, be it known unto him that the dowager Lady of Marcillac, exploring the recesses of her drawers and boxes (known respectively as Pompeii and Herculaneum), having brought to light a fair piece of cambric whereof she wotted not, the Princesses Agathe and Laure place at their brother's disposal their thread, their needles, and hands somewhat of the reddest. The two young Princes, Don Henri and Don Gabriel, retain their fatal habits of stuffing themselves with grape-jelly, of teasing their sisters, of taking their pleasure by going a-bird-nesting, and of cutting switches for themselves from the osier-beds, maugre the laws of the realm. Moreover, they list not to learn naught, wherefore the Papal Nuncio (called of the commonalty, M. le Cure) threateneth them with excommunication, since that they neglect the sacred canons of grammatical construction for the construction of other canon, deadly engines made of the stems of elder.

°°°°"Farewell, dear brother, never did letter carry so many wishes for your success, so much love fully satisfied. You will have a great deal to tell us when you come home! You will tell me everything, won't you? I am the oldest. From something the aunt let fall, we think you must have had some success.

°°°°"Something was said of a lady, but nothing more was said . . .

°°°°"Of course not, in our family! Oh, by-the-by, Eugene, would you rather that we made that piece of cambric into shirts for you instead of pocket-handkerchiefs? If you want some really nice shirts at once, we ought to lose no time in beginning upon them; and if the fashion is different now in Paris, send us one for a pattern; we want more particularly to know about the cuffs. Good- bye! Good-bye! Take my kiss on the left side of your forehead, on the temple that belongs to me, and to no one else in the world. I am leaving the other side of the sheet for Agathe, who has solemnly promised not to read a word that I have written; but, all the same, I mean to sit by her side while she writes, so as to be quite sure that she keeps her word.--Your loving sister, "Laure de Rastignac."

°°°°"Yes!" said Eugene to himself. "Yes! Success at all costs now! Riches could not repay such devotion as this. I wish I could give them every sort of happiness! Fifteen hundred and fifty francs," he went on after a pause. "Every shot must go to the mark! Laure is right. Trust a woman! I have only calico shirts. Where some one else's welfare is concerned, a young girl becomes as ingenious as a thief. Guileless where she herself is in question, and full of foresight for me,--she is like a heavenly angel forgiving the strange incomprehensible sins of earth."

°°°°The world lay before him. His tailor had been summoned and sounded, and had finally surrendered. When Rastignac met M. de Trailles, he had seen at once how great a part the tailor plays in a young man's career; a tailor is either a deadly enemy or a staunch friend, with an invoice for a bond of friendship; between these two extremes there is, alack! no middle term. In this representative of his craft Eugene discovered a man who understood that his was a sort of paternal function for young men at their entrance into life, who regarded himself as a stepping- stone between a young man's present and future. And Rastignac in gratitude made the man's fortune by an epigram of a kind in which he excelled at a later period of his life.

°°°°"I have twice known a pair of trousers turned out by him make a match of twenty thousand livres a year!"

°°°°Fifteen hundred francs, and as many suits of clothes as he chose to order! At that moment the poor child of the South felt no more doubts of any kind. The young man went down to breakfast with the indefinable air which the consciousness of the possession of money gives to youth. No sooner are the coins slipped into a student's pocket than his wealth, in imagination at least, is piled into a fantastic column, which affords him a moral support. He begins to hold up his head as he walks; he is conscious that he has a means of bringing his powers to bear on a given point; he looks you straight in the face; his gestures are quick and decided; only yesterday he was diffident and shy, any one might have pushed him aside; to-morrow, he will take the wall of a prime minister. A miracle has been wrought in him. Nothing is beyond the reach of his ambition, and his ambition soars at random; he is light-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic; in short, the fledgling bird has discovered that he has wings. A poor student snatches at every chance pleasure much as a dog runs all sorts of risks to steal a bone, cracking it and sucking the marrow as he flies from pursuit; but a young man who can rattle a few runaway gold coins in his pocket can take his pleasure deliberately, can taste the whole of the sweets of secure possession; he soars far above earth; he has forgotten what the word POVERTY means; all Paris is his. Those are days when the whole world shines radiant with light, when everything glows and sparkles before the eyes of youth, days that bring joyous energy that is never brought into harness, days of debts and of painful fears that go hand in hand with every delight. Those who do not know the left bank of the Seine between the Rue Saint-Jacques and the Rue des Saints-Peres know nothing of life.

°°°°"Ah! if the women of Paris but knew," said Rastignac, as he devoured Mme. Vauquer's stewed pears (at five for a penny), "they would come here in search of a lover."

°°°°Just then a porter from the Messageries Royales appeared at the door of the room; they had previously heard the bell ring as the wicket opened to admit him. The man asked for M. Eugene de Rastignac, holding out two bags for him to take, and a form of receipt for his signature. Vautrin's keen glance cut Eugene like a lash.

°°°°"Now you will be able to pay for those fencing lessons and go to the shooting gallery," he said.

°°°°"Your ship has come in," said Mme. Vauquer, eyeing the bags.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau did not dare to look at the money, for fear her eyes should betray her cupidity.

°°°°"You have a kind mother," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"You have a kind mother, sir," echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, mamma has been drained dry," said Vautrin, "and now you can have your fling, go into society, and fish for heiresses, and dance with countesses who have peach blossom in their hair. But take my advice, young man, and don't neglect your pistol practice."

°°°°Vautrin struck an attitude, as if he were facing an antagonist. Rastignac, meaning to give the porter a tip, felt in his pockets and found nothing. Vautrin flung down a franc piece on the table.

°°°°"Your credit is good," he remarked, eyeing the student, and Rastignac was forced to thank him, though, since the sharp encounter of wits at dinner that day, after Eugene came in from calling on Mme. de Beauseant, he had made up his mind that Vautrin was insufferable. For a week, in fact, they had both kept silence in each other's presence, and watched each other. The student tried in vain to account to himself for this attitude.

°°°°An idea, of course, gains in force by the energy with which it is expressed; it strikes where the brain sends it, by a law as mathematically exact as the law that determines the course of a shell from a mortar. The amount of impression it makes is not to be determined so exactly. Sometimes, in an impressible nature, the idea works havoc, but there are, no less, natures so robustly protected, that this sort of projectile falls flat and harmless on skulls of triple brass, as cannon-shot against solid masonry; then there are flaccid and spongy-fibred natures into which ideas from without sink like spent bullets into the earthworks of a redoubt. Rastignac's head was something of the powder-magazine order; the least shock sufficed to bring about an explosion. He was too quick, too young, not to be readily accessible to ideas; and open to that subtle influence of thought and feeling in others which causes so many strange phenomena that make an impression upon us of which we are all unconscious at the time. Nothing escaped his mental vision; he was lynx-eyed; in him the mental powers of perception, which seem like duplicates of the senses, had the mysterious power of swift projection that astonishes us in intellects of a high order--slingers who are quick to detect the weak spot in any armor.

°°°°In the past month Eugene's good qualities and defects had rapidly developed with his character. Intercourse with the world and the endeavor to satisfy his growing desires had brought out his defects. But Rastignac came from the South side of the Loire, and had the good qualities of his countrymen. He had the impetuous courage of the South, that rushes to the attack of a difficulty, as well as the southern impatience of delay or suspense. These traits are held to be defects in the North; they made the fortune of Murat, but they likewise cut short his career. The moral would appear to be that when the dash and boldness of the South side of the Loire meets, in a southern temperament, with the guile of the North, the character is complete, and such a man will gain (and keep) the crown of Sweden.

°°°°Rastignac, therefore, could not stand the fire from Vautrin's batteries for long without discovering whether this was a friend or a foe. He felt as if this strange being was reading his inmost soul, and dissecting his feelings, while Vautrin himself was so close and secretive that he seemed to have something of the profound and unmoved serenity of a sphinx, seeing and hearing all things and saying nothing. Eugene, conscious of that money in his pocket, grew rebellious.

°°°°"Be so good as to wait a moment," he said to Vautrin, as the latter rose, after slowly emptying his coffee-cup, sip by sip.

°°°°"What for?" inquired the older man, as he put on his large- brimmed hat and took up the sword-cane that he was wont to twirl like a man who will face three or four footpads without flinching.

°°°°"I will repay you in a minute," returned Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he spoke, counted out a hundred and forty francs, and pushed them towards Mme. Vauquer. "Short reckonings make good friends" he added, turning to the widow; "that clears our accounts till the end of the year. Can you give me change for a five-franc piece?"

°°°°"Good friends make short reckonings," echoed Poiret, with a glance at Vautrin.

°°°°"Here is your franc," said Rastignac, holding out the coin to the sphinx in the black wig.

°°°°"Any one might think that you were afraid to owe me a trifle," exclaimed this latter, with a searching glance that seemed to read the young man's inmost thoughts; there was a satirical and cynical smile on Vautrin's face such as Eugene had seen scores of times already; every time he saw it, it exasperated him almost beyond endurance.

°°°°"Well . . . so I am," he answered. He held both the bags in his hand, and had risen to go up to his room.

°°°°Vautrin made as if he were going out through the sitting-room, and the student turned to go through the second door that opened into the square lobby at the foot of the staircase.

°°°°"Do you know, Monsieur le Marquis de Rastignacorama, that what you were saying just now was not exactly polite?" Vautrin remarked, as he rattled his sword-cane across the panels of the sitting-room door, and came up to the student.

°°°°Rastignac looked coolly at Vautrin, drew him to the foot of the staircase, and shut the dining-room door. They were standing in the little square lobby between the kitchen and the dining-room; the place was lighted by an iron-barred fanlight above a door that gave access into the garden. Sylvie came out of her kitchen, and Eugene chose that moment to say:

°°°°MONSIEUR Vautrin, I am not a marquis, and my name is not Rastignacorama."

°°°°"They will fight," said Mlle. Michonneau, in an indifferent tone.

°°°°"Fight!" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Not they," replied Mme. Vauquer, lovingly fingering her pile of coins.

°°°°"But there they are under the lime-trees," cried Mlle. Victorine, who had risen so that she might see out into the garden. "Poor young man! he was in the right, after all."

°°°°"We must go upstairs, my pet," said Mme. Couture; "it is no business of ours."

°°°°At the door, however, Mme. Couture and Victorine found their progress barred by the portly form of Sylvie the cook.

°°°°"What ever can have happened?" she said. "M. Vautrin said to M. Eugene, 'Let us have an explanation!' then he took him by the arm, and there they are, out among the artichokes."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking. "Mamma Vauquer," he said smiling, "don't frighten yourself at all. I am only going to try my pistols under the lime-trees."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur," cried Victorine, clasping her hands as she spoke, "why do you want to kill M. Eugene?"

°°°°Vautrin stepped back a pace or two, and gazed at Victorine.

°°°°"Oh! this is something fresh!" he exclaimed in a bantering tone, that brought the color into the poor girl's face. "That young fellow yonder is very nice, isn't he?" he went on. "You have given me a notion, my pretty child; I will make you both happy."

°°°°Mme. Couture laid her hand on the arm of her ward, and drew the girl away, as she said in her ear:

°°°°"Why, Victorine, I cannot imagine what has come over you this morning."

°°°°"I don't want any shots fired in my garden," said Mme. Vauquer. "You will frighten the neighborhood and bring the police up here all in a moment."

°°°°"Come, keep cool, Mamma Vauquer," answered Vautrin. "There, there; it's all right; we will go to the shooting-gallery."

°°°°He went back to Rastignac, laying his hand familiarly on the young man's arm.

°°°°"When I have given you ocular demonstration of the fact that I can put a bullet through the ace on a card five times running at thirty-five paces," he said, "that won't take away your appetite, I suppose? You look to me to be inclined to be a trifle quarrelsome this morning, and as if you would rush on your death like a blockhead."

°°°°"Do you draw back?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Don't try to raise my temperature," answered Vautrin, "it is not cold this morning. Let us go and sit over there," he added, pointing to the green-painted garden seats; "no one can overhear us. I want a little talk with you. You are not a bad sort of youngster, and I have no quarrel with you. I like you, take Trump--(confound it!)--take Vautrin's word for it. What makes me like you? I will tell you by-and-by. Meantime, I can tell you that I know you as well as if I had made you myself, as I will prove to you in a minute. Put down your bags," he continued, pointing to the round table.

°°°°Rastignac deposited his money on the table, and sat down. He was consumed with curiosity, which the sudden change in the manner of the man before him had excited to the highest pitch. Here was a strange being who, a moment ago, had talked of killing him, and now posed as his protector.

°°°°"You would like to know who I really am, what I was, and what I do now," Vautrin went on. "You want to know too much, youngster. Come! come! keep cool! You will hear more astonishing things than that. I have had my misfortunes. Just hear me out first, and you shall have your turn afterwards. Here is my past in three words. Who am I? Vautrin. What do I do? Just what I please. Let us change the subject. You want to know my character. I am good- natured to those who do me a good turn, or to those whose hearts speak to mine. These last may do anything they like with me; they may bruise my shins, and I shall not tell them to 'mind what they are about'; but, nom d'une pipe, the devil himself is not an uglier customer than I can be if people annoy me, or if I don't happen to take to them; and you may just as well know at once that I think no more of killing a man than of that," and he spat before him as he spoke. "Only when it is absolutely necessary to do so, I do my best to kill him properly. I am what you call an artist. I have read Benvenuto Cellini's Memoirs, such as you see me; and, what is more, in Italian: A fine-spirited fellow he was! From him I learned to follow the example set us by Providence, who strikes us down at random, and to admire the beautiful whenever and wherever it is found. And, setting other questions aside, is it not a glorious part to play, when you pit yourself against mankind, and the luck is on your side? I have thought a good deal about the constitution of your present social Dis- order. A duel is downright childish, my boy! utter nonsense and folly! When one of two living men must be got out of the way, none but an idiot would leave chance to decide which it is to be; and in a duel it is a toss-up--heads or tails--and there you are! Now I, for instance, can hit the ace in the middle of a card five times running, send one bullet after another through the same hole, and at thirty-five paces, moreover! With that little accomplishment you might think yourself certain of killing your man, mightn't you. Well, I have fired, at twenty paces, and missed, and the rogue who had never handled a pistol in his life-- look here!"--(he unbuttoned his waistcoat and exposed his chest, covered, like a bear's back, with a shaggy fell; the student gave a startled shudder)--"he was a raw lad, but he made his mark on me," the extraordinary man went on, drawing Rastignac's fingers over a deep scar on his breast. But that happened when I myself was a mere boy; I was one-and-twenty then (your age), and I had some beliefs left--in a woman's love, and in a pack of rubbish that you will be over head and ears in directly. You and I were to have fought just now, weren't we? You might have killed me. Suppose that I were put under the earth, where would you be? You would have to clear out of this, go to Switzerland, draw on papa's purse--and he has none too much in it as it is. I mean to open your eyes to your real position, that is what I am going to do: but I shall do it from the point of view of a man who, after studying the world very closely, sees that there are but two alternatives--stupid obedience or revolt. I obey nobody; is that clear? Now, do you know how much you will want at the pace you are going? A million; and promptly, too, or that little head of ours will be swaying to and fro in the drag-nets at Saint-Cloud, while we are gone to find out whether or no there is a Supreme Being. I will put you in the way of that million."

°°°°He stopped for a moment and looked at Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! you do not look so sourly at papa Vautrin now! At the mention of the million you look like a young girl when somebody has said, 'I will come for you this evening!' and she betakes herself to her toilette as a cat licks its whiskers over a saucer of milk. All right. Come, now, let us go into the question, young man; all between ourselves, you know. We have a papa and mamma down yonder, a great-aunt, two sisters (aged eighteen and seventeen), two young brothers (one fifteen, and the other ten), that is about the roll-call of the crew. The aunt brings up the two sisters; the cure comes and teaches the boys Latin. Boiled chestnuts are oftener on the table than white bread. Papa makes a suit of clothes last a long while; if mamma has a different dress winter and summer, it is about as much as she has; the sisters manage as best they can. I know all about it; I have lived in the south.

°°°°"That is how things are at home. They send you twelve hundred francs a year, and the whole property only brings in three thousand francs all told. We have a cook and a manservant; papa is a baron, and we must keep up appearances. Then we have our ambitions; we are connected with the Beauseants, and we go afoot through the streets; we want to be rich, and we have not a penny; we eat Mme. Vauquer's messes, and we like grand dinners in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; we sleep on a truckle-bed, and dream of a mansion! I do not blame you for wanting these things. What sort of men do the women run after? Men of ambition. Men of ambition have stronger frames, their blood is richer in iron, their hearts are warmer than those of ordinary men. Women feel that when their power is greatest, they look their best, and that those are their happiest hours; they like power in men, and prefer the strongest even if it is a power that may be their own destruction. I am going to make an inventory of your desires in order to put the question at issue before you. Here it is:--

°°°°"We are as hungry as a wolf, and those newly-cut teeth of ours are sharp; what are we to do to keep the pot boiling? In the first place, we have the Code to browse upon; it is not amusing, and we are none the wiser for it, but that cannot be helped. So far so good. We mean to make an advocate of ourselves with a prospect of one day being made President of a Court of Assize, when we shall send poor devils, our betters, to the galleys with a T.F.* [*Travaux forces.] on their shoulders, so that the rich may be convinced that they can sleep in peace. There is no fun in that; and you are a long while coming to it; for, to begin with, there are two years of nauseous drudgery in Paris, we see all the lollipops that we long for out of our reach. It is tiresome to want things and never to have them. If you were a pallid creature of the mollusk order, you would have nothing to fear, but it is different when you have the hot blood of a lion and are ready to get into a score of scrapes every day of your life. This is the ghastliest form of torture known in this inferno of God's making, and you will give in to it. Or suppose that you are a good boy, drink nothing stronger than milk, and bemoan your hard lot; you, with your generous nature, will endure hardships that would drive a dog mad, and make a start, after long waiting, as deputy to some rascal or other in a hole of a place where the Government will fling you a thousand francs a year like the scraps that are thrown to the butcher's dog. Bark at thieves, plead the cause of the rich, send men of heart to the guillotine, that is your work! Many thanks! If you have no influence, you may rot in your provincial tribunal. At thirty you will be a Justice with twelve hundred francs a year (if you have not flung off the gown for good before then). By the time you are forty you may look to marry a miller's daughter, an heiress with some six thousand livres a year. Much obliged! If you have influence, you may possibly be a Public Prosecutor by the time you are thirty; with a salary of a thousand crowns, you could look to marry the mayor's daughter. Some petty piece of political trickery, such as mistaking Villele for Manuel in a bulletin (the names rhyme, and that quiets your conscience), and you will probably be a Procureur General by the time you are forty, with a chance of becoming a deputy. Please to observe, my dear boy, that our conscience will have been a little damaged in the process, and that we shall endure twenty years of drudgery and hidden poverty, and that our sisters are wearing Dian's livery. I have the honor to call your attention to another fact: to wit, that there are but twenty Procureurs Generaux at a time in all France, while there are some twenty thousand of you young men who aspire to that elevated position; that there are some mountebanks among you who would sell their family to screw their fortunes a peg higher. If this sort of thing sickens you, try another course. The Baron de Rastignac thinks of becoming an advocate, does he? There's a nice prospect for you! Ten years of drudgery straight away. You are obliged to live at the rate of a thousand francs a month; you must have a library of law books, live in chambers, go into society, go down on your knees to ask a solicitor for briefs, lick the dust off the floor of the Palais de Justice. If this kind of business led to anything, I should not say no; but just give me the names of five advocates here in Paris who by the time that they are fifty are making fifty thousand francs a year! Bah! I would sooner turn pirate on the high seas than have my soul shrivel up inside me like that. How will you find the capital? There is but one way, marry a woman who has money. There is no fun in it. Have you a mind to marry? You hang a stone around your neck; for if you marry for money, what becomes of our exalted notions of honor and so forth? You might as well fly in the face of social conventions at once. Is it nothing to crawl like a serpent before your wife, to lick her mother's feet, to descend to dirty actions that would sicken swine--faugh!--never mind if you at least make your fortune. But you will be as doleful as a dripstone if you marry for money. It is better to wrestle with men than to wrangle at home with your wife. You are at the crossway of the roads of life, my boy; choose your way.

°°°°"But you have chosen already. You have gone to see your cousin of Beauseant, and you have had an inkling of luxury; you have been to Mme. de Restaud's house, and in Father Goriot's daughter you have seen a glimpse of the Parisienne for the first time. That day you came back with a word written on your forehead. I knew it, I could read it--'SUCCESS!' Yes, success at any price. 'Bravo,' said I to myself, 'here is the sort of fellow for me.' You wanted money. Where was it all to come from? You have drained your sisters' little hoard (all brothers sponge more or less on their sisters). Those fifteen hundred francs of yours (got together, God knows how! in a country where there are more chestnuts than five-franc pieces) will slip away like soldiers after pillage. And, then, what will you do? Shall you begin to work? Work, or what you understand by work at this moment, means, for a man of Poiret's calibre, an old age in Mamma Vauquer's lodging-house. There are fifty thousand young men in your position at this moment, all bent as you are on solving one and the same problem--how to acquire a fortune rapidly. You are but a unit in that aggregate. You can guess, therefore, what efforts you must make, how desperate the struggle is. There are not fifty thousand good positions for you; you must fight and devour one another like spiders in a pot. Do you know how a man makes his way here? By brilliant genius or by skilful corruption. You must either cut your way through these masses of men like a cannon ball, or steal among them like a plague. Honesty is nothing to the purpose. Men bow before the power of genius; they hate it, and try to slander it, because genius does not divide the spoil; but if genius persists, they bow before it. To sum it all up in a phrase, if they fail to smother genius in the mud, they fall on their knees and worship it. Corruption is a great power in the world, and talent is scarce. So corruption is the weapon of superfluous mediocrity; you will be made to feel the point of it everywhere. You will see women who spend more than ten thousand francs a year on dress, while their husband's salary (his whole income) is six thousand francs. You will see officials buying estates on twelve thousand francs a year. You will see women who sell themselves body and soul to drive in a carriage belonging to the son of a peer of France, who has a right to drive in the middle rank at Longchamp. You have seen that poor simpleton of a Goriot obliged to meet a bill with his daughter's name at the back of it, though her husband has fifty thousand francs a year. I defy you to walk a couple of yards anywhere in Paris without stumbling on some infernal complication. I'll bet my head to a head of that salad that you will stir up a hornet's nest by taking a fancy to the first young, rich, and pretty woman you meet. They are all dodging the law, all at loggerheads with their husbands. If I were to begin to tell you all that vanity or necessity (virtue is not often mixed up in it, you may be sure), all that vanity and necessity drive them to do for lovers, finery, housekeeping, or children, I should never come to an end. So an honest man is the common enemy.

°°°°"But do you know what an honest man is? Here, in Paris, an honest man is the man who keeps his own counsel, and will not divide the plunder. I am not speaking now of those poor bond-slaves who do the work of the world without a reward for their toil--God Almighty's outcasts, I call them. Among them, I grant you, is virtue in all the flower of its stupidity, but poverty is no less their portion. At this moment, I think I see the long faces those good folk would pull if God played a practical joke on them and stayed away at the Last Judgment.

°°°°"Well, then, if you mean to make a fortune quickly, you must either be rich to begin with, or make people believe that you are rich. It is no use playing here except for high stakes; once take to low play, it is all up with you. If in the scores of professions that are open to you, there are ten men who rise very rapidly, people are sure to call them thieves. You can draw your own conclusions. Such is life. It is no cleaner than a kitchen; it reeks like a kitchen; and if you mean to cook your dinner, you must expect to soil your hands; the real art is in getting them clean again, and therein lies the whole morality of our epoch. If I take this tone in speaking of the world to you, I have the right to do so; I know it well. Do you think that I am blaming it? Far from it; the world has always been as it is now. Moralists' strictures will never change it. Mankind are not perfect, but one age is more or less hypocritical than another, and then simpletons say that its morality is high or low. I do not think that the rich are any worse than the poor; man is much the same, high or low, or wherever he is. In a million of these human cattle there may be half a score of bold spirits who rise above the rest, above the laws; I am one of them. And you, if you are cleverer than your fellows, make straight to your end, and hold your head high. But you must lay your account with envy and slander and mediocrity, and every man's hand will be against you. Napoleon met with a Minister of War, Aubry by name, who all but sent him to the colonies.

°°°°"Feel your pulse. Think whether you can get up morning after morning, strengthened in yesterday's purpose. In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline. Listen attentively. You see, I have an idea of my own. My idea is to live a patriarchal life on a vast estate, say a hundred thousand acres, somewhere in the Southern States of America. I mean to be a planter, to have slaves, to make a few snug millions by selling my cattle, timber, and tobacco; I want to live an absolute monarch, and to do just as I please; to lead such a life as no one here in these squalid dens of lath and plaster ever imagines. I am a great poet; I do not write my poems, I feel them, and act them. At this moment I have fifty thousand francs, which might possibly buy forty negroes. I want two hundred thousand francs, because I want to have two hundred negroes to carry out my notions of the patriarachal life properly. Negroes, you see, are like a sort of family ready grown, and there are no inquisitive public prosecutors out there to interfere with you. That investment in ebony ought to mean three or four million francs in ten years' time. If I am successful, no one will ask me who I am. I shall be Mr. Four Millions, an American citizen. I shall be fifty years old by then, and sound and hearty still; I shall enjoy life after my own fashion. In two words, if I find you an heiress with a million, will you give me two hundred thousand francs? Twenty per cent commission, eh? Is that too much? Your little wife will be very much in love with you. Once married, you will show signs of uneasiness and remorse; for a couple of weeks you will be depressed. Then, some night after sundry grimacings, comes the confession, between two kisses, 'Two hundred thousand francs of debts, my darling!' This sort of farce is played every day in Paris, and by young men of the highest fashion. When a young wife has given her heart, she will not refuse her purse. Perhaps you are thinking that you will lose the money for good? Not you. You will make two hundred thousand francs again by some stroke of business. With your capital and your brains you should be able to accumulate as large a fortune as you could wish. ERGO, in six months you will have made your own fortune, and our old friend Vautrin's, and made an amiable woman very happy, to say nothing of your people at home, who must blow on their fingers to warm them, in the winter, for lack of firewood. You need not be surprised at my proposal, nor at the demand I make. Forty-seven out of every sixty great matches here in Paris are made after just such a bargain as this. The Chamber of Notaries compels my gentleman to----"

°°°°"What must I do?" said Rastignac, eagerly interrupting Vautrin's speech.

°°°°"Next to nothing," returned the other, with a slight involuntary movement, the suppressed exultation of the angler when he feels a bite at the end of his line. "Follow me carefully! The heart of a girl whose life is wretched and unhappy is a sponge that will thirstily absorb love; a dry sponge that swells at the first drop of sentiment. If you pay court to a young girl whose existence is a compound of loneliness, despair, and poverty, and who has no suspicion that she will come into a fortune, good Lord! it is quint and quatorze at piquet; it is knowing the numbers of the lottery before-hand; it is speculating in the funds when you have news from a sure source; it is building up a marriage on an indestructible foundation. The girl may come in for millions, and she will fling them, as if they were so many pebbles, at your feet. 'Take it, my beloved! Take it, Alfred, Adolphe, Eugene!' or whoever it was that showed his sense by sacrificing himself for her. And as for sacrificing himself, this is how I understand it. You sell a coat that is getting shabby, so that you can take her to the Cadran bleu, treat her to mushrooms on toast, and then go to the Ambigu-Comique in the evening; you pawn your watch to buy her a shawl. I need not remind you of the fiddle-faddle sentimentality that goes down so well with all women; you spill a few drops of water on your stationery, for instance; those are the tears you shed while far away from her. You look to me as if you were perfectly acquainted with the argot of the heart. Paris, you see, is like a forest in the New World, where you have to deal with a score of varieties of savages--Illinois and Hurons, who live on the proceed of their social hunting. You are a hunter of millions; you set your snares; you use lures and nets; there are many ways of hunting. Some hunt heiresses, others a legacy; some fish for souls, yet others sell their clients, bound hand and foot. Every one who comes back from the chase with his game- bag well filled meets with a warm welcome in good society. In justice to this hospitable part of the world, it must be said that you have to do with the most easy and good-natured of great cities. If the proud aristocracies of the rest of Europe refuse admittance among their ranks to a disreputable millionaire, Paris stretches out a hand to him, goes to his banquets, eats his dinners, and hobnobs with his infamy."

°°°°"But where is such a girl to be found?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Under your eyes; she is yours already."

°°°°"Mlle. Victorine?"

°°°°"Precisely."

°°°°"And what was that you said?"

°°°°"She is in love with you already, your little Baronne de Rastignac!"

°°°°"She has not a penny," Eugene continued, much mystified.

°°°°"Ah! now we are coming to it! Just another word or two, and it will all be clear enough. Her father, Taillefer, is an old scoundrel; it is said that he murdered one of his friends at the time of the Revolution. He is one of your comedians that sets up to have opinions of his own. He is a banker--senior partner in the house of Frederic Taillefer and Company. He has one son, and means to leave all he has to the boy, to the prejudice of Victorine. For my part, I don't like to see injustice of this sort. I am like Don Quixote, I have a fancy for defending the weak against the strong. If it should please God to take that youth away from him, Taillefer would have only his daughter left; he would want to leave his money to some one or other; an absurd notion, but it is only human nature, and he is not likely to have any more children, as I know. Victorine is gentle and amiable; she will soon twist her father round her fingers, and set his head spinning like a German top by plying him with sentiment! She will be too much touched by your devotion to forget you; you will marry her. I mean to play Providence for you, and Providence is to do my will. I have a friend whom I have attached closely to myself, a colonel in the Army of the Loire, who has just been transferred into the garde royale. He has taken my advice and turned ultra-royalist; he is not one of those fools who never change their opinions. Of all pieces of advice, my cherub, I would give you this--don't stick to your opinions any more than to your words. If any one asks you for them, let him have them-- at a price. A man who prides himself on going in a straight line through life is an idiot who believes in infallibility. There are no such things as principles; there are only events, and there are no laws but those of expediency: a man of talent accepts events and the circumstances in which he finds himself, and turns everything to his own ends. If laws and principles were fixed and invariable, nations would not change them as readily as we change our shirts. The individual is not obliged to be more particular than the nation. A man whose services to France have been of the very slightest is a fetich looked on with superstitious awe because he has always seen everything in red; but he is good, at the most, to be put into the Museum of Arts and Crafts, among the automatic machines, and labeled La Fayette; while the prince at whom everybody flings a stone, the man who despises humanity so much that he spits as many oaths as he is asked for in the face of humanity, saved France from being torn in pieces at the Congress of Vienna; and they who should have given him laurels fling mud at him. Oh! I know something of affairs, I can tell you; I have the secrets of many men! Enough. When I find three minds in agreement as to the application of a principle, I shall have a fixed and immovable opinion--I shall have to wait a long while first. In the Tribunals you will not find three judges of the same opinion on a single point of law. To return to the man I was telling you of. He would crucify Jesus Christ again, if I bade him. At a word from his old chum Vautrin he will pick a quarrel with a scamp that will not send so much as five francs to his sister, poor girl, and" (here Vautrin rose to his feet and stood like a fencing-master about to lunge)--"turn him off into the dark!" he added.

°°°°"How frightful!" said Eugene. "You do not really mean it? M. Vautrin, you are joking!"

°°°°"There! there! Keep cool!" said the other. "Don't behave like a baby. But if you find any amusement in it, be indignant, flare up! Say that I am a scoundrel, a rascal, a rogue, a bandit; but do not call me a blackleg nor a spy! There, out with it, fire away! I forgive you; it is quite natural at your age. I was like that myself once. Only remember this, you will do worse things yourself some day. You will flirt with some pretty woman and take her money. You have thought of that, of course," said Vautrin, "for how are you to succeed unless love is laid under contribution? There are no two ways about virtue, my dear student; it either is, or it is not. Talk of doing penance for your sins! It is a nice system of business, when you pay for your crime by an act of contrition! You seduce a woman that you may set your foot on such and such a rung of the social ladder; you sow dissension among the children of a family; you descend, in short, to every base action that can be committed at home or abroad, to gain your own ends for your own pleasure or your profit; and can you imagine that these are acts of faith, hope, or charity? How is it that a dandy, who in a night has robbed a boy of half his fortune, gets only a couple of months in prison; while a poor devil who steals a banknote for a thousand francs, with aggravating circumstances, is condemned to penal servitude? Those are your laws. Not a single provision but lands you in some absurdity. That man with yellow gloves and a golden tongue commits many a murder; he sheds no blood, but he drains his victim's veins as surely; a desperado forces open a door with a crowbar, dark deeds both of them! You yourself will do every one of those things that I suggest to you to-day, bar the bloodshed. Do you believe that there is any absolute standard in this world? Despise mankind and find out the meshes that you can slip through in the net of the Code. The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out, because it was properly executed."

°°°°"Silence, sir! I will not hear any more; you make me doubt myself. At this moment my sentiments are all my science."

°°°°"Just as you please, my fine fellow; I did think you were so weak-minded," said Vautrin, "I shall say no more about it. One last word, however," and he looked hard at the student--"you have my secret," he said.

°°°°"A young man who refuses your offer knows that he must forget it."

°°°°"Quite right, quite right; I am glad to hear you say so. Somebody else might not be so scrupulous, you see. Keep in mind what I want to do for you. I will give you a fortnight. The offer is still open."

°°°°"What a head of iron the man has!" said Eugene to himself, as he watched Vautrin walk unconcernedly away with his cane under his arm. "Yet Mme. de Beauseant said as much more gracefully; he has only stated the case in cruder language. He would tear my heart with claws of steel. What made me think of going to Mme. de Nucingen? He guessed my motives before I knew them myself. To sum it up, that outlaw has told me more about virtue than all I have learned from men and books. If virtue admits of no compromises, I have certainly robbed my sisters," he said, throwing down the bags on the table.

°°°°He sat down again and fell, unconscious of his surroundings, into deep thought.

°°°°"To be faithful to an ideal of virtue! A heroic martyrdom! Pshaw! every one believes in virtue, but who is virtuous? Nations have made an idol of Liberty, but what nation on the face of the earth is free? My youth is still like a blue and cloudless sky. If I set myself to obtain wealth or power, does it mean that I must make up my mind to lie, and fawn, and cringe, and swagger, and flatter, and dissemble? To consent to be the servant of others who have likewise fawned, and lied, and flattered? Must I cringe to them before I can hope to be their accomplice? Well, then, I decline. I mean to work nobly and with a single heart. I will work day and night; I will owe my fortune to nothing but my own exertions. It may be the slowest of all roads to success, but I shall lay my head on the pillow at night untroubled by evil thoughts. Is there a greater thing than this--to look back over your life and know that it is stainless as a lily? I and my life are like a young man and his betrothed. Vautrin has put before me all that comes after ten years of marriage. The devil! my head is swimming. I do not want to think at all; the heart is a sure guide."

°°°°Eugene was roused from his musings by the voice of the stout Sylvie, who announced that the tailor had come, and Eugene therefore made his appearance before the man with the two money bags, and was not ill pleased that it should be so. When he had tried on his dress suit, he put on his new morning costume, which completely metamorphosed him.

°°°°"I am quite equal to M. de Trailles," he said to himself. "In short, I look like a gentleman."

°°°°"You asked me, sir, if I knew the houses where Mme. de Nucingen goes," Father Goriot's voice spoke from the doorway of Eugene's room."

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Very well then, she is going to the Marechale Carigliano's ball on Monday. If you can manage to be there, I shall hear from you whether my two girls enjoyed themselves, and how they were dressed, and all about it in fact."

°°°°"How did you find that out, my good Goriot?" said Eugene, putting a chair by the fire for his visitor.

°°°°"Her maid told me. I hear all about their doings from Therese and Constance," he added gleefully.

°°°°The old man looked like a lover who is still young enough to be made happy by the discovery of some little stratagem which brings him information of his lady-love without her knowledge.

°°°°"YOU will see them both!" he said, giving artless expression to a pang of jealousy.

°°°°"I do not know," answered Eugene. "I will go to Mme. de Beauseant and ask her for an introduction to the Marechale."

°°°°Eugene felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought of appearing before the Vicomtesse, dressed as henceforward he always meant to be. The "abysses of the human heart," in the moralists' phrase, are only insidious thoughts, involuntary promptings of personal interest. The instinct of enjoyment turns the scale; those rapid changes of purpose which have furnished the text for so much rhetoric are calculations prompted by the hope of pleasure. Rastignac beholding himself well dressed and impeccable as to gloves and boots, forgot his virtuous resolutions. Youth, moreover, when bent upon wrongdoing does not dare to behold himself in the mirror of consciousness; mature age has seen itself; and therein lies the whole difference between these two phases of life.

°°°°A friendship between Eugene and his neighbor, Father Goriot, had been growing up for several days past. This secret friendship and the antipathy that the student had begun to entertain for Vautrin arose from the same psychological causes. The bold philosopher who shall investigate the effects of mental action upon the physical world will doubtless find more than one proof of the material nature of our sentiments in other animals. What physiognomist is as quick to discern character as a dog is to discover from a stranger's face whether this is a friend or no? Those by-words--"atoms," "affinities"--are facts surviving in modern languages for the confusion of philosophic wiseacres who amuse themselves by winnowing the chaff of language to find its grammatical roots. We FEEL that we are loved. Our sentiments make themselves felt in everything, even at a great distance. A letter is a living soul, and so faithful an echo of the voice that speaks in it, that finer natures look upon a letter as one of love's most precious treasures. Father Goriot's affection was of the instinctive order, a canine affection raised to a sublime pitch; he had scented compassion in the air, and the kindly respect and youthful sympathy in the student's heart. This friendship had, however, scarcely reached the stage at which confidences are made. Though Eugene had spoken of his wish to meet Mme. de Nucingen, it was not because he counted on the old man to introduce him to her house, for he hoped that his own audacity might stand him in good stead. All that Father Goriot had said as yet about his daughters had referred to the remarks that the student had made so freely in public on that day of the two visits.

°°°°"How could you think that Mme. de Restaud bore you a grudge for mentioning my name?" he had said on the day following that scene at dinner. "My daughters are very fond of me; I am a happy father; but my sons-in-law have behaved badly to me, and rather than make trouble between my darlings and their husbands, I choose to see my daughters secretly. Fathers who can see their daughters at any time have no idea of all the pleasure that all this mystery gives me; I cannot always see mine when I wish, do you understand? So when it is fine I walk out in the Champs- Elysees, after finding out from their waiting-maids whether my daughters mean to go out. I wait near the entrance; my heart beats fast when the carriages begin to come; I admire them in their dresses, and as they pass they give me a little smile, and it seems as if everything was lighted up for me by a ray of bright sunlight. I wait, for they always go back the same way, and then I see them again; the fresh air has done them good and brought color into their cheeks; all about me people say, 'What a beautiful woman that is!' and it does my heart good to hear them.

°°°°"Are they not my own flesh and blood? I love the very horses that draw them; I envy the little lap-dog on their knees. Their happiness is my life. Every one loves after his own fashion, and mine does no one any harm; why should people trouble their heads about me? I am happy in my own way. Is there any law against going to see my girls in the evening when they are going out to a ball? And what a disappointment it is when I get there too late, and am told that 'Madame has gone out!' Once I waited till three o'clock in the morning for Nasie; I had not seen her for two whole days. I was so pleased, that it was almost too much for me! Please do not speak of me unless it is to say how good my daughters are to me. They are always wanting to heap presents upon me, but I will not have it. 'Just keep your money,' I tell them. 'What should I do with it? I want nothing.' And what am I, sir, after all? An old carcase, whose soul is always where my daughters are. When you have seen Mme. de Nucingen, tell me which you like the most," said the old man after a moment's pause, while Eugene put the last touches to his toilette. The student was about to go out to walk in the Garden of the Tuileries until the hour when he could venture to appear in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room.

°°°°That walk was a turning-point in Eugene's career. Several women noticed him; he looked so handsome, so young, and so well dressed. This almost admiring attention gave a new turn to his thoughts. He forgot his sisters and the aunt who had robbed herself for him; he no longer remembered his own virtuous scruples. He had seen hovering above his head the fiend so easy to mistake for an angel, the Devil with rainbow wings, who scatters rubies, and aims his golden shafts at palace fronts, who invests women with purple, and thrones with a glory that dazzles the eyes of fools till they forget the simple origins of royal dominion; he had heard the rustle of that Vanity whose tinsel seems to us to be the symbol of power. However cynical Vautrin's words had been, they had made an impression on his mind, as the sordid features of the old crone who whispers, "A lover, and gold in torrents," remain engraven on a young girl's memory.

°°°°Eugene lounged about the walks till it was nearly five o'clock, then he went to Mme. de Beauseant, and received one of the terrible blows against which young hearts are defenceless. Hitherto the Vicomtesse had received him with the kindly urbanity, the bland grace of manner that is the result of fine breeding, but is only complete when it comes from the heart.

°°°°Today Mme. de Beauseant bowed constrainedly, and spoke curtly:

°°°°"M. de Rastignac, I cannot possibly see you, at least not at this moment. I am engaged . . ."

°°°°An observer, and Rastignac instantly became an observer, could read the whole history, the character and customs of caste, in the phrase, in the tones of her voice, in her glance and bearing. He caught a glimpse of the iron hand beneath the velvet glove-- the personality, the egoism beneath the manner, the wood beneath the varnish. In short, he heard that unmistakable I THE KING that issues from the plumed canopy of the throne, and finds its last echo under the crest of the simplest gentleman.

°°°°Eugene had trusted too implicitly to the generosity of a woman; he could not believe in her haughtiness. Like all the unfortunate, he had subscribed, in all good faith, the generous compact which should bind the benefactor to the recipient, and the first article in that bond, between two large-hearted natures, is a perfect equality. The kindness which knits two souls together is as rare, as divine, and as little understood as the passion of love, for both love and kindness are the lavish generosity of noble natures. Rastignac was set upon going to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball, so he swallowed down this rebuff.

°°°°"Madame," he faltered out, "I would not have come to trouble you about a trifling matter; be so kind as to permit me to see you later, I can wait."

°°°°"Very well, come and dine with me," she said, a little confused by the harsh way in which she had spoken, for this lady was as genuinely kind-hearted as she was high-born.

°°°°Eugene was touched by this sudden relenting, but none the less he said to himself as he went away, "Crawl in the dust, put up with every kind of treatment. What must the rest of the world be like when one of the kindest of women forgets all her promises of befriending me in a moment, and tosses me aside like an old shoe? So it is every one for himself? It is true that her house is not a shop, and I have put myself in the wrong by needing her help. You should cut your way through the world like a cannon ball, as Vautrin said."

°°°°But the student's bitter thoughts were soon dissipated by the pleasure which he promised himself in this dinner with the Vicomtesse. Fate seemed to determine that the smallest accidents in his life should combine to urge him into a career, which the terrible sphinx of the Maison Vauquer had described as a field of battle where you must either slay or be slain, and cheat to avoid being cheated. You leave your conscience and your heart at the barriers, and wear a mask on entering into this game of grim earnest, where, as in ancient Sparta, you must snatch your prize without being detected if you would deserve the crown.

°°°°On his return he found the Vicomtesse gracious and kindly, as she had always been to him. They went together to the dining-room, where the Vicomte was waiting for his wife. In the time of the Restoration the luxury of the table was carried, as is well known, to the highest degree, and M. de Beauseant, like many jaded men of the world, had few pleasures left but those of good cheer; in this matter, in fact, he was a gourmand of the schools of Louis XVIII. and of the Duc d'Escars, and luxury was supplemented by splendor. Eugene, dining for the first time in a house where the traditions of grandeur had descended through many generations, had never seen any spectacle like this that now met his eyes. In the time of the Empire, balls had always ended with a supper, because the officers who took part in them must be fortified for immediate service, and even in Paris might be called upon to leave the ballroom for the battlefield. This arrangement had gone out of fashion under the Monarchy, and Eugene had so far only been asked to dances. The self-possession which pre-eminently distinguished him in later life already stood him in good stead, and he did not betray his amazement. Yet as he saw for the first time the finely wrought silver plate, the completeness of every detail, the sumptuous dinner, noiselessly served, it was difficult for such an ardent imagination not to prefer this life of studied and refined luxury to the hardships of the life which he had chosen only that morning.

°°°°His thoughts went back for a moment to the lodging-house, and with a feeling of profound loathing, he vowed to himself that at New Year he would go; prompted at least as much by a desire to live among cleaner surroundings as by a wish to shake off Vautrin, whose huge hand he seemed to feel on his shoulder at that moment. When you consider the numberless forms, clamorous or mute, that corruption takes in Paris, common-sense begins to wonder what mental aberration prompted the State to establish great colleges and schools there, and assemble young men in the capital; how it is that pretty women are respected, or that the gold coin displayed in the money-changer's wooden saucers does not take to itself wings in the twinkling of an eye; and when you come to think further, how comparatively few cases of crime there are, and to count up the misdemeanors committed by youth, is there not a certain amount of respect due to these patient Tantaluses who wrestle with themselves and nearly always come off victorious? The struggles of the poor student in Paris, if skilfully drawn, would furnish a most dramatic picture of modern civilization.

°°°°In vain Mme. de Beauseant looked at Eugene as if asking him to speak; the student was tongue-tied in the Vicomte's presence.

°°°°"Are you going to take me to the Italiens this evening?" the Vicomtesse asked her husband.

°°°°"You cannot doubt that I should obey you with pleasure," he answered, and there was a sarcastic tinge in his politeness which Eugene did not detect, "but I ought to go to meet some one at the Varietes."

°°°°"His mistress," said she to herself.

°°°°"Then, is not Ajuda coming for you this evening?" inquired the Vicomte.

°°°°"No," she answered, petulantly.

°°°°"Very well, then, if you really must have an arm, take that of M. de Rastignac."

°°°°The Vicomtess turned to Eugene with a smile.

°°°°"That would be a very compromising step for you," she said.

°°°°" 'A Frenchman loves danger, because in danger there is glory,' to quote M. de Chateaubriand," said Rastignac, with a bow.

°°°°A few moments later he was sitting beside Mme. de Beauseant in a brougham, that whirled them through the streets of Paris to a fashionable theatre. It seemed to him that some fairy magic had suddenly transported him into a box facing the stage. All the lorgnettes of the house were pointed at him as he entered, and at the Vicomtesse in her charming toilette. He went from enchantment to enchantment.

°°°°"You must talk to me, you know," said Mme. de Beauseant. "Ah! look! There is Mme. de Nucingen in the third box from ours. Her sister and M. de Trailles are on the other side."

°°°°The Vicomtesse glanced as she spoke at the box where Mlle. de Rochefide should have been; M. d'Ajuda was not there, and Mme. de Beauseant's face lighted up in a marvelous way.

°°°°"She is charming," said Eugene, after looking at Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"She has white eyelashes."

°°°°"Yes, but she has such a pretty slender figure!"

°°°°"Her hands are large."

°°°°"Such beautiful eyes!"

°°°°"Her face is long."

°°°°"Yes, but length gives distinction."

°°°°"It is lucky for her that she has some distinction in her face. Just see how she fidgets with her opera-glass! The Goriot blood shows itself in every movement," said the Vicomtesse, much to Eugene's astonishment.

°°°°Indeed, Mme. de Beauseant seemed to be engaged in making a survey of the house, and to be unconscious of Mme. Nucingen's existence; but no movement made by the latter was lost upon the Vicomtesse. The house was full of the loveliest women in Paris, so that Delphine de Nucingen was not a little flattered to receive the undivided attention of Mme. de Beauseant's young, handsome, and well-dressed cousin, who seemed to have no eyes for any one else.

°°°°"If you look at her so persistently, you will make people talk, M. de Rastignac. You will never succeed if you fling yourself at any one's head like that."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Eugene, "you have protected me indeed so far, and now if you would complete your work, I only ask of you a favor which will cost you but little, and be of very great service to me. I have lost my heart."

°°°°"Already!"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"And to that woman!"

°°°°"How could I aspire to find any one else to listen to me?" he asked, with a keen glance at his cousin. "Her Grace the Duchesse de Carigliano is a friend of the Duchesse de Berri," he went on, after a pause; "you are sure to see her, will you be so kind as to present me to her, and to take me to her ball on Monday? I shall meet Mme. de Nucingen there, and enter into my first skirmish."

°°°°"Willingly," she said. "If you have a liking for her already, your affairs of the heart are like to prosper. That is de Marsay over there in the Princesse Galathionne's box. Mme. de Nucingen is racked with jealousy. There is no better time for approaching a woman, especially if she happens to be a banker's wife. All those ladies of the Chaussee-d'Antin love revenge."

°°°°"Then, what would you do yourself in such a case?"

°°°°"I should suffer in silence."

°°°°At this point the Marquis d'Ajuda appeared in Mme. de Beauseant's box.

°°°°"I have made a muddle of my affairs to come to you," he said, "and I am telling you about it, so that it may not be a sacrifice."

°°°°Eugene saw the glow of joy on the Vicomtesse's face, and knew that this was love, and learned the difference between love and the affectations of Parisian coquetry. He admired his cousin, grew mute, and yielded his place to M. d'Ajuda with a sigh.

°°°°"How noble, how sublime a woman is when she loves like that!" he said to himself. "And HE could forsake her for a doll! Oh! how could any one forsake her?"

°°°°There was a boy's passionate indignation in his heart. He could have flung himself at Mme. de Beauseant's feet; he longed for the power of the devil if he could snatch her away and hide her in his heart, as an eagle snatches up some white yeanling from the plains and bears it to its eyrie. It was humiliating to him to think that in all this gallery of fair pictures he had not one picture of his own. "To have a mistress and an almost royal position is a sign of power," he said to himself. And he looked at Mme. de Nucingen as a man measures another who has insulted him.

°°°°The Vicomtesse turned to him, and the expression of her eyes thanked him a thousand times for his discretion. The first act came to an end just then.

°°°°"Do you know Mme. de Nucingen well enough to present M. de Rastignac to her?" she asked of the Marquis d'Ajuda.

°°°°"She will be delighted," said the Marquis. The handsome Portuguese rose as he spoke and took the student's arm, and in another moment Eugene found himself in Mme. de Nucingen's box.

°°°°"Madame," said the Marquis, "I have the honor of presenting to you the Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac; he is a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's. You have made so deep an impression upon him, that I thought I would fill up the measure of his happiness by bringing him nearer to his divinity."

°°°°Words spoken half jestingly to cover their somewhat disrespectful import; but such an implication, if carefully disguised, never gives offence to a woman. Mme. de Nucingen smiled, and offered Eugene the place which her husband had just left.

°°°°"I do not venture to suggest that you should stay with me, monsieur," she said. "Those who are so fortunate as to be in Mme. de Beauseant's company do not desire to leave it."

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, lowering his voice, "I think that to please my cousin I should remain with you. Before my lord Marquis came we were speaking of you and of your exceedingly distinguished appearance," he added aloud.

°°°°M. d'Ajuda turned and left them.

°°°°"Are you really going to stay with me, monsieur?" asked the Baroness. "Then we shall make each other's acquaintance. Mme. de Restaud told me about you, and has made me anxious to meet you."

°°°°"She must be very insincere, then, for she has shut her door on me."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Madame, I will tell you honestly the reason why; but I must crave your indulgence before confiding such a secret to you. I am your father's neighbor; I had no idea that Mme. de Restaud was his daughter. I was rash enough to mention his name; I meant no harm, but I annoyed your sister and her husband very much. You cannot think how severely the Duchesse de Langeais and my cousin blamed this apostasy on a daughter's part, as a piece of bad taste. I told them all about it, and they both burst out laughing. Then Mme. de Beauseant made some comparison between you and your sister, speaking in high terms of you, and saying how very fond you were of my neighbor, M. Goriot. And, indeed, how could you help loving him? He adores you so passionately that I am jealous already. We talked about you this morning for two hours. So this evening I was quite full of all that your father had told me, and while I was dining with my cousin I said that you could not be as beautiful as affectionate. Mme. de Beauseant meant to gratify such warm admiration, I think, when she brought me here, telling me, in her gracious way, that I should see you."

°°°°"Then, even now, I owe you a debt of gratitude, monsieur," said the banker's wife. "We shall be quite old friends in a little while."

°°°°"Although a friendship with you could not be like an ordinary friendship," said Rastignac; "I should never wish to be your friend."

°°°°Such stereotyped phrases as these, in the mouths of beginners, possess an unfailing charm for women, and are insipid only when read coldly; for a young man's tone, glance and attitude give a surpassing eloquence to the banal phrases. Mme. de Nucingen thought that Rastignac was adorable. Then, woman-like, being at a loss how to reply to the student's outspoken admiration, she answered a previous remark.

°°°°"Yes, it is very wrong of my sister to treat our poor father as she does," she said; "he has been a Providence to us. It was not until M. de Nucingen positively ordered me only to receive him in the mornings that I yielded the point. But I have been unhappy about it for a long while; I have shed many tears over it. This violence to my feelings, with my husband's brutal treatment, have been two causes of my unhappy married life. There is certainly no woman in Paris whose lot seems more enviable than mine, and yet, in reality, there is not one so much to be pitied. You will think I must be out of my senses to talk to you like this; but you know my father, and I cannot regard you as a stranger."

°°°°"You will find no one," said Eugene, "who longs as eagerly as I do to be yours. What do all women seek? Happiness." (He answered his own question in low, vibrating tones.) "And if happiness for a woman means that she is to be loved and adored, to have a friend to whom she can pour out her wishes, her fancies, her sorrows and joys; to whom she can lay bare her heart and soul, and all her fair defects and her gracious virtues, without fear of a betrayal; believe me, the devotion and the warmth that never fails can only be found in the heart of a young man who, at a bare sign from you, would go to his death, who neither knows nor cares to know anything as yet of the world, because you will be all the world to him. I myself, you see (you will laugh at my simplicity), have just come from a remote country district; I am quite new to this world of Paris; I have only known true and loving hearts; and I made up my mind that here I should find no love. Then I chanced to meet my cousin, and to see my cousin's heart from very near; I have divined the inexhaustible treasures of passion, and, like Cherubino, I am the lover of all women, until the day comes when I find THE woman to whom I may devote myself. As soon as I saw you, as soon as I came into the theatre this evening, I felt myself borne towards you as if by the current of a stream. I had so often thought of you already, but I had never dreamed that you would be so beautiful! Mme. de Beauseant told me that I must not look so much at you. She does not know the charm of your red lips, your fair face, nor see how soft your eyes are. . . . I also am beginning to talk nonsense; but let me talk."

°°°°Nothing pleases a woman better than to listen to such whispered words as these; the most puritanical among them listens even when she ought not to reply to them; and Rastignac, having once begun, continued to pour out his story, dropping his voice, that she might lean and listen; and Mme. de Nucingen, smiling, glanced from time to time at de Marsay, who still sat in the Princesse Galathionne's box.

°°°°Rastignac did not leave Mme. de Nucingen till her husband came to take her home.

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, "I shall have the pleasure of calling upon you before the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball."

°°°°"If Matame infites you to come," said the Baron, a thickset Alsatian, with indications of a sinister cunning in his full-moon countenance, "you are quide sure of being well receifed."

°°°°"My affairs seem to be in a promising way," said Eugene to himself.--" 'Can you love me?' I asked her, and she did not resent it. The bit is in the horse's mouth, and I have only to mount and ride;" and with that he went to pay his respects to Mme. de Beauseant, who was leaving the theatre on d'Ajuda's arm.

°°°°The student did not know that the Baroness' thoughts had been wandering; that she was even then expecting a letter from de Marsay, one of those letters that bring about a rupture that rends the soul; so, happy in his delusion, Eugene went with the Vicomtesse to the peristyle, where people were waiting till their carriages were announced.

°°°°"That cousin of yours is hardly recognizable for the same man," said the Portuguese laughingly to the Vicomtesse, when Eugene had taken leave of them. "He will break the bank. He is as supple as an eel; he will go a long way, of that I am sure. Who else could have picked out a woman for him, as you did, just when she needed consolation?"

°°°°"But it is not certain that she does not still love the faithless lover," said Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°The student meanwhile walked back from the Theatre-Italien to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, making the most delightful plans as he went. He had noticed how closely Mme. de Restaud had scrutinized him when he sat beside Mme. de Nucingen, and inferred that the Countess' doors would not be closed in the future. Four important houses were now open to him--for he meant to stand well with the Marechale; he had four supporters in the inmost circle of society in Paris. Even now it was clear to him that, once involved in this intricate social machinery, he must attach himself to a spoke of the wheel that was to turn and raise his fortunes; he would not examine himself too curiously as to the methods, but he was certain of the end, and conscious of the power to gain and keep his hold.

°°°°"If Mme. de Nucingen takes an interest in me, I will teach her how to manage her husband. That husband of hers is a great speculator; he might put me in the way of making a fortune by a single stroke."

°°°°He did not say this bluntly in so many words; as yet, indeed, he was not sufficient of a diplomatist to sum up a situation, to see its possibilities at a glance, and calculate the chances in his favor. These were nothing but hazy ideas that floated over his mental horizon; they were less cynical than Vautrin's notions; but if they had been tried in the crucible of conscience, no very pure result would have issued from the test. It is by a succession of such like transactions that men sink at last to the level of the relaxed morality of this epoch, when there have never been so few of those who square their courses with their theories, so few of those noble characters who do not yield to temptation, for whom the slightest deviation from the line of rectitude is a crime. To these magnificent types of uncompromising Right we owe two masterpieces--the Alceste of Moliere, and, in our own day, the characters of Jeanie Deans and her father in Sir Walter Scott's novel. Perhaps a work which should chronicle the opposite course, which should trace out all the devious courses through which a man of the world, a man of ambitions, drags his conscience, just steering clear of crime that he may gain his end and yet save appearances, such a chronicle would be no less edifying and no less dramatic.

°°°°Rastignac went home. He was fascinated by Mme. de Nucingen; he seemed to see her before him, slender and graceful as a swallow. He recalled the intoxicating sweetness of her eyes, her fair hair, the delicate silken tissue of the skin, beneath which it almost seemed to him that he could see the blood coursing; the tones of her voice still exerted a spell over him; he had forgotten nothing; his walk perhaps heated his imagination by sending a glow of warmth through his veins. He knocked unceremoniously at Goriot's door.

°°°°"I have seen Mme. Delphine, neighbor," said he.

°°°°"Where?"

°°°°"At the Italiens."

°°°°"Did she enjoy it?. . . . Just come inside," and the old man left his bed, unlocked the door, and promptly returned again.

°°°°It was the first time that Eugene had been in Father Goriot's room, and he could not control his feeling of amazement at the contrast between the den in which the father lived and the costume of the daughter whom he had just beheld. The window was curtainless, the walls were damp, in places the varnished wall- paper had come away and gave glimpses of the grimy yellow plaster beneath. The wretched bed on which the old man lay boasted but one thin blanket, and a wadded quilt made out of large pieces of Mme. Vauquer's old dresses. The floor was damp and gritty. Opposite the window stood a chest of drawers made of rosewood, one of the old-fashioned kind with a curving front and brass handles, shaped like rings of twisted vine stems covered with flowers and leaves. On a venerable piece of furniture with a wooden shelf stood a ewer and basin and shaving apparatus. A pair of shoes stood in one corner; a night-table by the bed had neither a door nor marble slab. There was not a trace of a fire in the empty grate; the square walnut table with the crossbar against which Father Goriot had crushed and twisted his posset- dish stood near the hearth. The old man's hat was lying on a broken-down bureau. An armchair stuffed with straw and a couple of chairs completed the list of ramshackle furniture. From the tester of the bed, tied to the ceiling by a piece of rag, hung a strip of some cheap material in large red and black checks. No poor drudge in a garret could be worse lodged than Father Goriot in Mme. Vauquer's lodging-house. The mere sight of the room sent a chill through you and a sense of oppression; it was like the worst cell in a prison. Luckily, Goriot could not see the effect that his surroundings produced on Eugene as the latter deposited his candle on the night-table. The old man turned round, keeping the bedclothes huddled up to his chin.

°°°°"Well," he said, "and which do you like the best, Mme. de Restaud or Mme. de Nucingen?"

°°°°"I like Mme. Delphine the best," said the law student, "because she loves you the best."

°°°°At the words so heartily spoken the old man's hand slipped out from under the bedclothes and grasped Eugene's.

°°°°"Thank you, thank you," he said, gratefully. "Then what did she say about me?"

°°°°The student repeated the Baroness' remarks with some embellishments of his own, the old man listening the while as though he heard a voice from Heaven.

°°°°"Dear child!" he said. "Yes, yes, she is very fond of me. But you must not believe all that she tells you about Anastasie. The two sisters are jealous of each other, you see, another proof of their affection. Mme. de Restaud is very fond of me too. I know she is. A father sees his children as God sees all of us; he looks into the very depths of their hearts; he knows their intentions; and both of them are so loving. Oh! if I only had good sons-in-law, I should be too happy, and I dare say there is no perfect happiness here below. If I might live with them-- simply hear their voices, know that they are there, see them go and come as I used to do at home when they were still with me; why, my heart bounds at the thought. . . . Were they nicely dressed?"

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene. "But, M. Goriot, how is it that your daughters have such fine houses, while you live in such a den as this?"

°°°°"Dear me, why should I want anything better?" he replied, with seeming carelessness. "I can't quite explain to you how it is; I am not used to stringing words together properly, but it all lies there----" he said, tapping his heart. "My real life is in my two girls, you see; and so long as they are happy, and smartly dressed, and have soft carpets under their feet, what does it matter what clothes I wear or where I lie down of a night? I shall never feel cold so long as they are warm; I shall never feel dull if they are laughing. I have no troubles but theirs. When you, too, are a father, and you hear your children's little voices, you will say to yourself, 'That has all come from me.' You will feel that those little ones are akin to every drop in your veins, that they are the very flower of your life (and what else are they?); you will cleave so closely to them that you seem to feel every movement that they make. Everywhere I hear their voices sounding in my ears. If they are sad, the look in their eyes freezes my blood. Some day you will find out that there is far more happiness in another's happiness than in your own. It is something that I cannot explain, something within that sends a glow of warmth all through you. In short, I live my life three times over. Shall I tell you something funny? Well, then, since I have been a father, I have come to understand God. He is everywhere in the world, because the whole world comes from Him. And it is just the same with my children, monsieur. Only, I love my daughters better than God loves the world, for the world is not so beautiful as God Himself is, but my children are more beautiful than I am. Their lives are so bound up with mine that I felt somehow that you would see them this evening. Great Heaven! If any man would make my little Delphine as happy as a wife is when she is loved, I would black his boots and run on his errands. That miserable M. de Marsay is a cur; I know all about him from her maid. A longing to wring his neck comes over me now and then. He does not love her! does not love a pearl of a woman, with a voice like a nightingale and shaped like a model. Where can her eyes have been when she married that great lump of an Alsatian? They ought both of them to have married young men, good-looking and good-tempered--but, after all, they had their own way."

°°°°Father Goriot was sublime. Eugene had never yet seen his face light up as it did now with the passionate fervor of a father's love. It is worthy of remark that strong feeling has a very subtle and pervasive power; the roughest nature, in the endeavor to express a deep and sincere affection, communicates to others the influence that has put resonance into the voice, and eloquence into every gesture, wrought a change in the very features of the speaker; for under the inspiration of passion the stupidest human being attains to the highest eloquence of ideas, if not of language, and seems to move in some sphere of light. In the old man's tones and gesture there was something just then of the same spell that a great actor exerts over his audience. But does not the poet in us find expression in our affections?

°°°°"Well," said Eugene, "perhaps you will not be sorry to hear that she is pretty sure to break with de Marsay before long. That sprig of fashion has left her for the Princesse Galathionne. For my part, I fell in love with Mme. Delphine this evening."

°°°°"Stuff!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"I did indeed, and she did not regard me with aversion. For a whole hour we talked of love, and I am to go to call on her on Saturday, the day after to-morrow."

°°°°"Oh! how I should love you, if she should like you. You are kind- hearted; you would never make her miserable. If you were to forsake her, I would cut your throat at once. A woman does not love twice, you see! Good heavens! what nonsense I am talking, M. Eugene! It is cold; you ought not to stay here. MON DIEU! so you have heard her speak? What message did she give you for me?"

°°°°"None at all," said Eugene to himself; aloud he answered, "She told me to tell you that your daughter sends you a good kiss."

°°°°"Good-night, neighbor! Sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you! I have mine already made for me by that message from her. May God grant you all your desires! You have come in like a good angel on me to-night, and brought with you the air that my daughter breathes."

°°°°"Poor old fellow!" said Eugene as he lay down. "It is enough to melt a heart of stone. His daughter no more thought of him than of the Grand Turk."

°°°°Ever after this conference Goriot looked upon his neighbor as a friend, a confidant such as he had never hoped to find; and there was established between the two the only relationship that could attach this old man to another man. The passions never miscalculate. Father Goriot felt that this friendship brought him closer to his daughter Delphine; he thought that he should find a warmer welcome for himself if the Baroness should care for Eugene. Moreover, he had confided one of his troubles to the younger man. Mme. de Nucingen, for whose happiness he prayed a thousand times daily, had never known the joys of love. Eugene was certainly (to make use of his own expression) one of the nicest young men that he had ever seen, and some prophetic instinct seemed to tell him that Eugene was to give her the happiness which had not been hers. These were the beginnings of a friendship that grew up between the old man and his neighbor; but for this friendship the catastrophe of the drama must have remained a mystery.

°°°°The affection with which Father Goriot regarded Eugene, by whom he seated himself at breakfast, the change in Goriot's face, which as a rule, looked as expressionless as a plaster cast, and a few words that passed between the two, surprised the other lodgers. Vautrin, who saw Eugene for the first time since their interview, seemed as if he would fain read the student's very soul. During the night Eugene had had some time in which to scan the vast field which lay before him; and now, as he remembered yesterday's proposal, the thought of Mlle. Taillefer's dowry came, of course, to his mind, and he could not help thinking of Victorine as the most exemplary youth may think of an heiress. It chanced that their eyes met. The poor girl did not fail to see that Eugene looked very handsome in his new clothes. So much was said in the glance, thus exchanged, that Eugene could not doubt but that he was associated in her mind with the vague hopes that lie dormant in a girl's heart and gather round the first attractive newcomer. "Eight hundred thousand francs!" a voice cried in his ears, but suddenly he took refuge in the memories of yesterday evening, thinking that his extemporized passion for Mme. de Nucingen was a talisman that would preserve him from this temptation.

°°°°"They gave Rossini's Barber of Seville at the Italiens yesterday evening," he remarked. "I never heard such delicious music. Good gracious! how lucky people are to have a box at the Italiens!"

°°°°Father Goriot drank in every word that Eugene let fall, and watched him as a dog watches his master's slightest movement.

°°°°"You men are like fighting cocks," said Mme. Vauquer; "you do what you like."

°°°°"How did you get back?" inquired Vautrin.

°°°°"I walked," answered Eugene.

°°°°"For my own part," remarked the tempter, "I do not care about doing things by halves. If I want to enjoy myself that way, I should prefer to go in my carriage, sit in my own box, and do the thing comfortably. Everything or nothing; that is my motto."

°°°°"And a good one, too," commented Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Perhaps you will see Mme. de Nucingen to-day," said Eugene, addressing Goriot in an undertone. "She will welcome you with open arms, I am sure; she would want to ask you for all sorts of little details about me. I have found out that she will do anything in the world to be known by my cousin Mme. de Beauseant; don't forget to tell her that I love her too well not to think of trying to arrange this."

°°°°Rastignac went at once to the Ecole de Droit. He had no mind to stay a moment longer than was necessary in that odious house. He wasted his time that day; he had fallen a victim to that fever of the brain that accompanies the too vivid hopes of youth. Vautrin's arguments had set him meditating on social life, and he was deep in these reflections when he happened on his friend Bianchon in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

°°°°"What makes you look so solemn?" said the medical student, putting an arm through Eugene's as they went towards the Palais.

°°°°"I am tormented by temptations."

°°°°"What kind? There is a cure for temptation."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Yielding to it."

°°°°"You laugh, but you don't know what it is all about. Have you read Rousseau?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Do you remember that he asks the reader somewhere what he would do if he could make a fortune by killing an old mandarin somewhere in China by mere force of wishing it, and without stirring from Paris?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Well, then?"

°°°°"Pshaw! I am at my thirty-third mandarin."

°°°°"Seriously, though. Look here, suppose you were sure that you could do it, and had only to give a nod. Would you do it?"

°°°°"Is he well stricken in years, this mandarin of yours? Pshaw! after all, young or old, paralytic, or well and sound, my word for it. . . . Well, then. Hang it, no!"

°°°°"You are a good fellow, Bianchon. But suppose you loved a woman well enough to lose your soul in hell for her, and that she wanted money for dresses and a carriage, and all her whims, in fact?"

°°°°"Why, here you are taking away my reason, and want me to reason!"

°°°°"Well, then, Bianchon, I am mad; bring me to my senses. I have two sisters as beautiful and innocent as angels, and I want them to be happy. How am I to find two hundred thousand francs apiece for them in the next five years? Now and then in life, you see, you must play for heavy stakes, and it is no use wasting your luck on low play."

°°°°"But you are only stating the problem that lies before every one at the outset of his life, and you want to cut the Gordian knot with a sword. If that is the way of it, dear boy, you must be an Alexander, or to the hulks you go. For my own part, I am quite contented with the little lot I mean to make for myself somewhere in the country, when I mean to step into my father's shoes and plod along. A man's affections are just as fully satisfied by the smallest circle as they can be by a vast circumference. Napoleon himself could only dine once, and he could not have more mistresses than a house student at the Capuchins. Happiness, old man, depends on what lies between the sole of your foot and the crown of your head; and whether it costs a million or a hundred louis, the actual amount of pleasure that you receive rests entirely with you, and is just exactly the same in any case. I am for letting that Chinaman live."

°°°°"Thank you, Bianchon; you have done me good. We will always be friends."

°°°°"I say," remarked the medical student, as they came to the end of a broad walk in the Jardin des Plantes, "I saw the Michonneau and Poiret a few minutes ago on a bench chatting with a gentleman whom I used to see in last year's troubles hanging about the Chamber of Deputies; he seems to me, in fact, to be a detective dressed up like a decent retired tradesman. Let us keep an eye on that couple; I will tell you why some time. Good-bye; it is nearly four o'clock, and I must be in to answer to my name."

°°°°When Eugene reached the lodging-house, he found Father Goriot waiting for him.

°°°°"Here," cried the old man, "here is a letter from her. Pretty handwriting, eh?"

°°°°Eugene broke the seal and read:--

°°°°"Sir,--I have heard from my father that you are fond of Italian music. I shall be delighted if you will do me the pleasure of accepting a seat in my box. La Fodor and Pellegrini will sing on Saturday, so I am sure that you will not refuse me. M. de Nucingen and I shall be pleased if you will dine with us; we shall be quite by ourselves. If you will come and be my escort, my husband will be glad to be relieved from his conjugal duties. Do not answer, but simply come.--Yours sincerely, D. DE N."

°°°°"Let me see it," said Father Goriot, when Eugene had read the letter. "You are going, aren't you?" he added, when he had smelled the writing-paper. "How nice it smells! Her fingers have touched it, that is certain."

°°°°"A woman does not fling herself at a man's head in this way," the student was thinking. "She wants to use me to bring back de Marsay; nothing but pique makes a woman do a thing like this."

°°°°"Well," said Father Goriot, "what are you thinking about?"

°°°°Eugene did not know the fever or vanity that possessed some women in those days; how should he imagine that to open a door in the Faubourg Saint-Germain a banker's wife would go to almost any length. For the coterie of the Faubourg Saint-Germain was a charmed circle, and the women who moved in it were at that time the queens of society; and among the greatest of these Dames du Petit-Chateau, as they were called, were Mme. de Beauseant and her friends the Duchesse de Langeais and the Duchesse de Maufrigneause. Rastignac was alone in his ignorance of the frantic efforts made by women who lived in the Chausee-d'Antin to enter this seventh heaven and shine among the brightest constellations of their sex. But his cautious disposition stood him in good stead, and kept his judgment cool, and the not altogether enviable power of imposing instead of accepting conditions.

°°°°"Yes, I am going," he replied.

°°°°So it was curiosity that drew him to Mme. de Nucingen; while, if she had treated him disdainfully, passion perhaps might have brought him to her feet. Still he waited almost impatiently for to-morrow, and the hour when he could go to her. There is almost as much charm for a young man in a first flirtation as there is in first love. The certainty of success is a source of happiness to which men do not confess, and all the charm of certain women lies in this. The desire of conquest springs no less from the easiness than from the difficulty of triumph, and every passion is excited or sustained by one or the other of these two motives which divide the empire of love. Perhaps this division is one result of the great question of temperaments; which, after all, dominates social life. The melancholic temperament may stand in need of the tonic of coquetry, while those of nervous or sanguine complexion withdraw if they meet with a too stubborn resistance. In other words, the lymphatic temperament is essentially despondent, and the rhapsodic is bilious.

°°°°Eugene lingered over his toilette with an enjoyment of all its little details that is grateful to a young man's self-love, though he will not own to it for fear of being laughed at. He thought, as he arranged his hair, that a pretty woman's glances would wander through the dark curls. He indulged in childish tricks like any young girl dressing for a dance, and gazed complacently at his graceful figure while he smoothed out the creases of his coat.

°°°°"There are worse figures, that is certain," he said to himself.

°°°°Then he went downstairs, just as the rest of the household were sitting down to dinner, and took with good humor the boisterous applause excited by his elegant appearance. The amazement with which any attention to dress is regarded in a lodging-house is a very characteristic trait. No one can put on a new coat but every one else must say his say about it.

°°°°"Clk! clk! clk!" cried Bianchon, making the sound with his tongue against the roof of his mouth, like a driver urging on a horse.

°°°°"He holds himself like a duke and a peer of France," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Are you going a-courting?" inquired Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried the artist.

°°°°"My compliments to my lady your wife," from the employe at the Museum.

°°°°"Your wife; have you a wife?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, in compartments, water-tight and floats, guaranteed fast color, all prices from twenty-five to forty sous, neat check patterns in the latest fashion and best taste, will wash, half- linen, half-cotton, half-wool; a certain cure for toothache and other complaints under the patronage of the Royal College of Physicians! children like it! a remedy for headache, indigestion, and all other diseases affecting the throat, eyes, and ears!" cried Vautrin, with a comical imitation of the volubility of a quack at a fair. "And how much shall we say for this marvel, gentlemen? Twopence? No. Nothing of the sort. All that is left in stock after supplying the Great Mogul. All the crowned heads of Europe, including the Gr-r-rand Duke of Baden, have been anxious to get a sight of it. Walk up! walk up! gentlemen! Pay at the desk as you go in! Strike up the music there! Brooum, la, la, trinn! la, la, boum! boum! Mister Clarinette, there you are out of tune!" he added gruffly; "I will rap your knuckles for you!"

°°°°"Goodness! what an amusing man!" said Mme. Vauquer to Mme. Couture; "I should never feel dull with him in the house."

°°°°This burlesque of Vautrin's was the signal for an outburst of merriment, and under cover of jokes and laughter Eugene caught a glance from Mlle. Taillefer; she had leaned over to say a few words in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"The cab is at the door," announced Sylvie.

°°°°"But where is he going to dine?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"With Madame la Baronne de Nucingen."

°°°°"M. Goriot's daughter," said the law student.

°°°°At this, all eyes turned to the old vermicelli maker; he was gazing at Eugene with something like envy in his eyes.

°°°°Rastignac reached the house in the Rue Saint-Lazare, one of those many-windowed houses with a mean-looking portico and slender columns, which are considered the thing in Paris, a typical banker's house, decorated in the most ostentatious fashion; the walls lined with stucco, the landings of marble mosaic. Mme. de Nucingen was sitting in a little drawing-room; the room was painted in the Italian fashion, and decorated like a restaurant. The Baroness seemed depressed. The effort that she made to hide her feelings aroused Eugene's interest; it was plain that she was not playing a part. He had expected a little flutter of excitement at his coming, and he found her dispirited and sad. The disappointment piqued his vanity.

°°°°"My claim to your confidence is very small, madame," he said, after rallying her on her abstracted mood; "but if I am in the way, please tell me so frankly; I count on your good faith."

°°°°"No, stay with me," she said; "I shall be all alone if you go. Nucingen is dining in town, and I do not want to be alone; I want to be taken out of myself."

°°°°"But what is the matter?"

°°°°"You are the very last person whom I should tell," she exclaimed.

°°°°"Then I am connected in some way in this secret. I wonder what it is?"

°°°°"Perhaps. Yet, no," she went on; "it is a domestic quarrel, which ought to be buried in the depths of the heart. I am very unhappy; did I not tell you so the day before yesterday? Golden chains are the heaviest of all fetters."

°°°°When a woman tells a young man that she is very unhappy, and when the young man is clever, and well dressed, and has fifteen hundred francs lying idle in his pocket, he is sure to think as Eugene said, and he becomes a coxcomb.

°°°°"What can you have left to wish for?" he answered. "You are young, beautiful, beloved, and rich."

°°°°"Do not let us talk of my affairs," she said shaking her head mournfully. "We will dine together tete-a-tete, and afterwards we will go to hear the most exquisite music. Am I to your taste?" she went on, rising and displaying her gown of white cashmere, covered with Persian designs in the most superb taste.

°°°°"I wish that you were altogether mine," said Eugene; "you are charming."

°°°°"You would have a forlorn piece of property," she said, smiling bitterly. "There is nothing about me that betrays my wretchedness; and yet, in spite of appearances, I am in despair. I cannot sleep; my troubles have broken my night's rest; I shall grow ugly."

°°°°"Oh! that is impossible," cried the law student; "but I am curious to know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface."

°°°°"Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me," she said. "Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else, for pity's sake," she added. "Let me show you my rooms."

°°°°"No; let us stay here," answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen's hand in his. She surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

°°°°"Listen," said Rastignac; "if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end to them, even if I have to kill half-a- dozen men; or I shall go, never to return."

°°°°"Very well," she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of despair, "I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes," she said to herself, "I have no other resource left."

°°°°She rang the bell.

°°°°"Are the horses put in for the master?" she asked of the servant.

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve dinner at seven o'clock."

°°°°"Now, come with me," she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in the banker's carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be dreaming.

°°°°"To the Palais-Royal," she said to the coachman; "stop near the Theatre-Francais."

°°°°She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

°°°°"Another moment and she will escape me," he said to himself.

°°°°When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

°°°°"Is it true that you love me?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes," he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the uneasiness that he felt.

°°°°"You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"Are you ready to do my bidding?"

°°°°"Blindly."

°°°°"Have you ever been to a gaming-house?" she asked in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Never."

°°°°"Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse," she said. "Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my troubles when you come back."

°°°°"Devil take me, I'm sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am about, but I will obey you," he added, with inward exultation, as he thought, "She has gone too far to draw back-- she can refuse me nothing now!"

°°°°Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand clothes-dealer, and hurried to number 9, which happened to be the nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his stakes.

°°°°"If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it turns up, you will win thirty-six louis," said a respectable- looking, white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

°°°°Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number 21 (his own age). There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had won.

°°°°"Take your money off, sir," said the old gentleman; "you don't often win twice running by that system."

°°°°Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once more.

°°°°"You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own," the old gentleman said in his ear. "Take my advice and go away with your winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable, you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck."

°°°°Rastignac's head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the white-haired man's possession, and went down-stairs with his seven thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his luck.

°°°°"So, that is over; and now where will you take me?" he asked, as soon as the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild embrace.

°°°°"You have saved me!" she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

°°°°"I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then," she went on, "I wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over disgracefully. If, at a woman's utmost need, SOMEBODY heaps gold upon her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever! But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept money in such a way? MON DIEU! is it not natural to share everything with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how, then, can our interests be separate?

°°°°"You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I longed to escape, to run away . . . where, I did not know. Half the women in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture. Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think of me as a woman whom he has paid." She tried to conceal her tears from him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

°°°°"It is hideous, is it not," she cried, "to speak in a breath of money and affection. You cannot love me after this," she added.

°°°°The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great, and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution of society, had thrown Eugene's thoughts into confusion; he uttered soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

°°°°"You will not remember this against me?" she asked; "promise me that you will not."

°°°°"Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so," he said. She took his hand and held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep gratitude.

°°°°"I am free and happy once more, thanks to you," she said. "Oh! I have felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this," she went on, as she took only six of the banknotes. "In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns, for I really ought to go halves with you."

°°°°Eugene's maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, "I am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy," he took the money.

°°°°"It shall be a last stake in reserve," he said, "in case of misfortune."

°°°°"That was what I was dreading to hear," she cried, turning pale. "Oh, if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you! I should die of sorrow!"

°°°°They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin's cynical words began to ring in his ears.

°°°°"Seat yourself there," said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside the fire. "I have a difficult letter to write," she added. "Tell me what to say."

°°°°"Say nothing," Eugene answered her. "Put the bills in an envelope, direct it, and send it by your maid."

°°°°"Why, you are a love of a man," she said. "Ah! see what it is to have been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through," she went on, smiling at him.

°°°°"She is charming," thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

°°°°"Do you like it?" she asked, as she rang for the maid.

°°°°"Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me."

°°°°Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

°°°°Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of the table which he had admired in his cousin's house.

°°°°"Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens afterwards," she said.

°°°°"I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am a poor student, and I have my way to make."

°°°°"Oh! you will succeed," she said laughing. "You will see. All that you wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy."

°°°°It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris, believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

°°°°Eugene took the Baroness' hand in his, and by some light pressure of the fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

°°°°"That was gratitude," she said, "for devotion that I did not dare to hope for, but now it would be a promise."

°°°°"And will you give me no promise, ingrate?"

°°°°He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a discontented air that delighted her.

°°°°"I shall see you at the ball on Monday," she said.

°°°°As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections. He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible excuses for appropriating it.

°°°°He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the stairhead he saw a light in Goriot's room; the old man had lighted a candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and go to his room without "telling him all about his daughter," to use his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without reserve.

°°°°"Then they think that I am ruined!" cried Father Goriot, in an agony of jealousy and desperation. "Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a year! MON DIEU! Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why did not YOU come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I had hold of them, I would wring their necks. MON DIEU! CRYING! Did you say she was crying?"

°°°°"With her head on my waistcoat," said Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! give it to me," said Father Goriot. "What! my daughter's tears have fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me have it. By the terms of her marriage- contract, she ought to have the use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth."

°°°°"Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the waistcoat."

°°°°Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student's hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

°°°°"You will succeed," the old man said. "God is just, you see. I know an honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to save one tear to either of them."

°°°°"An honest man!" said Eugene to himself as he lay down. "Upon my word, I think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey the voice of conscience." Perhaps none but believers in God do good in secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

°°°°The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant, who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball. The Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there. Delphine's dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene's eyes; she was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who can guess all that passes in a woman's mind. Who has not refrained from giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure; he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room; all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

°°°°Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

°°°°The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in a diabolical fashion.

°°°°"And do you suppose," cried that cold-blooded logician, "that a young man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, in the Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way, I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but, after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be out of place here, where we only aim at the purely patriarchalorama. If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend," Vautrin continued, with half-paternal jocularity, "you must have three horses, a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further. Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good- bye to your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe going to carry your billets-doux for you? Do you mean to employ the stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom of your elders!" he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each syllable. "Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously, and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way."

°°°°Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by which he had sought to corrupt the student's mind.

°°°°Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve in the small hours. He rose at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew. He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money, and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

°°°°One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in their youth and in the almost frantic eagerness with which youth grasps at pleasure. They are reckless with anything obtained on credit, while everything for which they must pay in ready money is made to last as long as possible; if they cannot have all that they want, they make up for it, it would seem, by squandering what they have. To state the matter simply--a student is far more careful of his hat than of his coat, because the latter being a comparatively costly article of dress, it is in the nature of things that a tailor should be a creditor; but it is otherwise with the hatter; the sums of money spent with him are so modest, that he is the most independent and unmanageable of his tribe, and it is almost impossible to bring him to terms. The young man in the balcony of a theatre who displays a gorgeous waistcoat for the benefit of the fair owners of opera glasses, has very probably no socks in his wardrobe, for the hosier is another of the genus of weevils that nibble at the purse. This was Rastignac's condition. His purse was always empty for Mme. Vauquer, always full at the demand of vanity; there was a periodical ebb and flow in his fortunes, which was seldom favorable to the payment of just debts. If he was to leave that unsavory and mean abode, where from time to time his pretensions met with humiliation, the first step was to pay his hostess for a month's board and lodging, and the second to purchase furniture worthy of the new lodgings he must take in his quality of dandy, a course that remained impossible. Rastignac, out of his winnings at cards, would pay his jeweler exorbitant prices for gold watches and chains, and then, to meet the exigencies of play, would carry them to the pawnbroker, that discreet and forbidding- looking friend of youth; but when it was a question of paying for board or lodging, or for the necessary implements for the cultivation of his Elysian fields, his imagination and pluck alike deserted him. There was no inspiration to be found in vulgar necessity, in debts contracted for past requirements. Like most of those who trust to their luck, he put off till the last moment the payment of debts that among the bourgeoisie are regarded as sacred engagements, acting on the plan of Mirabeau, who never settled his baker's bill until it underwent a formidable transformation into a bill of exchange.

°°°°It was about this time when Rastignac was down on his luck and fell into debt, that it became clear to the law student's mind that he must have some more certain source of income if he meant to live as he had been doing. But while he groaned over the thorny problems of his precarious situation, he felt that he could not bring himself to renounce the pleasures of this extravagant life, and decided that he must continue it at all costs. His dreams of obtaining a fortune appeared more and more chimerical, and the real obstacles grew more formidable. His initiation into the secrets of the Nucingen household had revealed to him that if he were to attempt to use this love affair as a means of mending his fortunes, he must swallow down all sense of decency, and renounce all the generous ideas which redeem the sins of youth. He had chosen this life of apparent splendor, but secretly gnawed by the canker worm of remorse, a life of fleeting pleasure dearly paid for by persistent pain; like Le Distrait of La Bruyere, he had descended so far as to make his bed in a ditch; but (also like Le Distrait) he himself was uncontaminated as yet by the mire that stained his garments.

°°°°"So we have killed our mandarin, have we?" said Bianchon one day as they left the dinner table.

°°°°"Not yet," he answered, "but he is at his last gasp."

°°°°The medical student took this for a joke, but it was not a jest. Eugene had dined in the house that night for the first time for a long while, and had looked thoughtful during the meal. He had taken his place beside Mlle. Taillefer, and stayed through the dessert, giving his neighbor an expressive glance from time to time. A few of the boarders discussed the walnuts at the table, and others walked about the room, still taking part in the conversation which had begun among them. People usually went when they chose; the amount of time that they lingered being determined by the amount of interest that the conversation possessed for them, or by the difficulty of the process of digestion. In winter-time the room was seldom empty before eight o'clock, when the four women had it all to themselves, and made up for the silence previously imposed upon them by the preponderating masculine element. This evening Vautrin had noticed Eugene's abstractedness, and stayed in the room, though he had seemed to be in a hurry to finish his dinner and go. All through the talk afterwards he had kept out of the sight of the law student, who quite believed that Vautrin had left the room. He now took up his position cunningly in the sitting-room instead of going when the last boarders went. He had fathomed the young man's thoughts, and felt that a crisis was at hand. Rastignac was, in fact, in a dilemma, which many another young man must have known.

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen might love him, or might merely be playing with him, but in either case Rastignac had been made to experience all the alternations of hope and despair of genuine passion, and all the diplomatic arts of a Parisienne had been employed on him. After compromising herself by continually appearing in public with Mme. de Beauseant's cousin she still hesitated, and would not give him the lover's privileges which he appeared to enjoy. For a whole month she had so wrought on his senses, that at last she had made an impression on his heart. If in the earliest days the student had fancied himself to be master, Mme. de Nucingen had since become the stronger of the two, for she had skilfully roused and played upon every instinct, good or bad, in the two or three men comprised in a young student in Paris. This was not the result of deep design on her part, nor was she playing a part, for women are in a manner true to themselves even through their grossest deceit, because their actions are prompted by a natural impulse. It may have been that Delphine, who had allowed this young man to gain such an ascendency over her, conscious that she had been too demonstrative, was obeying a sentiment of dignity, and either repented of her concessions, or it pleased her to suspend them. It is so natural to a Parisienne, even when passion has almost mastered her, to hesitate and pause before taking the plunge; to probe the heart of him to whom she intrusts her future. And once already Mme. de Nucingen's hopes had been betrayed, and her loyalty to a selfish young lover had been despised. She had good reason to be suspicious. Or it may have been that something in Eugene's manner (for his rapid success was making a coxcomb of him) had warned her that the grotesque nature of their position had lowered her somewhat in his eyes. She doubtless wished to assert her dignity; he was young, and she would be great in his eyes; for the lover who had forsaken her had held her so cheap that she was determined that Eugene should not think her an easy conquest, and for this very reason--he knew that de Marsay had been his predecessor. Finally, after the degradation of submission to the pleasure of a heartless young rake, it was so sweet to her to wander in the flower-strewn realms of love, that it was not wonderful that she should wish to dwell a while on the prospect, to tremble with the vibrations of love, to feel the freshness of the breath of its dawn. The true lover was suffering for the sins of the false. This inconsistency is unfortunately only to be expected so long as men do not know how many flowers are mown down in a young woman's soul by the first stroke of treachery.

°°°°Whatever her reasons may have been, Delphine was playing with Rastignac, and took pleasure in playing with him, doubtless because she felt sure of his love, and confident that she could put an end to the torture as soon as it was her royal pleasure to do so. Eugene's self-love was engaged; he could not suffer his first passage of love to end in a defeat, and persisted in his suit like a sportsman determined to bring down at least one partridge to celebrate his first Feast of Saint-Hubert. The pressure of anxiety, his wounded self-love, his despair, real or feigned, drew him nearer and nearer to this woman. All Paris credited him with this conquest, and yet he was conscious that he had made no progress since the day when he saw Mme. de Nucingen for the first time. He did not know as yet that a woman's coquetry is sometimes more delightful than the pleasure of secure possession of her love, and was possessed with helpless rage. If, at this time, while she denied herself to love, Eugene gathered the springtide spoils of his life, the fruit, somewhat sharp and green, and dearly bought, was no less delicious to the taste. There were moments when he had not a sou in his pockets, and at such times he thought in spite of his conscience of Vautrin's offer and the possibility of fortune by a marriage with Mlle. Taillefer. Poverty would clamor so loudly that more than once he was on the point of yielding to the cunning temptations of the terrible sphinx, whose glance had so often exerted a strange spell over him.

°°°°Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau went up to their rooms; and Rastignac, thinking that he was alone with the women in the dining-room, sat between Mme. Vauquer and Mme. Couture, who was nodding over the woolen cuffs that she was knitting by the stove, and looked at Mlle. Taillefer so tenderly that she lowered her eyes.

°°°°"Can you be in trouble, M. Eugene?" Victorine said after a pause.

°°°°"Who has not his troubles?" answered Rastignac. "If we men were sure of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should have no troubles."

°°°°For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible to mistake its meaning.

°°°°"You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to- day, but are you sure that it will never change?"

°°°°A smile flitted over the poor girl's lips; it seemed as if a ray of light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

°°°°"Ah! but suppose," he said, "that you should be rich and happy to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of poverty?"

°°°°A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

°°°°"Even if he were very poor?"

°°°°Again the same mute answer.

°°°°"What nonsense are you talking, you two?" exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Never mind," answered Eugene; "we understand each other."

°°°°"So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?" The words were uttered in Vautrin's deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door as he spoke.

°°°°"Oh! how you startled me!" Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed together.

°°°°"I might make a worse choice," said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin's voice had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

°°°°"No bad jokes, gentlemen!" said Mme. Couture. "My dear, let us go upstairs."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene and Vautrin were left alone.

°°°°"I felt sure you would come round to it," said the elder man with the coolness that nothing seemed to shake. "But stay a moment! I have as much delicacy as anybody else. Don't make up your mind on the spur of the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like."

°°°°The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes, which he fluttered before the student's eyes. Eugene was in a most painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis to the Marquis d'Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud's house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

°°°°"You must see," said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor, "that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself under any obligation to you."

°°°°"Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise," answered the tempter. "You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion, and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women. Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you? Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account," Vautrin went on, and a smile stole over his lips. "Take these bits of paper and write across this," he added, producing a piece of stamped paper, "Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day twelvemonth, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful. In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of strength, my boy."

°°°°"What manner of man are you?" cried Eugene. "Were you created to torment me?"

°°°°"Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes, and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your first fright will go off like a conscript's terror on the battlefield. You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, 'Here are a hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,' and you could sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won't compromise you in any way, and you hesitate. 'Tis an effeminate age."

°°°°Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for it.

°°°°"Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally," Vautrin continued. "I mean to leave this country in a few months' time for America, and set about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do; I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look at. What is a man's life to me? Not THAT," he said, and he snapped his thumb-nail against his teeth. "A man, in short, is everything to me, or just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret; you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin, but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A sentiment-- what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part, I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is my passion. I knew Venice Preserved by heart. Have you met many men plucky enough when a comrade says, 'Let us bury a dead body!' to go and do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!"

°°°°Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student's repudiation, he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying their blameworthy actions to themselves.

°°°°"He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is certain," said Eugene to himself.

°°°°He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of Vautrin's ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for his own ends, raised him in the student's eyes; but the thought of a compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de Restaud's.

°°°°For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid Messieurs de Trailles and d'Ajuda, played at whist for part of the evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to consider that his luck was heaven's reward for his perseverance in the right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin whether the bill he had given was still in the other's possession; and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand francs with a not unnatural relief.

°°°°"Everything is going on well," said Vautrin.

°°°°"But I am not your accomplice," said Eugene.

°°°°"I know, I know," Vautrin broke in. "You are still acting like a child. You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset."

°°°°Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not without good reason, his own suspicions.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," this M. Gondureau was saying, "I do not see any cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of Police----"

°°°°"Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter," said Gondureau.

°°°°Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by that word "police," and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers, confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where the BONUS flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature (an illegible scrawl) and by his title--"His Excellency Monseigneur le Ministre," five words which produce as much effect as the il Bondo Cani of the Calife de Bagdad, five words which in the eyes of this low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a moment? Pronounce the words "His Excellency," and these poor folk will forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests. Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences, annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the deus ex machina, the magical words "His Excellency," so as to dazzle Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

°°°°"If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister . . . Ah! that is quite another thing," said Poiret.

°°°°"You seem to be guided by this gentleman's opinion, and you hear what he says," said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau. "Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the nickname Trompe-la-Mort."

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort?" said Pioret. "Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves that nickname."

°°°°"Well, yes," said the detective. "They call him so because he has been so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----"

°°°°"Then is he a man of honor?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man's crime upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler, who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been unexceptionable."

°°°°"But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, why should he want me?" asked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Oh yes," said Poiret, "if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as to tell us, really knows for a certainty----"

°°°°"Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed Trompe-la- Mort, is in the confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing their affairs, which want a MAN OF MARK to see about them."

°°°°"Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?" asked Poiret. "This gentleman calls himself a MAN OF MARK because he is a MARKED MAN-- branded, you know."

°°°°"This so-called Vautrin," said the detective, "receives the money belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for their benefit."

°°°°"Their mistresses! You mean their wives," remarked Poiret.

°°°°"No, sir. A convict's wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We call them concubines."

°°°°"Then they all live in a state of concubinage?"

°°°°"Naturally."

°°°°"Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow. Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society."

°°°°"But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues, my dear sir----"

°°°°"Of course not, sir; but still----"

°°°°"Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie," said Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"You see how it is, mademoiselle," Gondureau continued. "The Government may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the Society of the Ten Thousand----"

°°°°"Ten Thousand Thieves!" cried Pioret in alarm.

°°°°"No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they won't touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society. If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds, we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again; they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, "What is there to hinder Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?"

°°°°"Oh!" said the detective, "a man is told off to follow him everywhere he goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions."

°°°°"You are quite right, sir," said Poiret, "utterly disgraced he would be."

°°°°"But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without more ado," remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but," he added in her ear, "keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.-- Trompe-la-Mort, when he came back here," he went on aloud "slipped into the skin of an honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning, that he is! You don't catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of consequence, who transacts a good deal of business."

°°°°"Naturally," said Poiret to himself.

°°°°"And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of the real Vautrin, he would put every one's back up among the business men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about."

°°°°"Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman," said Mlle. Michonneau briskly.

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him," said the detective. "I will tell you a secret--he does not like them."

°°°°"Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to identify him for two thousand francs."

°°°°"Nothing simpler," said the stranger. "I will send you a little bottle containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder, and PRESTO! the letters will appear."

°°°°"Why, that is just nothing at all," said Poiret.

°°°°"Well, do you agree?" said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

°°°°"But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all," said Mlle. Michonneau; "am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"What will you give me then?"

°°°°"Five hundred francs."

°°°°"It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir."

°°°°"I assure you," said Poiret, "that mademoiselle has a great deal of conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very intelligent."

°°°°"Well, now," Mlle. Michonneau went on, "make it three thousand francs if he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man."

°°°°"Done!" said Gondureau, "but on the condition that the thing is settled to-morrow."

°°°°"Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first."

°°°°"You are a sly one," said the detective as he rose to his feet. "Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M. Gondureau."

°°°°Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier's lecture, overheard the sufficiently striking nickname of Trompe-la-Mort, and caught the celebrated chief detective's "Done!"

°°°°"Why didn't you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a year," said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Why didn't I?" she asked. "Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without paying, and that would be an abominable sell."

°°°°"And suppose you did warn him," Poiret went on, "didn't that gentleman say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything."

°°°°"Anyhow," thought Mlle. Michonneau, "I can't abide him. He says nothing but disagreeable things to me."

°°°°"But you can do better than that," Poiret resumed. "As that gentleman said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief. Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into the bargain!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau's musings did not permit her to listen very closely to the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret's lips like water dripping from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

°°°°By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau versus Dame Morin, when he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

°°°°As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"I knew how it would end," remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. "They have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week past."

°°°°"Yes," he answered. "So she was found guilty."

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. Morin."

°°°°"I am talking about Mlle. Victorine," said Mlle, Michonneau, as she entered Poiret's room with an absent air, "and you answer, 'Mme. Morin.' Who may Mme. Morin be?"

°°°°"What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?" demanded Poiret.

°°°°"Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!"

°°°°That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel's voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac's face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately; he had said to himself that a woman's happiness should atone for this venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face; the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice broke in upon their bliss.

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity,"

°°°°he sang mockingly.

°°°°Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand, the light touch of Rastignac's hair against her cheek, a word whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student's warm breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love's sake in the most famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

°°°°"The thing is arranged," Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. "Our two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half- past eight in the morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father's fortune and affections. A funny way of putting it, isn't it? Taillefer's youngster is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know."

°°°°Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders likewise appeared.

°°°°"That is just as I intended." Vautrin said. "You know quite well what you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you."

°°°°He made as though he would take Eugene's hand, but Rastignac hastily withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

°°°°"Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes of virtue about us!" murmured Vautrin. "But Papa Doliban has three millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride's white dress, even in your own eyes."

°°°°Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, "You look melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me."

°°°°The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

°°°°"Let us go up to your room," the worthy soul remarked, when he had asked Sylvie for the law student's key. "This morning," he resumed, "you thought that SHE did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting ME! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move into it in three days' time. Don't split upon me. She wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn't bear to keep the secret from you. You will be in the Rue d'Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that won't run away."

°°°°Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student's back was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney- piece and set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac's arms stamped in gold on the leather.

°°°°"My dear boy," said the kind soul, "I have been up to the eyes in this business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?"

°°°°"What is it?"

°°°°"There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn't that so? I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say to myself, 'He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.' If I were ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs- Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my little girl again, so light- hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, 'I am very happy, papa!' When they say 'father' stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me 'papa,' it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else."

°°°°The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

°°°°"It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!" he said, raising his head after a pause. "All the time we were going about together she chatted away about you. 'He is so nice-looking, papa; isn't he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?' Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no sign, and he was dying of impatience.

°°°°Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were written:

°°°°"I want you to think of me every hour, BECAUSE . . .   "DELPHINE."

°°°°That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as well as for his daughter's sake.

°°°°"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera- dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me with you, will you not?"

°°°°"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

°°°°"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you! Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

°°°°"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to her this evening, will you not?"

°°°°"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

°°°°"Can I be of any use?"

°°°°"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening; it is a matter of life and death."

°°°°"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance; "are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were saying down below? . . . TONNERRE DE DIEU! you have no notion what a tap A LA GORIOT is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh! the thing is impossible!"

°°°°"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

°°°°"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

°°°°"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to- morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

°°°°"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

°°°°"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting in an appearance----"

°°°°Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing at the threshold of his door and singing:

°°°°"Oh! Richard, oh my king!   All the world abandons thee!   Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

°°°°The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a . . . tra la la."

°°°°"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is waiting for you."

°°°°"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my Bordeaux."

°°°°"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste, hasn't she? Eh?"

°°°°Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and, all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

°°°°Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with consternation.

°°°°"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as merry as a skylark."

°°°°"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

°°°°"Bargain?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on, seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.

°°°°"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules," said the young painter.

°°°°"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

°°°°"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

°°°°"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

°°°°"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and the cheese."

°°°°"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach besides."

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme. Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

°°°°"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

°°°°Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

°°°°"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this, Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right- hand side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

°°°°"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a hundred chestnuts."

°°°°"Oh! oh!"

°°°°"Booououh!"

°°°°"Prrr!"

°°°°These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a set firework.

°°°°"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called Vautrin.

°°°°"Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for it, I have some currant cordial."

°°°°"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered the medical student.

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for it," he added.

°°°°"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little cakes."

°°°°"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out the biscuits."

°°°°The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously struck up with the following variations:

°°°°"Scissors to grind!"

°°°°"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

°°°°"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

°°°°"China to mend!"

°°°°"Boat ahoy!"

°°°°"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

°°°°"Old clo'!"

°°°°"Cherries all ripe!"

°°°°But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

°°°°A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

°°°°"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs. When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer, telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the bread is ready for the oven; to- morrow we will eat it up and whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? . . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

°°°°Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

°°°°"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the widow.

°°°°These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

°°°°"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

°°°°"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two ladies----"

°°°°"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your young lady."

°°°°"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

°°°°"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

°°°°He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead, and began to sing:

°°°°"Sleep, little darlings;   I watch while you slumber."

°°°°"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

°°°°"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. " 'Tis your duty as a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "the young fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife-- there's your fortune for you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I go out and call a cab--all my own self."

°°°°And he started out, singing as he went:

°°°°"Oh! sun! divine sun!   Ripening the pumpkins every one."

°°°°"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over. HE never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't lose what he hadn't got-- Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

°°°°Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just as he was, like a package, across the bed.

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know what dissipation is."

°°°°"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

°°°°"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such things----"

°°°°"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

°°°°"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer. It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

°°°°"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

°°°°"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

°°°°"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

°°°°"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress as she spoke.

°°°°Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.

°°°°"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

°°°°The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face, so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet, austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught something of the golden glory of heaven.

°°°°"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing her fingers through Eugene's hair.

°°°°"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

°°°°There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

°°°°"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though you had nothing on."

°°°°"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

°°°°"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint- Pierre (good soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme. Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now, don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will idolize you."

°°°°The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady; "we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments with all the care of an antiquary."

°°°°"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine. "Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them."

°°°°"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M. Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

°°°°"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

°°°°"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two women were alone together.

°°°°"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady; "just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

°°°°"Oh! mamma."

°°°°"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in for."

°°°°"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life," said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

°°°°"MON DIEU! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

°°°°With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room, Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned, and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

°°°°That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

°°°°But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the scent.

°°°°"A delusion," he said. "Collin's sorbonne is the most dangerous that has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the Place de Greve."

°°°°As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible expressions borrowed from thieves' Latin, thieves, of all people, being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking-- his council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth after the axe has done its work.

°°°°"Collin is playing us off," he continued. "When we come across a man like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la- Mort's paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent crime than to punish it."

°°°°"And you do a service to our country," said Poiret.

°°°°"Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you are," said the head of the department. "Yes, of course, we are serving our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle. I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get it back for you."

°°°°"Well, now," Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, "there are idiots who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as saying 'Good-day.' "

°°°°The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like apparition of the sham Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her boarders so long as she lived.

°°°°In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till close upon eleven o'clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin's first bottle of wine), was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme. Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o'clock, and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested, therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup belonging to Vautrin--it was standing with the others in the bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business. The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen. It ran thus:--

°°°°"I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my friend. Till two o'clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity's sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line will be enough. Say, 'I will hasten to you,' or else, 'I am ill.' But if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have happened? . . ."

°°°°"Yes, indeed, what has happened?" exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any more. "What time is it?"

°°°°"Half-past eleven," said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his coffee.

°°°°The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M. Taillefer's servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," he cried, "your father is asking for you-- something terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious."

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" exclaimed Vautrin. "How can people brawl when they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people have bad manners, and that is a fact."

°°°°"Sir!" cried Eugene.

°°°°"Well, what then, you big baby!" said Vautrin, swallowing down his coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. "Are there not duels every morning in Paris?" added Vautrin.

°°°°"I will go with you, Victorine," said Mme. Couture, and the two women hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance that said--"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me tears!"

°°°°"Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"I am all sorts of things," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Queer, isn't it?" said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession of commonplaces suited to the occasion. "Death takes us off without asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have other complaints that men don't suffer from. We bear children, and it takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her father will have to acknowledge her now!"

°°°°"There!" said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, "yesterday she had not a penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune."

°°°°"I say, M. Eugene!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "you have landed on your feet!"

°°°°At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the crumpled letter still in his hand.

°°°°"You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to be like the rest of them?" he asked.

°°°°"Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine," said Eugene, turning to Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised the onlookers at this scene.

°°°°Father Goriot caught the student's hand and grasped it warmly. He could have kissed it.

°°°°"Oh, ho!" said Vautrin, "the Italians have a good proverb--Col tempo."

°°°°"Is there any answer?" said Mme. de Nucingen's messenger, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Say that I will come directly."

°°°°The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he could not be prudent.

°°°°"What is to be done?" he exclaimed aloud. "There are no proofs!"

°°°°Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, "Luck comes to us while we sleep, young man," and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck dead.

°°°°"So there is a Divine Justice!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?"

°°°°"A stroke!" cried Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor," called the widow. "Oh, M. Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel."

°°°°Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.

°°°°"Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist's and ask for something that's good for the apoplexy."

°°°°Christophe likewise went.

°°°°"Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs."

°°°°Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow staircase, and laid upon his bed.

°°°°"I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter," said M. Goriot.

°°°°"Selfish old thing!" cried Mme. Vauquer. "Yes, go; I wish you may die like a dog."

°°°°"Just go and see if you can find some ether," said Mlle. Michonneau to Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the sick man's clothes.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress of the situation.

°°°°"Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be of some use in sparing my modesty," she said to Poiret, "instead of standing there like a stock."

°°°°Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

°°°°"There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily," exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on the shirt again.--"Ouf! How heavy he is," he added, as he laid the convict down.

°°°°"Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!" said the old maid briskly; her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of the furniture with greedy eyes. "Could we find some excuse for opening that desk?"

°°°°"It mightn't be quite right," responded Poiret to this.

°°°°"Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it doesn't belong to any one now. But we haven't time, there is the Vauquer."

°°°°"Here is the ether," said that lady. "I must say that this is an eventful day. Lord! that man can't have had a stroke; he is as white as curds."

°°°°"White as curds?" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"And his pulse is steady," said the widow, laying her hand on his breast.

°°°°"Steady?" said the astonished Poiret.

°°°°"He is all right."

°°°°"Do you think so?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look, mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears a wig. They say that red- haired people are either the worst or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?"

°°°°"Good to hang," said Poiret.

°°°°"Round a pretty woman's neck, you mean," said Mlle Michonneau, hastily. "Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman's duty to nurse you men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take yourself off," she added. "Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of dear M. Vautrin.

°°°°Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the room by his master.

°°°°Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself might be implicated. Vautrin's coolness still further dismayed him.

°°°°"Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?" Rastignac asked himself.

°°°°He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

°°°°"Well?" shouted Bianchon, "you have seen the Pilote?"

°°°°The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local journals.

°°°°"There is a wonderful history in it," said the house student of the Hopital Cochin. "Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?"

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----"

°°°°"You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master Taillefer's money!"

°°°°"Are all the devils of hell at my heels?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand," said Bianchon, "and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish."

°°°°"Just go to Mother Vauquer's," said Rastignac; "that scoundrel Vautrin has dropped down like one dead."

°°°°"Aha!" said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, "you confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself."

°°°°The law student's long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot's confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue d'Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.

°°°°"Such a love is my anchor of safety," he said to himself. "How the old man's heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!"

°°°°He took out his watch and admired it.

°°°°"I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?"

°°°°Rastignac's battle with himself went on for a long while; and though the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison Vauquer through the gathering dusk.

°°°°Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau's officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer's duel. They were anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the probable change in Victorine's prospects. Father Goriot alone was absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the same look that had read his thoughts before--the look that had such power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.

°°°°"Well, dear boy," said the escaped convict, "I am likely to cheat death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors."

°°°°"A bull you might say," cried the widow.

°°°°"You really might be sorry to see me still alive," said Vautrin in Rastignac's ear, thinking that he guessed the student's thoughts. "You must be mighty sure of yourself."

°°°°"Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort," said Bianchon; "and, upon my word, that name would do very well for you."

°°°°Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle. Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature had dropped from the convict's face; from the unmistakable ferocity of that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the sitting-room.

°°°°"In the name of the King and the Law!" said an officer, but the words were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.

°°°°Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men, who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden, and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin's face was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair, the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines, his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor. Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.

°°°°"You are not in the politest of humors to-day," he remarked to the chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his head.

°°°°"Gentlemen," he said, "put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call on those present to witness that I make no resistance."

°°°°A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally sudden cessation.

°°°°"There's a sell for you, master crusher," the convict added, looking at the famous director of police.

°°°°"Come, strip!" said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.

°°°°"Why?" asked Collin. "There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and surrender."

°°°°He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to overwhelm his audience.

°°°°"Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle," he went on, addressing a little, white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table; and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to draw up a document. "I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin, otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years' penal servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my nickname.--If I had as much as raised my hand," he went on, addressing the other lodgers, "those three sneaking wretches yonder would have drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer's domestic hearth. The rogues have laid their heads together to set a trap for me."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.

°°°°"Good Lord!" she cried, "this does give one a turn; and me at the Gaite with him only last night!" she said to Sylvie.

°°°°"Summon your philosophy, mamma," Collin resumed. "Is it a misfortune to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me." His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his eyes.--"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept any time you like! Do you understand?" And he sang:

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity."

°°°°"Don't you trouble yourself," he went on; "I can get in my money. They are too much afraid of me to swindle me."

°°°°The convicts' prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur, its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the speaker's discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno, wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own evil thoughts.

°°°°"Who betrayed me?" said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"It was you, old cat!" he said. "That sham stroke of apoplexy was your doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs," he shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession of his effects. "The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here," he said tapping his forehead. "Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?" he said, turning to the chief. "It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?" he asked of the police officers. "A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money," he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. "These folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?" he asked proudly. "There is some good there," he said tapping his heart; "I have never betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut," he said to the old maid, "they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them sick. Rake in your gains."

°°°°He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers' faces.

°°°°"What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before? A convict of Collin's stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and I am a match for them all."

°°°°"Ye gods!" cried the painter, "what a magnificent sketch one might make of him!"

°°°°"Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master of ceremonies to the widow" (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given by prisoners to the guillotine), "be a good fellow, and tell me if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don't want him to suffer for some one else, that would not be fair."

°°°°But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Collin, addressing the lodgers, "they will take me away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me to send you figs from Provence."

°°°°He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at Rastignac.

°°°°"Good-bye, Eugene," he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange transition from his previous rough and stern manner. "If you should be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend," and, in spite of his shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, "One, two!" like a fencing-master, and lunged. "If anything goes wrong, apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service."

°°°°The strange speaker's manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the pantomime.

°°°°As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house, Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress' temples with vinegar, looked round at the bewildered lodgers.

°°°°"Well," said she, "he was a man, he was, for all that."

°°°°Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead- alive, mummy-like figure, crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, "If that creature is going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out."

°°°°In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save Poiret, was of the medical student's opinion, so that the latter, strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

°°°°"You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us," he said; "speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at once."

°°°°"At once!" echoed Poiret in amazement.

°°°°Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in her ear.

°°°°"I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here as any one else," she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

°°°°"Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Monsieur is taking Collin's part" she said, with a questioning, malignant glance at the law student; "it is not difficult to guess why."

°°°°Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

°°°°"Let her alone!" cried the boarders.

°°°°Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

°°°°"Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas," said the painter, turning to Mme. Vauquer. "If you don't show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are."

°°°°At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in them.

°°°°"Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness," she cried, interrupting herself, "I can't help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is moving----"

°°°°"Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux's in the Place Sorbonne," cried Bianchon.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Come, now," she said; "you would not be the ruin of my establishment, would you, eh? There's a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening."

°°°°"Never a bit of it!" cried the boarders. "She must go, and go this minute!"

°°°°"But the poor lady has had no dinner," said Poiret, with piteous entreaty.

°°°°"She can go and dine where she likes," shouted several voices.

°°°°"Turn her out, the spy!"

°°°°"Turn them both out! Spies!"

°°°°"Gentlemen," cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love gives to the ovine male, "respect the weaker sex."

°°°°"Spies are of no sex!" said the painter.

°°°°"A precious sexorama!"

°°°°"Turn her into the streetorama!"

°°°°"Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house, it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We have paid our money, and we are not going," said Poiret, putting on his cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer was remonstrating.

°°°°"Naughty boy!" said the painter, with a comical look; "run away, naughty little boy!"

°°°°"Look here," said Bianchon; "if you do not go, all the rest of us will," and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room- door.

°°°°"Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?" cried Mme. Vauquer. "I am a ruined woman. You can't stay here; they will go further, do something violent."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

°°°°"She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn't."

°°°°These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions, borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low voice in her hostess' ear, and then--"I shall go to Mme. Buneaud's," she said, with a threatening look.

°°°°"Go where you please, mademoiselle," said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. "Go and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the food is cheap and nasty."

°°°°The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out laughing at the sight of him.

°°°°"Hist!--st!--st! Poiret," shouted the painter. "Hallo! I say, Poiret, hallo!" The employe from the Museum began to sing:

°°°°"Partant pour la Syrie,   Le jeune et beau Dunois . . ."

°°°°"Get along with you; you must be dying to go, trahit sua quemque voluptas!" said Bianchon.

°°°°"Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil," said the tutor.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret's arm, with an appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together, the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause, followed by peals of laughter.

°°°°"Bravo, Poiret!"

°°°°"Who would have thought it of old Poiret!"

°°°°"Apollo Poiret!"

°°°°"Mars Poiret!"

°°°°"Intrepid Poiret!"

°°°°A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

°°°°"The house might as well be burned down at once," cried she, "if there are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three o'clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those ladies at that poor man's expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me to send their things, because they are going to live with her father. M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone! . . ."

°°°°She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

°°°°"Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think," she cried.

°°°°Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

°°°°"What! another windfall for somebody!" was Sylvie's comment.

°°°°But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

°°°°"Goriot in a cab!" cried the boarders; "the world is coming to an end."

°°°°The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man's arm.

°°°°"Come," he said, with gladness in his eyes.

°°°°"Then you haven't heard the news?" said Eugene. "Vautrin was an escaped convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead."

°°°°"Very well, but what business is it of ours?" replied Father Goriot. "I am going to dine with my daughter in YOUR HOUSE, do you understand? She is expecting you. Come!"

°°°°He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

°°°°"Now, let us have dinner," cried the painter, and every one drew his chair to the table.

°°°°"Well, I never," said the portly Sylvie. "Nothing goes right to- day! The haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it is, more's the pity!"

°°°°Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day's events; but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels, jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day. Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope was the portly Sylvie.

°°°°That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in the cab. The old man's voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears like words spoken in a dream.

°°°°"It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don't know what pretty ways she has; at table she will look after me, 'Here, papa, just try this, it is nice.' And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her."

°°°°"It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down."

°°°°"Upside down?" repeated Father Goriot. "Why, the world has never been so right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood would be as sweet as honey."

°°°°"I feel as if I were coming back to life again," said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, hurry up there!" cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in front. "Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the place I told you of in ten minutes time."

°°°°With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous celerity.

°°°°"How that fellow crawls!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"But where are you taking me?" Eugene asked him.

°°°°"To your own house," said Goriot.

°°°°The cab stopped in the Rue d'Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning to bachelor ways.

°°°°"Come along upstairs," he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard, and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen's maid. Eugene found himself in a charming set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description, the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

°°°°"So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to understand!"

°°°°Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just witnessed was too much for Rastignac's over- wrought nerves, after the day's strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was almost overcome by it.

°°°°"I felt sure myself that he loved you," murmured Father Goriot, while Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring about this final transformation scene.

°°°°"But you must see your rooms," said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed, down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of Delphine's apartment.

°°°°"There is no bed," said Rastignac.

°°°°"No, monsieur," she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene, looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

°°°°"You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for ever," he said in her ear. "Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret."

°°°°"Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose," growled the father.

°°°°"You know quite well that 'we' means you."

°°°°"Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a good idea of mine to say to you, 'There are some nice rooms to let in the Rue d'Artois; let us furnish them for him?' And she would not hear of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers else."

°°°°"Was that how it happened?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----"

°°°°Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low though the sound was.

°°°°The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was wanting there.

°°°°"Have we guessed your wishes rightly?" she asked, as they returned to the drawing-room for dinner.

°°°°"Yes," he said, "only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----"

°°°°"Ah! ah! you say me nay already," she said with arch imperiousness, and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman's way of laughing away scruples.

°°°°But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self- questioning, and Vautrin's arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into abandoning his high- minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled his mind.

°°°°"Do you really mean to refuse?" said Mme. de Nucingen. "And do you know what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying my affection? If you love me, if I-- love you, why should you shrink back from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment, you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this. . . . Ah!" she cried, as Eugene's passionate glance was turned on her, "and you are making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you. Speak!-- Father," she said after a pause, "make him listen to reason. Can he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?"

°°°°Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

°°°°"Child that you are!" she cried again, catching Eugene's hand. "You are just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man finds insurmountable; a woman's hand opens the way and you shrink back! Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to repay me my loan of today? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your garret must be if it is like papa's room! See, dinner is waiting all this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don't you answer?" she said, shaking his hand. "MON DIEU! papa, make up his mind for him, or I will go away and never see him any more."

°°°°"I will make up your mind," said Goriot, coming down from the clouds. "Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews, isn't it?"

°°°°"There is positively no help for it," said Eugene.

°°°°"All right, I will give you credit," said the other, drawing out a cheap leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. "I have turned Jew myself; I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you can return it some time or other."

°°°°Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot's warmly.

°°°°"Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?"

°°°°"Oh! my poor father," said Mme. de Nucingen, "how did you do it?"

°°°°"Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you, and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to myself, 'She will never be able to pay for them.' The attorney says that those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year, and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, 'How happy they are going to be!' and--well, now, are you not happy?"

°°°°"Oh papa! papa!" cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright and radiant.

°°°°"Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel for you now?"

°°°°"Why, children, why Delphinette!" cried Goriot, who had not felt his daughter's heart beat against his breast for ten years, "do you want me to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are quits already." And the old man strained her to his breast with such fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

°°°°"Oh! you are hurting me!" she said.

°°°°"I am hurting you!" He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men. Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his fingers had grasped too roughly.

°°°°"Oh! no, no," he cried. "I have not hurt you, have I?" and his smile seemed to repeat the question. "YOU have hurt me with that cry just now.--The things cost rather more than that," he said in her ear, with another gentle kiss, "but I had to deceive him about it, or he would have been angry."

°°°°Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration which shapes the beliefs of youth.

°°°°"I will be worthy of all this," he cried.

°°°°"Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said," and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law student on the forehead.

°°°°"He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you," said Father Goriot. "Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus."

°°°°"Oh! why did you tell her?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"Eugene," Delphine said in his ear, "I have one regret now this evening. Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!"

°°°°"This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!" cried Goriot. "God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer through you, and I can still say, 'In this short month of February I had more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.'--Look at me, Fifine!" he said to his daughter. "She is very beautiful, is she not? Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell instead. Come, let us have dinner," he added, scarcely knowing what he said, "everything is ours."

°°°°"Poor dear father!"

°°°°He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a kiss on the plaits of hair. "If you only knew, little one, how happy you can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me, say that you will!"

°°°°"Yes, dear father."

°°°°"Say it again."

°°°°"Yes, I will, my kind father."

°°°°"Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed my own wishes. Let us have dinner."

°°°°The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot's spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter's feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more tender.

°°°°"You see!" Delphine said with a look at Eugene, "so long as my father is with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes."

°°°°Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

°°°°"And when will the rooms be ready?" asked Eugene, looking round. "We must all leave them this evening, I suppose."

°°°°"Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me," she answered, with an eloquent glance. "It is our night at the Italiens."

°°°°"I shall go to the pit," said her father.

°°°°It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen's carriage was waiting for her, and Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing that the father's self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her father's adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future of love.

°°°°They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso's lamentations as recorded in Byron's poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force of truth they fall far short of the widow's cry from the depths.

°°°°"Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life, now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people! The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and Christophe will have to go!"

°°°°The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said, "Madame," questioningly.

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Sylvie, "he is like a dog."

°°°°"In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a little dog."

°°°°"Lord!" said Sylvie, flinging up her head, "those old maids are up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"There's that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict," the widow went on. "Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I can't bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny on the nail too."

°°°°"And open-handed he was!" said Christophe.

°°°°"There is some mistake," said Sylvie.

°°°°"Why, no there isn't! he said so himself!" said Mme. Vauquer. "And to think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it's like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap; we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again; there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred, will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that is just what it is!"

°°°°"And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear," cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Don't speak of her, she is a wicked woman!" said Mme. Vauquer. "She is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed and murdered people in her time. SHE ought to be put in jail for life instead of that poor dear----"

°°°°Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

°°°°"Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers," said the widow, sighing.

°°°°But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d'Antin.

°°°°"Sylvie!" cried the widow, "this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There's a weight on my chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow, Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen," and she went.

°°°°"What is the matter now?" Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

°°°°"Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a bit. It's the first time she has cried since I've been with her."

°°°°By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had "made up her mind to it." True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A lover's farewell glance at his lady-love's window is not more mournful than Mme. Vauquer's survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take his (Rastignac's) place; that the official from the Museum had often expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture's rooms; and that in a very few days her household would be on the old footing.

°°°°"God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here. There'll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you'll see," and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining- room. "Whose turn will it be, I wonder?"

°°°°"It is just as well that we are moving out," said Eugene to Father Goriot in a low voice.

°°°°"Madame," said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, "I have not seen Mistigris these three days."

°°°°"Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if HE has gone and left us, I----"

°°°°The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this dreadful portent.

°°°°By twelve o'clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse's great ball, which had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was slipped in with the card.

°°°°"I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to   interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the   card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make   the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud's sister. Pray introduce that   charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your   affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.   "VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT."

°°°°"Well," said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, "Mme. de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de Nucingen."

°°°°He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of Paris--will never have a rival.

°°°°Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country, it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love exist there without that wealth?

°°°°If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water, without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls, waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look with pity upon those of earth.

°°°°Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it. In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one man, but of a whole nation.

°°°°But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a brilliant future.

°°°°So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

°°°°"Madame is in her room," Therese came to tell him. The woman's voice made him start.

°°°°He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid the blossom.

°°°°"Well," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "here you are."

°°°°"Guess what I bring for you," said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He took possession of her arm to kiss her hand

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

°°°°"And I owe this happiness to you--to THEE" (she whispered the more intimate word in his ear); "but Therese is in my dressing- room, let us be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes to me through YOU--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint- Germain, it is because I shall meet you there."

°°°°"Mme. de Beauseant's note seems to say very plainly that she does not expect to see the BARON de Nucingen at her ball; don't you think so?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, yes," said the Baroness as she returned the letter. "Those women have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go. My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully dressed.--Eugene," she went on, lowering her voice, "she will go to dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a woman's character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband's mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant's ball in tissue of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I mean to be perfectly happy."

°°°°At one o'clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In the midst of their lovers' farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to come, she said in a troubled voice, "I am very fearful, superstitious. Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe."

°°°°"Child!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?" she asked, laughingly.

°°°°Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left its sweetness on the lips.

°°°°"Well?" cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene; "I will tell you everything to-morrow."

°°°°"Everything, will you not?" cried the old man. "Go to bed. To- morrow our happy life will begin."

°°°°Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging- house, and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it; but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran lightly upstairs.

°°°°It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d'Artois at four o'clock; but Rastignac's name had been called early on the list at the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this, Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin's signature lying in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot's room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him; but after the first few words, the conversation between the father and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his attention.

°°°°"Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe to talk?" she added.

°°°°"Yes, there is no one in the house," said her father faintly.

°°°°"What is the matter with you?" asked Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!" said the old man. "You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d'Artois."

°°°°"Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the subject with him. Wasn't that what you told me to tell him?"

°°°°"Yes, quite right," answered Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then," Delphine continued, "he told me all about his affairs. He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations; they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes, on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy (in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him."

°°°°"Do you really believe that silly rubbish?" . . . cried her father. "It was all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No, no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them, and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that's holiest in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked! and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers. If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don't give way, don't make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he can't do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once; I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know for certain that your fortune is secure."

°°°°"Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile, it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we drive him to despair, I am lost."

°°°°"Why, then, the man is a rogue?"

°°°°"Well, yes, father," she said, flinging herself into a chair, "I wanted to keep it from you to spare your feelings," and she burst into tears; "I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his stalking- horse."

°°°°"But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons- in-law of that sort," cried her father; "why, I would guillotine him myself if there was no headsman to do it."

°°°°"No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says, stripped of all his circumlocutions--'Take your choice, you and no one else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through myself.' Is that plain speaking? He MUST have my assistance. He is assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to be Eugene's wife in all but name. 'I connive at your errors, and you allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!' Is that sufficiently explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get possession of those bills?"

°°°°Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on his knees.

°°°°"Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child! forgive me!" cried the old man.

°°°°"Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame," said Delphine. "We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us! Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa," she said, kissing him.

°°°°"Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your husband's winding."

°°°°"No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me, well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters. No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant's ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene! . . . Come, let us see his room."

°°°°But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve, and the sound of Mme. de Restaud's voice came from the staircase. "Is my father in?" she asked of Sylvie.

°°°°This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

°°°°"Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?" said Delphine, when she heard her sister speak. "It looks as though some strange things had happened in that family."

°°°°"What sort of things?" asked Goriot. "This is like to be the death of me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune."

°°°°"Good-morning, father," said the Countess from the threshold. "Oh! Delphine, are you here?"

°°°°Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister's presence.

°°°°"Good-morning, Nasie," said the Baroness. "What is there so extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day."

°°°°"Since when?"

°°°°"If you came yourself you would know."

°°°°"Don't tease, Delphine," said the Countess fretfully. "I am very miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!"

°°°°"What is it, Nasie?" cried Goriot. "Tell us all about it, child! How white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will love you even better, if that were possible."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. "We are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see."

°°°°The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

°°°°"This will kill me!" said their father. "There," he went on, stirring the smouldering fire, "come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it, Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----"

°°°°"Well, then, my husband knows everything," said the Countess. "Just imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime's some time ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that. About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled. He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively. Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard; for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I had eaten up all that you had----"

°°°°"No," said Goriot; "I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet."

°°°°The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when the father's love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice, revealed the depths of his despair.

°°°°"I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell," and the Countess burst into tears.

°°°°Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister's shoulder, and cried too.

°°°°"Then it is all true," she said.

°°°°Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her, kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

°°°°"I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie," she said.

°°°°"My angels," murmured Goriot faintly. "Oh, why should it be trouble that draws you together?"

°°°°This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

°°°°"To save Maxime's life," she said, "to save all my own happiness, I went to the money-lender you know of, a man of iron forged in hell-fire; nothing can melt him; I took all the family diamonds that M. de Restaud is so proud of--his and mine too--and sold them to that M. Gobseck. SOLD THEM! Do you understand? I saved Maxime, but I am lost. Restaud found it all out."

°°°°"How? Who told him? I will kill him," cried Goriot.

°°°°"Yesterday he sent to tell me to come to his room. I went. . . . 'Anastasie,' he said in a voice--oh! such a voice; that was enough, it told me everything--'where are your diamonds?'--'In my room----'--'No,' he said, looking straight at me, 'there they are on that chest of drawers----' and he lifted his handkerchief and showed me the casket. 'Do you know where they came from?' he said. I fell at his feet. . . . I cried; I besought him to tell me the death he wished to see me die."

°°°°"You said that!" cried Goriot. "By God in heaven, whoever lays a hand on either of you so long as I am alive may reckon on being roasted by slow fires! Yes, I will cut him in pieces like . . ."

°°°°Goriot stopped; the words died away in his throat.

°°°°"And then, dear, he asked something worse than death of me. Oh! heaven preserve all other women from hearing such words as I heard then!"

°°°°"I will murder that man," said Goriot quietly. "But he has only one life, and he deserves to die twice.--And then, what next?" he added, looking at Anastasie.

°°°°"Then," the Countess resumed, "there was a pause, and he looked at me. 'Anastasie,' he said, 'I will bury this in silence; there shall be no separation; there are the children. I will not kill M. de Trailles. I might miss him if we fought, and as for other ways of getting rid of him, I should come into collision with the law. If I killed him in your arms, it would bring dishonor on THOSE children. But if you do not want to see your children perish, nor their father nor me, you must first of all submit to two conditions. Answer me. Have I a child of my own?' I answered, 'Yes,'--'Which?'--'Ernest, our eldest boy.'--'Very well,' he said, 'and now swear to obey me in this particular from this time forward.' I swore. 'You will make over your property to me when I require you to do so.' "

°°°°"Do nothing of the kind!" cried Goriot. "Aha! M. de Restaud, you could not make your wife happy; she has looked for happiness and found it elsewhere, and you make her suffer for your own ineptitude? He will have to reckon with me. Make yourself easy, Nasie. Aha! he cares about his heir! Good, very good. I will get hold of the boy; isn't he my grandson? What the blazes! I can surely go to see the brat! I will stow him away somewhere; I will take care of him, you may be quite easy. I will bring Restaud to terms, the monster! I shall say to him, 'A word or two with you! If you want your son back again, give my daughter her property, and leave her to do as she pleases.' "

°°°°"Father!"

°°°°"Yes. I am your father, Nasie, a father indeed! That rogue of a great lord had better not ill-treat my daughter. Tonnerre! What is it in my veins? There is the blood of a tiger in me; I could tear those two men to pieces! Oh! children, children! so this is what your lives are! Why, it is death! . . . What will become of you when I shall be here no longer? Fathers ought to live as long as their children. Ah! Lord God in heaven! how ill Thy world is ordered! Thou hast a Son, if what they tell us is true, and yet Thou leavest us to suffer so through our children. My darlings, my darlings! to think that trouble only should bring you to me, that I should only see you with tears on your faces! Ah! yes, yes, you love me, I see that you love me. Come to me and pour out your griefs to me; my heart is large enough to hold them all. Oh! you might rend my heart in pieces, and every fragment would make a father's heart. If only I could bear all your sorrows for you! . . . Ah! you were so happy when you were little and still with me. . . ."

°°°°"We have never been happy since," said Delphine. "Where are the old days when we slid down the sacks in the great granary?"

°°°°"That is not all, father," said Anastasie in Goriot's ear. The old man gave a startled shudder. "The diamonds only sold for a hundred thousand francs. Maxime is hard pressed. There are twelve thousand francs still to pay. He has given me his word that he will be steady and give up play in future. His love is all that I have left in the world. I have paid such a fearful price for it that I should die if I lose him now. I have sacrificed my fortune, my honor, my peace of mind, and my children for him. Oh! do something, so that at the least Maxime may be at large and live undisgraced in the world, where he will assuredly make a career for himself. Something more than my happiness is at stake; the children have nothing, and if he is sent to Sainte-Pelagie all his prospects will be ruined."

°°°°"I haven't the money, Nasie. I have NOTHING--nothing left. This is the end of everything. Yes, the world is crumbling into ruin, I am sure. Fly! Save yourselves! Ah!--I have still my silver buckles left, and half-a-dozen silver spoons and forks, the first I ever had in my life. But I have nothing else except my life annuity, twelve hundred francs . . ."

°°°°"Then what has become of your money in the funds?"

°°°°"I sold out, and only kept a trifle for my wants. I wanted twelve thousand francs to furnish some rooms for Delphine."

°°°°"In your own house?" asked Mme. de Restaud, looking at her sister.

°°°°"What does it matter where they were?" asked Goriot. "The money is spent now."

°°°°"I see how it is," said the Countess. "Rooms for M. de Rastignac. Poor Delphine, take warning by me!"

°°°°"M. de Rastignac is incapable of ruining the woman he loves, dear."

°°°°"Thanks! Delphine. I thought you would have been kinder to me in my troubles, but you never did love me."

°°°°"Yes, yes, she loves you, Nasie," cried Goriot; "she was saying so only just now. We were talking about you, and she insisted that you were beautiful, and that she herself was only pretty!"

°°°°"Pretty!" said the Countess. "She is as hard as a marble statue."

°°°°"And if I am?" cried Delphine, flushing up, "how have you treated me? You would not recognize me; you closed the doors of every house against me; you have never let an opportunity of mortifying me slip by. And when did I come, as you were always doing, to drain our poor father, a thousand francs at a time, till he is left as you see him now? That is all your doing, sister! I myself have seen my father as often as I could. I have not turned him out of the house, and then come and fawned upon him when I wanted money. I did not so much as know that he had spent those twelve thousand francs on me. I am economical, as you know; and when papa has made me presents, it has never been because I came and begged for them."

°°°°"You were better off than I. M. de Marsay was rich, as you have reason to know. You always were as slippery as gold. Good-bye; I have neither sister nor----"

°°°°"Oh! hush, hush, Nasie!" cried her father.

°°°°"Nobody else would repeat what everybody has ceased to believe. You are an unnatural sister!" cried Delphine.

°°°°"Oh, children, children! hush! hush! or I will kill myself before your eyes."

°°°°"There, Nasie, I forgive you," said Mme. de Nucingen; "you are very unhappy. But I am kinder than you are. How could you say THAT just when I was ready to do anything in the world to help you, even to be reconciled with my husband, which for my own sake I---- Oh! it is just like you; you have behaved cruelly to me all through these nine years."

°°°°"Children, children, kiss each other!" cried the father. "You are angels, both of you."

°°°°"No. Let me alone," cried the Countess shaking off the hand that her father had laid on her arm. "She is more merciless than my husband. Any one might think she was a model of all the virtues herself!"

°°°°"I would rather have people think that I owed money to M. de Marsay than own that M. de Trailles had cost me more than two hundred thousand francs," retorted Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"DELPHINE!" cried the Countess, stepping towards her sister.

°°°°"I shall tell you the truth about yourself if you begin to slander me," said the Baroness coldly.

°°°°"Delphine! you are a ----"

°°°°Father Goriot sprang between them, grasped the Countess' hand, and laid his own over her mouth.

°°°°"Good heavens, father! What have you been handling this morning?" said Anastasie.

°°°°"Ah! well, yes, I ought not to have touched you," said the poor father, wiping his hands on his trousers, "but I have been packing up my things; I did not know that you were coming to see me."

°°°°He was glad that he had drawn down her wrath upon himself.

°°°°"Ah!" he sighed, as he sat down, "you children have broken my heart between you. This is killing me. My head feels as if it were on fire. Be good to each other and love each other! This will be the death of me! Delphine! Nasie! come, be sensible; you are both in the wrong. Come, Dedel," he added, looking through his tears at the Baroness, "she must have twelve thousand francs, you see; let us see if we can find them for her. Oh, my girls, do not look at each other like that!" and he sank on his knees beside Delphine. "Ask her to forgive you--just to please me," he said in her ear. "She is more miserable than you are. Come now, Dedel."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Delphine, alarmed at the wild extravagant grief in her father's face, "I was in the wrong, kiss me----"

°°°°"Ah! that is like balm to my heart," cried Father Goriot. "But how are we to find twelve thousand francs? I might offer myself as a substitute in the army----"

°°°°"Oh! father dear!" they both cried, flinging their arms about him. "No, no!"

°°°°"God reward you for the thought. We are not worth it, are we, Nasie?" asked Delphine.

°°°°"And besides, father dear, it would only be a drop in the bucket," observed the Countess.

°°°°"But is flesh and blood worth nothing?" cried the old man in his despair. "I would give body and soul to save you, Nasie. I would do a murder for the man who would rescue you. I would do, as Vautrin did, go to the hulks, go----" he stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and put both hands to his head. "Nothing left!" he cried, tearing his hair. "If I only knew of a way to steal money, but it is so hard to do it, and then you can't set to work by yourself, and it takes time to rob a bank. Yes, it is time I was dead; there is nothing left me to do but to die. I am no good in the world; I am no longer a father! No. She has come to me in her extremity, and, wretch that I am, I have nothing to give her. Ah! you put your money into a life annuity, old scoundrel; and had you not daughters? You did not love them. Die, die in a ditch, like the dog that you are! Yes, I am worse than a dog; a beast would not have done as I have done! Oh! my head . . . it throbs as if it would burst."

°°°°"Papa!" cried both the young women at once, "do, pray, be reasonable!" and they clung to him to prevent him from dashing his head against the wall. There was a sound of sobbing.

°°°°Eugene, greatly alarmed, took the bill that bore Vautrin's signature, saw that the stamp would suffice for a larger sum, altered the figures, made it into a regular bill for twelve thousand francs, payable to Goriot's order, and went to his neighbor's room.

°°°°"Here is the money, madame," he said, handing the piece of paper to her. "I was asleep; your conversation awoke me, and by this means I learned all that I owed to M. Goriot. This bill can be discounted, and I shall meet it punctually at the due date."

°°°°The Countess stood motionless and speechless, but she held the bill in her fingers.

°°°°"Delphine," she said, with a white face, and her whole frame quivering with indignation, anger, and rage, "I forgave you everything; God is my witness that I forgave you, but I cannot forgive this! So this gentleman was there all the time, and you knew it! Your petty spite has let you to wreak your vengeance on me by betraying my secrets, my life, my children's lives, my shame, my honor! There, you are nothing to me any longer. I hate you. I will do all that I can to injure you. I will . . ."

°°°°Anger paralyzed her; the words died in her dry parched throat.

°°°°"Why, he is my son, my child; he is your brother, your preserver!" cried Goriot. "Kiss his hand, Nasie! Stay, I will embrace him myself," he said, straining Eugene to his breast in a frenzied clasp. "Oh my boy! I will be more than a father to you; if I had God's power, I would fling worlds at your feet. Why don't you kiss him, Nasie? He is not a man, but an angel, a angel out of heaven."

°°°°"Never mind her, father; she is mad just now."

°°°°"Mad! am I? And what are you?" cried Mme. de Restaud.

°°°°"Children, children, I shall die if you go on like this," cried the old man, and he staggered and fell on the bed as if a bullet had struck him.--"They are killing me between them," he said to himself.

°°°°The Countess fixed her eyes on Eugene, who stood stock still; all his faculties were numbed by this violent scene.

°°°°"Sir? . . ." she said, doubt and inquiry in her face, tone, and bearing; she took no notice now of her father nor of Delphine, who was hastily unfastening his waistcoat.

°°°°"Madame," said Eugene, answering the question before it was asked, "I will meet the bill, and keep silence about it."

°°°°"You have killed our father, Nasie!" said Delphine, pointing to Goriot, who lay unconscious on the bed. The Countess fled.

°°°°"I freely forgive her," said the old man, opening his eyes; "her position is horrible; it would turn an older head than hers. Comfort Nasie, and be nice to her, Delphine; promise it to your poor father before he dies," he asked, holding Delphine's hand in a convulsive clasp.

°°°°"Oh! what ails you, father?" she cried in real alarm.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing," said Goriot; "it will go off. There is something heavy pressing on my forehead, a little headache. . . . Ah! poor Nasie, what a life lies before her!"

°°°°Just as he spoke, the Countess came back again and flung herself on her knees before him. "Forgive me!" she cried.

°°°°"Come," said her father, "you are hurting me still more."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Countess said, turning to Rastignac, "misery made me unjust to you. You will be a brother to me, will you not?" and she held out her hand. Her eyes were full of tears as she spoke.

°°°°"Nasie," cried Delphine, flinging her arms round her sister, "my little Nasie, let us forget and forgive."

°°°°"No, no," cried Nasie; "I shall never forget!"

°°°°"Dear angels," cried Goriot, "it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won't it?"

°°°°"I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?"

°°°°"There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No, after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in future."

°°°°Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

°°°°"Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper," said Mme. de Nucingen, "but she has a good heart."

°°°°"She came back for the endorsement," said Eugene in Delphine's ear.

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her," he answered, raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did not venture to express.

°°°°"Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent."

°°°°"How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"I should like to go to sleep," he replied.

°°°°Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

°°°°"This evening at the Italiens," she said to Eugene, "and you can let me know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go into your room.--Oh! how frightful!" she cried on the threshold. "Why, you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps of gold."

°°°°A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot's bedside; to all appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, "They are not happy!" Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they were spoken went to his daughter's heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

°°°°"Ah! Delphine!" he said.

°°°°"How are you now?" she asked.

°°°°"Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently. Don't stay with me, children; go, go and be happy."

°°°°Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room, and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

°°°°"Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin," said Eugene.

°°°°Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him next to the old lodger.

°°°°"What is wrong with him?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning."

°°°°"Is there any cure for it?"

°°°°"None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on? There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way."

°°°°"Yes, there was," said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had struck blow on blow at their father's heart.

°°°°"But Delphine at any rate loves her father," he said to himself.

°°°°That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

°°°°"Do not be anxious about him," she said, however, as soon as Eugene began, "our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear. At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake. To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me; what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh! no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in life when everything turns to bitterness."

°°°°Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression on him.

°°°°Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love, they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme. de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

°°°°"What are you thinking about?" she asked.

°°°°"I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me."

°°°°She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more words, and she feared for her self- control.

°°°°"Eugene," she said, changing the conversation, "I wonder whether you know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant's to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d'Ajuda have agreed to keep the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be there. People are wondering what will happen?"

°°°°"The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill Mme. de Beauseant."

°°°°"Oh, no," said Delphine, smiling, "you do not know that kind of woman. Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for your sake."

°°°°"Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set in circulation here."

°°°°"We shall know the truth to-morrow."

°°°°Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d'Artois. Yesterday evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o'clock in the morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot's existence. The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four o'clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

°°°°"Aha!" said the painter as Eugene came in, "Father Goriot has broken down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of its brightest ornaments."

°°°°Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

°°°°"Hey! Monsieur Eugene!"

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you," shouted Sylvie.

°°°°"It is this, sir," said the widow. "You and M. Goriot should by rights have moved out on the 15th of February. That was three days ago; to-day is the 18th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied."

°°°°"Why can't you trust him?"

°°°°"Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died, those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won't fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and forks he has left, I don't know why. He had got himself up to look quite young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks; he looked quite young again."

°°°°"I will be responsible," said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he foresaw the end.

°°°°He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot's room. The old man was tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

°°°°"Good-evening, father," said Eugene.

°°°°The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

°°°°"How is SHE?"

°°°°"She is quite well. But how are you?"

°°°°"There is nothing much the matter."

°°°°"Don't tire him," said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the room.

°°°°"Well?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in; I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are acting."

°°°°"Is it possible to move him?"

°°°°"Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as quiet as possible----"

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," said Eugene, "we will nurse him between us."

°°°°"I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him."

°°°°"And what did he say?"

°°°°"He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went, and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his strength. One of his daughters has been here."

°°°°"Was it the Countess?" asked Eugene. "A tall, dark-haired woman, with large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Leave him to me for a bit," said Rastignac. "I will make him confess; he will tell me all about it."

°°°°"And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is still some hope left."

°°°°"All right."

°°°°"How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow," said Father Goriot when they were alone. "They are going to a grand ball."

°°°°"What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this evening that you have to stop in bed?"

°°°°"Nothing."

°°°°"Did not Anastasie come to see you?" demanded Rastignac.

°°°°"Yes," said Father Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then, don't keep anything from me. What more did she want of you?"

°°°°"Oh, she was very miserable," he answered, gathering up all his strength to speak. "It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds, Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie's waiting-woman advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie's maid saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair. She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that heartless scoundrel and say, 'I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker; pay her for me!' She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there too in a superb toilette, and Anastasie ought not to be outshone by her younger sister. And then--she was drowned in tears, poor girl! I felt so humbled yesterday when I had not the twelve thousand francs, that I would have given the rest of my miserable life to wipe out that wrong. You see, I could have borne anything once, but latterly this want of money has broken my heart. Oh! I did not do it by halves; I titivated myself up a bit, and went out and sold my spoons and forks and buckles for six hundred francs; then I went to old Daddy Gobseck, and sold a year's interest on my annuity for four hundred francs down. Pshaw! I can live on dry bread, as I did when I was a young man; if I have done it before, I can do it again. My Nasie shall have one happy evening, at any rate. She shall be smart. The banknote for a thousand francs is under my pillow; it warms me to have it lying there under my head, for it is going to make my poor Nasie happy. She can turn that bad girl Victoire out of the house. A servant that cannot trust her mistress, did any one ever hear the like! I shall be quite well to-morrow. Nasie is coming at ten o'clock. They must not think that I am ill, or they will not go to the ball; they will stop and take care of me. To-morrow Nasie will come and hold me in her arms as if I were one of her children; her kisses will make me well again. After all, I might have spent the thousand francs on physic; I would far rather give them to my little Nasie, who can charm all the pain away. At any rate, I am some comfort to her in her misery; and that makes up for my unkindness in buying an annuity. She is in the depths, and I cannot draw her out of them now. Oh! I will go into business again, I will buy wheat in Odessa; out there, wheat fetches a quarter of the price it sells for here. There is a law against the importation of grain, but the good folk who made the law forgot to prohibit the introduction of wheat products and food stuffs made from corn. Hey! hey! . . . That struck me this morning. There is a fine trade to be done in starch."

°°°°Eugene, watching the old man's face, thought that his friend was light-headed.

°°°°"Come," he said, "do not talk any more, you must rest----" Just then Bianchon came up, and Eugene went down to dinner.

°°°°The two students sat up with him that night, relieving each other in turn. Bianchon brought up his medical books and studied; Eugene wrote letters home to his mother and sisters. Next morning Bianchon thought the symptoms more hopeful, but the patient's condition demanded continual attention, which the two students alone were willing to give--a task impossible to describe in the squeamish phraseology of the epoch. Leeches must be applied to the wasted body, the poultices and hot foot-baths, and other details of the treatment required the physical strength and devotion of the two young men. Mme. de Restaud did not come; but she sent a messenger for the money.

°°°°"I expected she would come herself; but it would have been a pity for her to come, she would have been anxious about me," said the father, and to all appearances he was well content.

°°°°At seven o'clock that evening Therese came with a letter from Delphine.

°°°°"What are you doing, dear friend? I have been loved for a very   little while, and I am neglected already? In the confidences of   heart and heart, I have learned to know your soul--you are too   noble not to be faithful for ever, for you know that love with   all its infinite subtle changes of feeling is never the same.   Once you said, as we were listening to the Prayer in Mose in   Egitto, 'For some it is the monotony of a single note; for   others, it is the infinite of sound.' Remember that I am   expecting you this evening to take me to Mme. de Beauseant's   ball. Every one knows now that the King signed M. d'Ajuda's   marriage-contract this morning, and the poor Vicomtesse knew   nothing of it until two o'clock this afternoon. All Paris will   flock to her house, of course, just as a crowd fills the Place de   Greve to see an execution. It is horrible, is it not, to go out   of curiosity to see if she will hide her anguish, and whether she   will die courageously? I certainly should not go, my friend, if I   had been at her house before; but, of course, she will not   receive society any more after this, and all my efforts would be   in vain. My position is a very unusual one, and besides, I am   going there partly on your account. I am waiting for you. If you   are not beside me in less than two hours, I do not know whether I   could forgive such treason."

°°°°Rastignac took up a pen and wrote:

°°°°"I am waiting till the doctor comes to know if there is any hope   of your father's life. He is lying dangerously ill. I will come   and bring you the news, but I am afraid it may be a sentence of   death. When I come you can decide whether you can go to the   ball.--Yours a thousand times."

°°°°At half-past eight the doctor arrived. He did not take a very hopeful view of the case, but thought that there was no immediate danger. Improvements and relapses might be expected, and the good man's life and reason hung in the balance.

°°°°"It would be better for him to die at once," the doctor said as he took leave.

°°°°Eugene left Goriot to Bianchon's care, and went to carry the sad news to Mme. de Nucingen. Family feeling lingered in her, and this must put an end for the present to her plans of amusement.

°°°°"Tell her to enjoy her evening as if nothing had happened," cried Goriot. He had been lying in a sort of stupor, but he suddenly sat upright as Eugene went out.

°°°°Eugene, half heartbroken, entered Delphine's. Her hair had been dressed; she wore her dancing slippers; she had only to put on her ball-dress; but when the artist is giving the finishing stroke to his creation, the last touches require more time than the whole groundwork of the picture.

°°°°"Why, you are not dressed!" she cried.

°°°°"Madame, your father----"

°°°°"My father again!" she exclaimed, breaking in upon him. "You need not teach me what is due to my father, I have known my father this long while. Not a word, Eugene. I will hear what you have to say when you are dressed. My carriage is waiting, take it, go round to your rooms and dress, Therese has put out everything in readiness for you. Come back as soon as you can; we will talk about my father on the way to Mme. de Beauseant's. We must go early; if we have to wait our turn in a row of carriages, we shall be lucky if we get there by eleven o'clock."

°°°°"Madame----"

°°°°"Quick! not a word!" she cried, darting into her dressing-room for a necklace.

°°°°"Do go, Monsieur Eugene, or you will vex madame," said Therese, hurrying him away; and Eugene was too horror-stricken by this elegant parricide to resist.

°°°°He went to his rooms and dressed, sad, thoughtful, and dispirited. The world of Paris was like an ocean of mud for him just then; and it seemed that whoever set foot in that black mire must needs sink into it up to the chin.

°°°°"Their crimes are paltry," said Eugene to himself. "Vautrin was greater."

°°°°He had seen society in its three great phases--Obedience, Struggle, and Revolt; the Family, the World, and Vautrin; and he hesitated in his choice. Obedience was dull, Revolt impossible, Struggle hazardous. His thoughts wandered back to the home circle. He thought of the quiet uneventful life, the pure happiness of the days spent among those who loved him there. Those loving and beloved beings passed their lives in obedience to the natural laws of the hearth, and in that obedience found a deep and constant serenity, unvexed by torments such as these. Yet, for all his good impulses, he could not bring himself to make profession of the religion of pure souls to Delphine, nor to prescribe the duties of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was capable of stepping over her father's corpse to go to the ball; and within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the courage to leave her to go alone.

°°°°"She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it," he said to himself. Then he turned the doctor's dictum over in his mind; he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of traitorous excuses for Delphine's conduct. She did not know how ill her father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations; and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family life that excuse the apparent offence.

°°°°Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his, and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, "how is my father?"

°°°°"Very dangerously ill," he answered; "if you will grant me a proof of your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way."

°°°°"Very well," she said. "Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice, and don't preach to me. Come."

°°°°They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

°°°°"What is it now?" she asked.

°°°°"I can hear the death-rattle in your father's throat," he said almost angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of Mme. de Restaud's vanity and cruelty, of her father's final act of self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie's golden embroideries. Delphine cried.

°°°°"I shall look frightful," she thought. She dried her tears.

°°°°"I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside," she said aloud.

°°°°"Ah! now you are as I would have you," exclaimed Rastignac.

°°°°The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the Vicomtesse.

°°°°The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

°°°°Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a last audience of one of its sovereigns.

°°°°"I was afraid that you would not come," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°"Madame," he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a reproach, "I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here."

°°°°"Good," she said, and she took his hand. "You are perhaps the only one I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a woman."

°°°°She took Rastignac's arm, and went towards a sofa in the card- room.

°°°°"I want you to go to the Marquis," she said. "Jacques, my footman, will go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one shall bring me word."

°°°°She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

°°°°Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d'Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide, feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave a casket to the student, saying as he did so, "They are all there."

°°°°He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes, and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

°°°°"Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene." He grasped Rastignac's hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him. Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the Vicomtesse's room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey. He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

°°°°"Ah! my friend! . . ." said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid her hand on Rastignac's shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin's uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it in the fire, and watched it burn.

°°°°"They are dancing," she said. "They all came very early; but death will be long in coming. Hush! my friend," and she laid a finger on Rastignac's lips, seeing that he was about to speak. "I shall never see Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o'clock this morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my arrangements; since three o'clock this afternoon I have been busy signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I could send to . . ."

°°°°She broke off.

°°°°"He was sure to be . . ."

°°°°Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are impossible to utter.

°°°°"And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service this evening," she said. "I should like to give you some pledge of friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay," she said, glancing about her, "there is this box that has held my gloves. Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer. Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to you in the Rue d'Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my tears. One last look round first."

°°°°She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and took the student's arm.

°°°°"Let us go!" she said.

°°°°This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene's arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her husband's eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten Rastignac's sad thougths; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

°°°°"Come," she said, "I must not deprive you of a pleasure."

°°°°Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover's feet the homage she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move henceforth.

°°°°"What do you think of Nasie?" she asked him.

°°°°"She has discounted everything, even her own father's death," said Rastignac.

°°°°Towards four o'clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M. de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, "It is a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among us."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an exclamation broke from her.

°°°°"I saw how it was, Clara," said Mme. de Langeais. "You are going from among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you have heard me, until we have understood each other."

°°°°She took her friend's arm, and they went together into the next room. There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

°°°°"I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself. You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words. One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night; do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night, Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail, I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?"

°°°°"Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!" called the Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was waiting there.

°°°°The student knelt to kiss his cousin's hand.

°°°°"Good-bye, Antoinette!" said Mme. de Beauseant. "May you be happy."--She turned to the student. "You are young," she said; "you have some beliefs still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of this world."

°°°°It was nearly five o'clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

°°°°"There is no hope for poor Father Goriot," said Bianchon, as Rastignac came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then he turned to his friend. "Dear fellow, you are content with the modest career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world, nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden away under the covering of gems and gold."

°°°°At two o'clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

°°°°"Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours," he said; "but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result, nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he had not a farthing of his own. What have you?"

°°°°"I have twenty francs left," said Rastignac; "but I will take them to the roulette table, I shall be sure to win."

°°°°"And if you lose?"

°°°°"Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for money."

°°°°"And suppose they refuse?" Bianchon retorted. "The most pressing thing just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides, Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him till I come back."

°°°°The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying. Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot's face, so livid, distorted, and feeble.

°°°°"How are you, papa?" he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came into his eyes.

°°°°"Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?"

°°°°"No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the smell was something horrible.

°°°°"MON DIEU!" said Rastignac. "To think of those daughters of his."

°°°°"One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this," said the house student, pointing to a large white jar. "If he begins to groan, and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon, a pupil of Gall's came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised; whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here," said Bianchon, touching the back of the head, "very strange things have been known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives."

°°°°"Did they enjoy themselves?" It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had recognized Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters," said Bianchon. "Scores of times last night he said to me, 'They are dancing now! She has her dress.' He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take it, calling with that tone in his voice, for 'Delphine! my little Delphine! and Nasie!' Upon my word," said the medical student, "it was enough to make any one burst out crying."

°°°°"Delphine," said the old man, "she is there, isn't she? I knew she was there," and his eyes sought the door.

°°°°"I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready," said Bianchon. "They ought to go on at once."

°°°°Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was shocking to see.

°°°°"Noble natures cannot dwell in this world," he said; "Mme de Beauseant has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and feelings?"

°°°°Pictures of yesterday's ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

°°°°"I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to the base of the spine, and send round for us."

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," exclaimed Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view," said the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

°°°°"So!" said Eugene. "Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old man for his own sake?"

°°°°"You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning," returned Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. "Doctors who have seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my dear fellow, I can see the patient still."

°°°°He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

°°°°"Ah! dear boy, is that you?" said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

°°°°"Do you feel better?" asked the law student, taking his hand.

°°°°"Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man here, who has burned up all my bark fuel."

°°°°"I can hear Christophe coming upstairs," Eugene answered. "He is bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you."

°°°°"Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!) Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left now."

°°°°Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man's ear, "I will pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble."

°°°°"My daughters told you that they were coming, didn't they, Christophe? Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once again before I die. Tell them that, but don't alarm them more than you can help."

°°°°Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

°°°°"They will come before long," the old man went on. "I know them so well. My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die; and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning. 'Good-morning, papa!' they used to say, and I would take them on my knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they loved me with all their hearts. MON DIEU! why could they not always be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah! forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for you have used me to endure pain. MON DIEU! if only I held their hands in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. HE will see them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked. They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this is! what pain this is! . . . ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they MUST have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make millions. (Oh! this is agony!)"

°°°°Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength to endure the pain.

°°°°"If they were here, I should not complain," he said. "So why should I complain now?"

°°°°He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

°°°°"First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse," he said; "but she and her husband were so busy that I couldn't get to speak to her. When I insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and went on like this: 'M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important business, when it is all finished she can go.' The gentleman looked angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said, 'Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.' As for Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, 'Ah yes, but madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It will be time enough then to tell her bad news!' I begged and I prayed, but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was out."

°°°°"To think that neither of his daughters should come!" exclaimed Rastignac. "I will write to them both."

°°°°"Neither of them!" cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. "They are busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not. Not until you are dying do you know your children. . . . Oh! my friend, do not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it. No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it."

°°°°The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

°°°°"Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and THEY would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money? If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God! who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh! this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was 'My kind father' here, 'My dear father' there. There was always a place for me at their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought. How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening parties. In fact, they acknowleged me their father; publicly they owned that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see, and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence, but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law's ear, 'Who may that gentleman be?'--'The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very rich.'--'The devil, e is!' they would say, and look again at me with the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one thing I did learn thoroughly --I knew that I was not wanted here on earth.

°°°°"The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that was how they both turned me out of the house.

°°°°"Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured; Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to- day? Have I not more than expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

°°°°"Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see, my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! MON DIEU! These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie! Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to ruin if a father's rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see. The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them, my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know what it means to trample on a father's corpse? There is a God in heaven who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

°°°°"Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss; one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault. I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so. It is no one's affair but mine; man's justice and God's justice have nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly; I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch, I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through love.

°°°°"My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should be present at their father's deathbed; the law is on my side. It would only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit, as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine, mine!" and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak spoke of menace.

°°°°"There, there, dear father," said Eugene, "lie down again; I will write to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them myself, if they do not come before."

°°°°"If they do not come?" repeated the old man, sobbing. "Why, I shall be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life; they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one. . . . Go to them; just tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud as I do now, 'Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who has been so kind to you is lying ill!'--Not a sound; no one comes! Then am I do die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them. I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all, my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh? . . . What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister. . . . Eugene, you are my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me nothing but my heart."

°°°°"Christophe!" shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man moaned, and by his cries, "go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to you."

°°°°"Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military, anything and everything, but make them come!" He looked at Eugene, and a last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. "Go to the authorities, to the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!"

°°°°"But you have cursed them."

°°°°"Who said that!" said the old man in dull amazement. "You know quite well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I can see them. . . . Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay their hands there, I think I should get better. . . . MON DIEU! who will recover their money for them when I am gone? . . . I will manufacture vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes."

°°°°"Here is something to drink," said Eugene, supporting the dying man on his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot's lips.

°°°°"How you must love your own father and mother!" said the old man, and grasped the student's hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling grasp. "I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that has been my life for the last ten years. . . . I have no daughters, my sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl's mind and contaminates her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid them! . . . Kill them! . . . Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They have murdered me between them! . . . Death or my daughters! . . . Ah! it is too late, I am dying, and they are not here! . . . Dying without them! . . . Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----"

°°°°"Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest; don't worry yourself, don't think."

°°°°"I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!"

°°°°"You SHALL see them."

°°°°"Really?" cried the old man, still wandering. "Oh! shall I see them; I shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my fingers . . . their hair . . ."

°°°°His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his daughters' hair.

°°°°"My blessing on them . . ." he said, making an effort, "my blessing . . ."

°°°°His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

°°°°"I met Christophe," he said; "he is gone for your cab."

°°°°Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath had grown.

°°°°"He will not get over this, I am sure," said Bianchon. He felt the old man's pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

°°°°"The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be better for him to die."

°°°°"Ah! my word, it would!"

°°°°"What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death."

°°°°"Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard. . . . There is a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

°°°°"We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come from?"

°°°°Rastignac took out his watch.

°°°°"There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall have to pay the cabman when I get home again."

°°°°Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder. The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de Restaud's house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could see no one.

°°°°"But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying," Rastignac told the man.

°°°°"The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----"

°°°°"If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at once."

°°°°The man went out.

°°°°Eugene waited for a long while. "Perhaps her father is dying at this moment," he thought.

°°°°Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte," said Rastignac, "M. Goriot, your father-in- law, is lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter. He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----"

°°°°"I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are aware," the Count answered coolly. "His character has been compromised in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much more important matters to think about than the things that fools and chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a few seconds; it lies entirely with her----"

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct; you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her, and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I ask."

°°°°"You can tell her yourself," the Count answered, impressed by the thrill of indignation in Eugene's voice.

°°°°The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her. Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to speak.

°°°°"I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all he would forgive me. . . . I did not think there was such torture in the world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not give way as long as I live," she said, turning to her husband. "I am a mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of appearances!" she cried aloud in her despair.

°°°°Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess' life. M. de Restaud's manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in bed.

°°°°"Poor dear Eugene, I am ill," she said. "I caught cold after the ball, and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come."

°°°°"If you were at death's door," Eugene broke in, "you must be carried somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer."

°°°°"Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just as you wish. As for HIM, he would die of grief I know if I went out to see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as I have seen the doctor.--Ah!" she cried out, "you are not wearing your watch, how is that?"

°°°°Eugene reddened.

°°°°"Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it. . . . Oh! it would be very wrong of you!"

°°°°The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, "Do you want to know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch has been pawned, for I had nothing either."

°°°°Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

°°°°"I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why, I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before you.--Therese," she called to the waiting-woman, "ask M. de Nucingen to come upstairs at once and speak to me."

°°°°Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve; he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine's purse for money, so as to dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse. He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient's back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of science, and it was tried in vain.

°°°°"Can you feel them?" asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of Rastignac, and answered, "They are coming, are they not?"

°°°°"There is hope yet," said the surgeon; "he can speak."

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene, "Delphine is coming."

°°°°"Oh! that is nothing!" said Bianchon; "he has been talking about his daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for water, they say----"

°°°°"We may as well give up," said the physician, addressing the surgeon. "Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless."

°°°°Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his loathsome bed.

°°°°"But the sheets ought to be changed," added the physician. "Even if there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come back again, Bianchon," he said, turning to the medical student. "If he complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm."

°°°°He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

°°°°"Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy," said Bianchon, as soon as they were alone; "we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help us to make the bed."

°°°°Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a customer.

°°°°"My dear Monsieur Eugene," she said, when he had spoken, "you know quite as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes, you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you; altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make."

°°°°Eugene hurried up to Goriot's room.

°°°°"Bianchon," he cried, "the money or the watch?"

°°°°"There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money."

°°°°Rastignac hurried downstairs.

°°°°"Here, madame" he said in disgust, "let us square accounts. M. Goriot will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----"

°°°°"Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman," she said, counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

°°°°"Let us get this over," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen."

°°°°"You won't forget Sylvie," said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene's ear; "she has been sitting up these two nights."

°°°°As soon as Eugene's back was turned, the old woman hurried after her handmaid.

°°°°"Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number 7. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse," she said in Sylvie's ear.

°°°°Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear the elderly economist.

°°°°"Quick," said Bianchon, "let us change his shirt. Hold him upright."

°°°°Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

°°°°"Ah! yes!" cried Bianchon. "It is the little locket and the chain made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on the chimney-piece."

°°°°Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded golden hair--Mme. Goriot's hair, no doubt. He read the name on the little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other. It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes, the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students, that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a shrill cry of delight.

°°°°"Nasie! Fifine!"

°°°°"There is life in him yet," said Bianchon.

°°°°"What does he go on living for?" said Sylvie.

°°°°"To suffer," answered Rastignac.

°°°°Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the students' heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair, they heard a faint whisper:

°°°°"Ah! my angels!"

°°°°Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which fled forth with them as they left his lips.

°°°°"Poor dear!" cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most ghastly and involuntary of lies.

°°°°The father's last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

°°°°"He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last, that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the throat. The brain must be completely suffused."

°°°°As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman hastened up, panting for breath.

°°°°"She has come too late," said Rastignac.

°°°°But it was not Delphine; it was Therese, her waiting-woman, who stood in the doorway.

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene," she said, "monsieur and madame have had a terrible scene about some money that Madame (poor thing!) wanted for her father. She fainted, and the doctor came, and she had to be bled, calling out all the while, 'My father is dying; I want to see papa!' It was heartbreaking to hear her----"

°°°°"That will do, Therese. If she came now, it would be trouble thrown away. M. Goriot cannot recognize any one now."

°°°°"Poor, dear gentleman, is he as bad at that?" said Therese.

°°°°"You don't want me now, I must go and look after my dinner; it is half-past four," remarked Sylvie. The next instant she all but collided with Mme. de Restaud on the landing outside.

°°°°There was something awful and appalling in the sudden apparition of the Countess. She saw the bed of death by the dim light of the single candle, and her tears flowed at the sight of her father's passive features, from which the life had almost ebbed. Bianchon with thoughtful tact left the room.

°°°°"I could not escape soon enough," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°The student bowed sadly in reply. Mme. de Restaud took her father's hand and kissed it.

°°°°"Forgive me, father! You used to say that my voice would call you back from the grave; ah! come back for one moment to bless your penitent daughter. Do you hear me? Oh! this is fearful! No one on earth will ever bless me henceforth; every one hates me; no one loves me but you in all the world. My own children will hate me. Take me with you, father; I will love you, I will take care of you. He does not hear me . . . I am mad . . ."

°°°°She fell on her knees, and gazed wildly at the human wreck before her.

°°°°"My cup of misery is full," she said, turning her eyes upon Eugene. "M. de Trailles has fled, leaving enormous debts behind him, and I have found out that he was deceiving me. My husband will never forgive me, and I have left my fortune in his hands. I have lost all my illusions. Alas! I have forsaken the one heart that loved me (she pointed to her father as she spoke), and for whom? I have held his kindness cheap, and slighted his affection; many and many a time I have given him pain, ungrateful wretch that I am!"

°°°°"He knew it," said Rastignac.

°°°°Just then Goriot's eyelids unclosed; it was only a muscular contraction, but the Countess' sudden start of reviving hope was no less dreadful than the dying eyes.

°°°°"Is it possible that he can hear me?" cried the Countess. "No," she answered herself, and sat down beside the bed. As Mme. de Restaud seemed to wish to sit by her father, Eugene went down to take a little food. The boarders were already assembled.

°°°°"Well," remarked the painter, as he joined them, "it seems that there is to be a death-orama upstairs."

°°°°"Charles, I think you might find something less painful to joke about," said Eugene.

°°°°"So we may not laugh here?" returned the painter. "What harm does it do? Bianchon said that the old man was quite insensible."

°°°°"Well, then," said the employe from the Museum, "he will die as he has lived."

°°°°"My father is dead!" shrieked the Countess.

°°°°The terrible cry brought Sylvie, Rastignac, and Bianchon; Mme. de Restaud had fainted away. When she recovered they carried her downstairs, and put her into the cab that stood waiting at the door. Eugene sent Therese with her, and bade the maid take the Countess to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Bianchon came down to them.

°°°°"Yes, he is dead," he said.

°°°°"Come, sit down to dinner, gentlemen," said Mme. Vauquer, "or the soup will be cold."

°°°°The two students sat down together.

°°°°"What is the next thing to be done?" Eugene asked of Bianchon.

°°°°"I have closed his eyes and composed his limbs," said Bianchon. "When the certificate has been officially registered at the Mayor's office, we will sew him in his winding sheet and bury him somewhere. What do you think we ought to do?"

°°°°"He will not smell at his bread like this any more," said the painter, mimicking the old man's little trick.

°°°°"Oh, hang it all!" cried the tutor, "let Father Goriot drop, and let us have something else for a change. He is a standing dish, and we have had him with every sauce this hour or more. It is one of the privileges of the good city of Paris that anybody may be born, or live, or die there without attracting any attention whatsoever. Let us profit by the advantages of civilization. There are fifty or sixty deaths every day; if you have a mind to do it, you can sit down at any time and wail over whole hecatombs of dead in Paris. Father Goriot has gone off the hooks, has he? So much the better for him. If you venerate his memory, keep it to yourselves, and let the rest of us feed in peace."

°°°°"Oh, to be sure," said the widow, "it is all the better for him that he is dead. It looks as though he had had trouble enough, poor soul, while he was alive."

°°°°And this was all the funeral oration delivered over him who had been for Eugene the type and embodiment of Fatherhood.

°°°°The fifteen lodgers began to talk as usual. When Bianchon and Eugene had satisfied their hunger, the rattle of spoons and forks, the boisterous conversation, the expressions on the faces that bespoke various degrees of want of feeling, gluttony, or indifference, everything about them made them shiver with loathing. They went out to find a priest to watch that night with the dead. It was necessary to measure their last pious cares by the scanty sum of money that remained. Before nine o'clock that evening the body was laid out on the bare sacking of the bedstead in the desolate room; a lighted candle stood on either side, and the priest watched at the foot. Rastignac made inquiries of this latter as to the expenses of the funeral, and wrote to the Baron de Nucingen and the Comte de Restaud, entreating both gentlemen to authorize their man of business to defray the charges of laying their father-in-law in the grave. He sent Christophe with the letters; then he went to bed, tired out, and slept.

°°°°Next day Bianchon and Rastignac were obliged to take the certificate to the registrar themselves, and by twelve o'clock the formalities were completed. Two hours went by, no word came from the Count nor from the Baron; nobody appeared to act for them, and Rastignac had already been obliged to pay the priest. Sylvie asked ten francs for sewing the old man in his winding- sheet and making him ready for the grave, and Eugene and Bianchon calculated that they had scarcely sufficient to pay for the funeral, if nothing was forthcoming from the dead man's family. So it was the medical student who laid him in a pauper's coffin, despatched from Bianchon's hospital, whence he obtained it at a cheaper rate.

°°°°"Let us play those wretches a trick," said he. "Go to the cemetery, buy a grave for five years at Pere-Lachaise, and arrange with the Church and the undertaker to have a third-class funeral. If the daughters and their husbands decline to repay you, you can carve this on the headstone--'HERE LIES M. GORIOT, FATHER OF THE COMTESSE DE RESTAUD AND THE BARONNE DE NUCINGEN, INTERRED AT THE EXPENSE OF TWO STUDENTS.' "

°°°°Eugene took part of his friend's advice, but only after he had gone in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

°°°°"Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their father, and are in deep grief over their loss."

°°°°Eugene's Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was impossible to reach Delphine.

°°°°"Sell some of your ornaments," he wrote hastily in the porter's room, "so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place."

°°°°He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the lodging-house about three o'clock. In spite of himself, the tears came into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth, was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs. A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

°°°°Bianchon's duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he had made for the burial service. The house student's note told Rastignac that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading Bianchon's scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot's two daughters in Mme. Vauquer's hands.

°°°°"How dared you take it?" he asked.

°°°°"Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?" retorted Sylvie. "It is gold."

°°°°"Of course it shall!" Eugene answered indignantly; "he shall at any rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with him."

°°°°When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man's breast the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were innocent little maidens, before they began "to think for themselves," as he had moaned out in his agony.

°°°°Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker's men were the only followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. When the coffin had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked round in vain for Goriot's two daughters or their husbands. Christophe was his only fellow- mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe's hand. He could not utter a word just then.

°°°°"Yes, Monsieur Eugene," said Christophe, "he was a good and worthy man, who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any harm, and gave nobody any trouble."

°°°°The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

°°°°The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the Libera nos and the De profundis. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with Eugene and Christophe.

°°°°"There is no one else to follow us," remarked the priest, "so we may as well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five."

°°°°But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen, arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o'clock Goriot's coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters' servants standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that fell on Father Goriot's grave, Eugene Rastignac's youth ended. He folded his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

°°°°He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste of its honey, and said magniloquently:

°°°°"Henceforth there is war between us."

°°°°And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine with Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°ADDENDUM

°°°°The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

°°°°Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d'   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Secrets of a Princess   Beatrix

°°°°Beauseant, Marquis   An Episode under the Terror

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomte de   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomtesse de   The Deserted Woman   Albert Savarus

°°°°Bianchon, Horace   The Atheist's Mass   Cesar Birotteau   The Commission in Lunacy   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   A Bachelor's Establishment   The Secrets of a Princess   The Government Clerks   Pierrette   A Study of Woman   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Honorine   The Seamy Side of History   The Magic Skin   A Second Home   A Prince of Bohemia   Letters of Two Brides   The Muse of the Department   The Imaginary Mistress   The Middle Classes   Cousin Betty   The Country Parson In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:   Another Study of Woman   La Grande Breteche

°°°°Bibi-Lupin (chief of secret police, called himself Gondureau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de   Sarrasine

°°°°Collin, Jacques   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Derville   Gobseck   A Start in Life   The Gondreville Mystery   Colonel Chabert   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Franchessini, Colonel   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Galathionne, Princess   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van   Gobseck   Cesar Birotteau   The Government Clerks   The Unconscious Humoriists

°°°°Jacques (M. de Beauseant's butler)   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Langeais, Duchesse Antoinette de   The Thirteen

°°°°Marsay, Henri de   The Thirteen   The Unconscious Humorists   Another Study of Woman   The Lily of the Valley   Jealousies of a Country Town   Ursule Mirouet   A Marriage Settlement   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Letters of Two Brides   The Ball at Sceaux   Modest Mignon   The Secrets of a Princess   The Gondreville Mystery   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Maurice (de Restaud's valet)   Gobseck

°°°°Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de   The Thirteen   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Another Study of Woman   Pierrette   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Nucingen, Baron Frederic de   The Firm of Nucingen   Pierrette   Cesar Birotteau   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Another Study of Woman   The Secrets of a Princess   A Man of Business   Cousin Betty   The Muse of the Department   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de   The Thirteen   Eugenie Grandet   Cesar Birotteau   Melmoth Reconciled   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   The Commission in Lunacy   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Modeste Mignon   The Firm of Nucingen   Another Study of Woman   A Daughter of Eve   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Poiret   The Government Clerks   A Start in Life   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Poiret, Madame (nee Christine-Michelle Michonneau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de (Eugene's parents)   Lost Illusions

°°°°Rastignac, Eugene de   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Ball at Sceaux   The Interdiction   A Study of Woman   Another Study of Woman   The Magic Skin   The Secrets of a Princess   A Daughter of Eve   The Gondreville Mystery   The Firm of Nucingen   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Rastignac, Laure-Rose and Agathe de   Lost Illusions   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Rastignac, Monseigneur Gabriel de   The Country Parson   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Restaud, Comte de   Gobseck

°°°°Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de   Gobseck

°°°°Selerier   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Taillefer, Jean-Frederic   The Firm of Nucingen   The Magic Skin   The Red Inn

°°°°Taillefer, Victorine   The Red Inn

°°°°Therese   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Tissot, Pierre-Francois   A Prince of Bohemia

°°°°Trailles, Comte Maxime de   Cesar Birotteau   Gobseck   Ursule Mirouet   A Man of Business   The Member for Arcis   The Secrets of a Princess   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   Beatrix   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°End

°°°°Eugenie Grandet

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Katharine Prescott Wormeley

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Maria.

°°°°May your name, that of one whose portrait is the noblest ornament

°°°°of this work, lie on its opening pages like a branch of sacred

°°°°box, taken from an unknown tree, but sanctified by religion, and

°°°°kept ever fresh and green by pious hands to bless the house.De Balzac.

°°°°EUGENIE GRANDET

°°°°I

°°°°There are houses in certain provincial towns whose aspect inspiresmelancholy, akin to that called forth by sombre cloisters, drearymoorlands, or the desolation of ruins. Within these houses there is,perhaps, the silence of the cloister, the barrenness of moors, theskeleton of ruins; life and movement are so stagnant there that astranger might think them uninhabited, were it not that he encounterssuddenly the pale, cold glance of a motionless person, whose half-monastic face peers beyond the window-casing at the sound of anunaccustomed step.

°°°°Such elements of sadness formed the physiognomy, as it were, of adwelling-house in Saumur which stands at the end of the steep streetleading to the chateau in the upper part of the town. This street--nowlittle frequented, hot in summer, cold in winter, dark in certainsections--is remarkable for the resonance of its little pebblypavement, always clean and dry, for the narrowness of its tortuousroad-way, for the peaceful stillness of its houses, which belong tothe Old town and are over-topped by the ramparts. Houses threecenturies old are still solid, though built of wood, and their diversaspects add to the originality which commends this portion of Saumurto the attention of artists and antiquaries.

°°°°It is difficult to pass these houses without admiring the enormousoaken beams, their ends carved into fantastic figures, which crownwith a black bas-relief the lower floor of most of them. In one placethese transverse timbers are covered with slate and mark a bluish linealong the frail wall of a dwelling covered by a roof /en colombage/which bends beneath the weight of years, and whose rotting shinglesare twisted by the alternate action of sun and rain. In another placeblackened, worn-out window-sills, with delicate sculptures nowscarcely discernible, seem too weak to bear the brown clay pots fromwhich springs the heart's-ease or the rose-bush of some poor working-woman. Farther on are doors studded with enormous nails, where thegenius of our forefathers has traced domestic hieroglyphics, of whichthe meaning is now lost forever. Here a Protestant attested hisbelief; there a Leaguer cursed Henry IV.; elsewhere some bourgeois hascarved the insignia of his /noblesse de cloches/, symbols of his long-forgotten magisterial glory. The whole history of France is there.Next to a tottering house with roughly plastered walls, where anartisan enshrines his tools, rises the mansion of a country gentleman,on the stone arch of which above the door vestiges of armorialbearings may still be seen, battered by the many revolutions that haveshaken France since 1789. In this hilly street the ground-floors ofthe merchants are neither shops nor warehouses; lovers of the MiddleAges will here find the /ouvrouere/ of our forefathers in all itsnaive simplicity. These low rooms, which have no shop-frontage, noshow-windows, in fact no glass at all, are deep and dark and withoutinterior or exterior decoration. Their doors open in two parts, eachroughly iron-bound; the upper half is fastened back within the room,the lower half, fitted with a spring-bell, swings continually to andfro. Air and light reach the damp den within, either through the upperhalf of the door, or through an open space between the ceiling and alow front wall, breast-high, which is closed by solid shutters thatare taken down every morning, put up every evening, and held in placeby heavy iron bars.

°°°°This wall serves as a counter for the merchandise. No delusive displayis there; only samples of the business, whatever it may chance to be,--such, for instance, as three or four tubs full of codfish and salt,a few bundles of sail-cloth, cordage, copper wire hanging from thejoists above, iron hoops for casks ranged along the wall, or a fewpieces of cloth upon the shelves. Enter. A neat girl, glowing withyouth, wearing a white kerchief, her arms red and bare, drops herknitting and calls her father or her mother, one of whom comes forwardand sells you what you want, phlegmatically, civilly, or arrogantly,according to his or her individual character, whether it be a matterof two sous' or twenty thousand francs' worth of merchandise. You maysee a cooper, for instance, sitting in his doorway and twirling histhumbs as he talks with a neighbor. To all appearance he owns nothingmore than a few miserable boat-ribs and two or three bundles of laths;but below in the port his teeming wood-yard supplies all the cooperagetrade of Anjou. He knows to a plank how many casks are needed if thevintage is good. A hot season makes him rich, a rainy season ruinshim; in a single morning puncheons worth eleven francs have been knownto drop to six. In this country, as in Touraine, atmosphericvicissitudes control commercial life. Wine-growers, proprietors, wood-merchants, coopers, inn-keepers, mariners, all keep watch of the sun.They tremble when they go to bed lest they should hear in the morningof a frost in the night; they dread rain, wind, drought, and wantwater, heat, and clouds to suit their fancy. A perpetual duel goes onbetween the heavens and their terrestrial interests. The barometersmooths, saddens, or makes merry their countenances, turn and turnabout. From end to end of this street, formerly the Grand'Rue deSaumur, the words: "Here's golden weather," are passed from door todoor; or each man calls to his neighbor: "It rains louis," knowingwell what a sunbeam or the opportune rainfall is bringing him.On Saturdays after midday, in the fine season, not one sou's worth ofmerchandise can be bought from these worthy traders. Each has hisvineyard, his enclosure of fields, and all spend two days in thecountry. This being foreseen, and purchases, sales, and profitsprovided for, the merchants have ten or twelve hours to spend inparties of pleasure, in making observations, in criticisms, and incontinual spying. A housewife cannot buy a partridge without theneighbors asking the husband if it were cooked to a turn. A young girlnever puts her head near a window that she is not seen by idlinggroups in the street. Consciences are held in the light; and thehouses, dark, silent, impenetrable as they seem, hide no mysteries.Life is almost wholly in the open air; every household sits at its ownthreshold, breakfasts, dines, and quarrels there. No one can passalong the street without being examined; in fact formerly, when astranger entered a provincial town he was bantered and made game offrom door to door. From this came many good stories, and the nickname/copieux/, which was applied to the inhabitants of Angers, whoexcelled in such urban sarcasms.

°°°°The ancient mansions of the old town of Saumur are at the top of thishilly street, and were formerly occupied by the nobility of theneighborhood. The melancholy dwelling where the events of thefollowing history took place is one of these mansions,--venerablerelics of a century in which men and things bore the characteristicsof simplicity which French manners and customs are losing day by day.Follow the windings of the picturesque thoroughfare, whoseirregularities awaken recollections that plunge the mind mechanicallyinto reverie, and you will see a somewhat dark recess, in the centreof which is hidden the door of the house of Monsieur Grandet. It isimpossible to understand the force of this provincial expression--thehouse of Monsieur Grandet--without giving the biography of MonsieurGrandet himself.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet enjoyed a reputation in Saumur whose causes andeffects can never be fully understood by those who have not, at onetime or another, lived in the provinces. In 1789 Monsieur Grandet--still called by certain persons le Pere Grandet, though the number ofsuch old persons has perceptibly diminished--was a master-cooper, ableto read, write, and cipher. At the period when the French Republicoffered for sale the church property in the arrondissement of Saumur,the cooper, then forty years of age, had just married the daughter ofa rich wood-merchant. Supplied with the ready money of his own fortuneand his wife's /dot/, in all about two thousand louis-d'or, Grandetwent to the newly established "district," where, with the help of twohundred double louis given by his father-in-law to the surlyrepublican who presided over the sales of the national domain, heobtained for a song, legally if not legitimately, one of the finestvineyards in the arrondissement, an old abbey, and several farms. Theinhabitants of Saumur were so little revolutionary that they thoughtPere Grandet a bold man, a republican, and a patriot with a mind opento all the new ideas; though in point of fact it was open only tovineyards. He was appointed a member of the administration of Saumur,and his pacific influence made itself felt politically andcommercially. Politically, he protected the ci-devant nobles, andprevented, to the extent of his power, the sale of the lands andproperty of the /emigres/; commercially, he furnished the Republicanarmies with two or three thousand puncheons of white wine, and tookhis pay in splendid fields belonging to a community of women whoselands had been reserved for the last lot.

°°°°Under the Consulate Grandet became mayor, governed wisely, andharvested still better pickings. Under the Empire he was calledMonsieur Grandet. Napoleon, however, did not like republicans, andsuperseded Monsieur Grandet (who was supposed to have worn thePhrygian cap) by a man of his own surroundings, a future baron of theEmpire. Monsieur Grandet quitted office without regret. He hadconstructed in the interests of the town certain fine roads which ledto his own property; his house and lands, very advantageouslyassessed, paid moderate taxes; and since the registration of hisvarious estates, the vineyards, thanks to his constant care, hadbecome the "head of the country,"--a local term used to denote thosethat produced the finest quality of wine. He might have asked for thecross of the Legion of honor.

°°°°This event occurred in 1806. Monsieur Grandet was then fifty-sevenyears of age, his wife thirty-six, and an only daughter, the fruit oftheir legitimate love, was ten years old. Monsieur Grandet, whomProvidence no doubt desired to compensate for the loss of hismunicipal honors, inherited three fortunes in the course of this year,--that of Madame de la Gaudiniere, born de la Bertelliere, the motherof Madame Grandet; that of old Monsieur de la Bertelliere, hergrandfather; and, lastly, that of Madame Gentillet, her grandmother onthe mother's side: three inheritances, whose amount was not known toany one. The avarice of the deceased persons was so keen that for along time they had hoarded their money for the pleasure of secretlylooking at it. Old Monsieur de la Bertelliere called an investment anextravagance, and thought he got better interest from the sight of hisgold than from the profits of usury. The inhabitants of Saumurconsequently estimated his savings according to "the revenues of thesun's wealth," as they said.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet thus obtained that modern title of nobility which ourmania for equality can never rub out. He became the most imposingpersonage in the arrondissement. He worked a hundred acres ofvineyard, which in fruitful years yielded seven or eight hundredhogsheads of wine. He owned thirteen farms, an old abbey, whosewindows and arches he had walled up for the sake of economy,--ameasure which preserved them,--also a hundred and twenty-seven acresof meadow-land, where three thousand poplars, planted in 1793, grewand flourished; and finally, the house in which he lived. Such was hisvisible estate; as to his other property, only two persons could giveeven a vague guess at its value: one was Monsieur Cruchot, a notaryemployed in the usurious investments of Monsieur Grandet; the otherwas Monsieur des Grassins, the richest banker in Saumur, in whoseprofits Grandet had a certain covenanted and secret share.Although old Cruchot and Monsieur des Grassins were both gifted withthe deep discretion which wealth and trust beget in the provinces,they publicly testified so much respect to Monsieur Grandet thatobservers estimated the amount of his property by the obsequiousattention which they bestowed upon him. In all Saumur there was no onenot persuaded that Monsieur Grandet had a private treasure, somehiding-place full of louis, where he nightly took ineffable delight ingazing upon great masses of gold. Avaricious people gathered proof ofthis when they looked at the eyes of the good man, to which the yellowmetal seemed to have conveyed its tints. The glance of a manaccustomed to draw enormous interest from his capital acquires, likethat of the libertine, the gambler, or the sycophant, certainindefinable habits,--furtive, eager, mysterious movements, which neverescape the notice of his co-religionists. This secret language is in acertain way the freemasonry of the passions. Monsieur Grandet inspiredthe respectful esteem due to one who owed no man anything, who,skilful cooper and experienced wine-grower that he was, guessed withthe precision of an astronomer whether he ought to manufacture athousand puncheons for his vintage, or only five hundred, who neverfailed in any speculation, and always had casks for sale when caskswere worth more than the commodity that filled them, who could storehis whole vintage in his cellars and bide his time to put thepuncheons on the market at two hundred francs, when the littleproprietors had been forced to sell theirs for five louis. His famousvintage of 1811, judiciously stored and slowly disposed of, broughthim in more than two hundred and forty thousand francs.

°°°°Financially speaking, Monsieur Grandet was something between a tigerand a boa-constrictor. He could crouch and lie low, watch his prey along while, spring upon it, open his jaws, swallow a mass of louis,and then rest tranquilly like a snake in process of digestion,impassible, methodical, and cold. No one saw him pass without afeeling of admiration mingled with respect and fear; had not every manin Saumur felt the rending of those polished steel claws? For thisone, Maitre Cruchot had procured the money required for the purchaseof a domain, but at eleven per cent. For that one, Monsieur desGrassins discounted bills of exchange, but at a frightful deduction ofinterest. Few days ever passed that Monsieur Grandet's name was notmentioned either in the markets or in social conversations at theevening gatherings. To some the fortune of the old wine-grower was anobject of patriotic pride. More than one merchant, more than oneinnkeeper, said to strangers with a certain complacency: "Monsieur, wehave two or three millionaire establishments; but as for MonsieurGrandet, he does not himself know how much he is worth."

°°°°In 1816 the best reckoners in Saumur estimated the landed property ofthe worthy man at nearly four millions; but as, on an average, he hadmade yearly, from 1793 to 1817, a hundred thousand francs out of thatproperty, it was fair to presume that he possessed in actual money asum nearly equal to the value of his estate. So that when, after agame of boston or an evening discussion on the matter of vines, thetalk fell upon Monsieur Grandet, knowing people said: "Le PereGrandet? le Pere Grandet must have at least five or six millions.""You are cleverer than I am; I have never been able to find out theamount," answered Monsieur Cruchot or Monsieur des Grassins, wheneither chanced to overhear the remark.

°°°°If some Parisian mentioned Rothschild or Monsieur Lafitte, the peopleof Saumur asked if he were as rich as Monsieur Grandet. When theParisian, with a smile, tossed them a disdainful affirmative, theylooked at each other and shook their heads with an incredulous air. Solarge a fortune covered with a golden mantle all the actions of thisman. If in early days some peculiarities of his life gave occasion forlaughter or ridicule, laughter and ridicule had long since died away.His least important actions had the authority of results repeatedlyshown. His speech, his clothing, his gestures, the blinking of hiseyes, were law to the country-side, where every one, after studyinghim as a naturalist studies the result of instinct in the loweranimals, had come to understand the deep mute wisdom of his slightestactions.

°°°°"It will be a hard winter," said one; "Pere Grandet has put on his furgloves."

°°°°"Pere Grandet is buying quantities of staves; there will be plenty ofwine this year."

°°°°Monsieur Grandet never bought either bread or meat. His farmerssupplied him weekly with a sufficiency of capons, chickens, eggs,butter, and his tithe of wheat. He owned a mill; and the tenant wasbound, over and above his rent, to take a certain quantity of grainand return him the flour and bran. La Grande Nanon, his only servant,though she was no longer young, baked the bread of the householdherself every Saturday. Monsieur Grandet arranged with kitchen-gardeners who were his tenants to supply him with vegetables. As tofruits, he gathered such quantities that he sold the greater part inthe market. His fire-wood was cut from his own hedgerows or taken fromthe half-rotten old sheds which he built at the corners of his fields,and whose planks the farmers carted into town for him, all cut up, andobligingly stacked in his wood-house, receiving in return his thanks.His only known expenditures were for the consecrated bread, theclothing of his wife and daughter, the hire of their chairs in church,the wages of la Grand Nanon, the tinning of the saucepans, lights,taxes, repairs on his buildings, and the costs of his variousindustries. He had six hundred acres of woodland, lately purchased,which he induced a neighbor's keeper to watch, under the promise of anindemnity. After the acquisition of this property he ate game for thefirst time.

°°°°Monsieur Grandet's manners were very simple. He spoke little. Heusually expressed his meaning by short sententious phrases uttered ina soft voice. After the Revolution, the epoch at which he first cameinto notice, the good man stuttered in a wearisome way as soon as hewas required to speak at length or to maintain an argument. Thisstammering, the incoherence of his language, the flux of words inwhich he drowned his thought, his apparent lack of logic, attributedto defects of education, were in reality assumed, and will besufficiently explained by certain events in the following history.Four sentences, precise as algebraic formulas, sufficed him usually tograsp and solve all difficulties of life and commerce: "I don't know;I cannot; I will not; I will see about it." He never said yes, or no,and never committed himself to writing. If people talked to him helistened coldly, holding his chin in his right hand and resting hisright elbow in the back of his left hand, forming in his own mindopinions on all matters, from which he never receded. He reflectedlong before making any business agreement. When his opponent, aftercareful conversation, avowed the secret of his own purposes, confidentthat he had secured his listener's assent, Grandet answered: "I candecide nothing without consulting my wife." His wife, whom he hadreduced to a state of helpless slavery, was a useful screen to him inbusiness. He went nowhere among friends; he neither gave nor accepteddinners; he made no stir or noise, seeming to economize in everything,even movement. He never disturbed or disarranged the things of otherpeople, out of respect for the rights of property. Nevertheless, inspite of his soft voice, in spite of his circumspect bearing, thelanguage and habits of a coarse nature came to the surface, especiallyin his own home, where he controlled himself less than elsewhere.Physically, Grandet was a man five feet high, thick-set, square-built,with calves twelve inches in circumference, knotted knee-joints, andbroad shoulders; his face was round, tanned, and pitted by the small-pox; his chin was straight, his lips had no curves, his teeth werewhite; his eyes had that calm, devouring expression which peopleattribute to the basilisk; his forehead, full of transverse wrinkles,was not without certain significant protuberances; his yellow-grayishhair was said to be silver and gold by certain young people who didnot realize the impropriety of making a jest about Monsieur Grandet.His nose, thick at the end, bore a veined wen, which the common peoplesaid, not without reason, was full of malice. The whole countenanceshowed a dangerous cunning, an integrity without warmth, the egotismof a man long used to concentrate every feeling upon the enjoyments ofavarice and upon the only human being who was anything whatever tohim,--his daughter and sole heiress, Eugenie. Attitude, manners,bearing, everything about him, in short, testified to that belief inhimself which the habit of succeeding in all enterprises never failsto give to a man.

°°°°Thus, though his manners were unctuous and soft outwardly, MonsieurGrandet's nature was of iron. His dress never varied; and those whosaw him to-day saw him such as he had been since 1791. His stout shoeswere tied with leathern thongs; he wore, in all weathers, thickwoollen stockings, short breeches of coarse maroon cloth with silverbuckles, a velvet waistcoat, in alternate stripes of yellow and puce,buttoned squarely, a large maroon coat with wide flaps, a blackcravat, and a quaker's hat. His gloves, thick as those of a gendarme,lasted him twenty months; to preserve them, he always laid themmethodically on the brim of his hat in one particular spot. Saumurknew nothing further about this personage.

°°°°Only six individuals had a right of entrance to Monsieur Grandet'shouse. The most important of the first three was a nephew of MonsieurCruchot. Since his appointment as president of the Civil courts ofSaumur this young man had added the name of Bonfons to that ofCruchot. He now signed himself C. de Bonfons. Any litigant so ill-advised as to call him Monsieur Cruchot would soon be made to feel hisfolly in court. The magistrate protected those who called him Monsieurle president, but he favored with gracious smiles those who addressedhim as Monsieur de Bonfons. Monsieur le president was thirty-threeyears old, and possessed the estate of Bonfons (Boni Fontis), worthseven thousand francs a year; he expected to inherit the property ofhis uncle the notary and that of another uncle, the Abbe Cruchot, adignitary of the chapter of Saint-Martin de Tours, both of whom werethought to be very rich. These three Cruchots, backed by a goodlynumber of cousins, and allied to twenty families in the town, formed aparty, like the Medici in Florence; like the Medici, the Cruchots hadtheir Pazzi.

°°°°Madame des Grassins, mother of a son twenty-three years of age, cameassiduously to play cards with Madame Grandet, hoping to marry herdear Adolphe to Mademoiselle Eugenie. Monsieur des Grassins, thebanker, vigorously promoted the schemes of his wife by means of secretservices constantly rendered to the old miser, and always arrived intime upon the field of battle. The three des Grassins likewise hadtheir adherents, their cousins, their faithful allies. On the Cruchotside the abbe, the Talleyrand of the family, well backed-up by hisbrother the notary, sharply contested every inch of ground with hisfemale adversary, and tried to obtain the rich heiress for his nephewthe president.

°°°°This secret warfare between the Cruchots and des Grassins, the prizethereof being the hand in marriage of Eugenie Grandet, kept thevarious social circles of Saumur in violent agitation. WouldMademoiselle Grandet marry Monsieur le president or Monsieur Adolphedes Grassins? To this problem some replied that Monsieur Grandet wouldnever give his daughter to the one or to the other. The old cooper,eaten up with ambition, was looking, they said, for a peer of France,to whom an income of three hundred thousand francs would make all thepast, present, and future casks of the Grandets acceptable. Othersreplied that Monsieur and Madame des Grassins were nobles, andexceedingly rich; that Adolphe was a personable young fellow; and thatunless the old man had a nephew of the pope at his beck and call, sucha suitable alliance ought to satisfy a man who came from nothing,--aman whom Saumur remembered with an adze in his hand, and who had,moreover, worn the /bonnet rouge/. Certain wise heads called attentionto the fact that Monsieur Cruchot de Bonfons had the right of entry tothe house at all times, whereas his rival was received only onSundays. Others, however, maintained that Madame des Grassins was moreintimate with the women of the house of Grandet than the Cruchotswere, and could put into their minds certain ideas which would lead,sooner or later, to success. To this the former retorted that the AbbeCruchot was the most insinuating man in the world: pit a woman againsta monk, and the struggle was even. "It is diamond cut diamond," said aSaumur wit.

°°°°The oldest inhabitants, wiser than their fellows, declared that theGrandets knew better than to let the property go out of the family,and that Mademoiselle Eugenie Grandet of Saumur would be married tothe son of Monsieur Grandet of Paris, a wealthy wholesale wine-merchant. To this the Cruchotines and the Grassinists replied: "In thefirst place, the two brothers have seen each other only twice inthirty years; and next, Monsieur Grandet of Paris has ambitiousdesigns for his son. He is mayor of an arrondissement, a deputy,colonel of the National Guard, judge in the commercial courts; hedisowns the Grandets of Saumur, and means to ally himself with someducal family,--ducal under favor of Napoleon." In short, was thereanything not said of an heiress who was talked of through acircumference of fifty miles, and even in the public conveyances fromAngers to Blois, inclusively!

°°°°At the beginning of 1811, the Cruchotines won a signal advantage overthe Grassinists. The estate of Froidfond, remarkable for its park, itsmansion, its farms, streams, ponds, forests, and worth about threemillions, was put up for sale by the young Marquis de Froidfond, whowas obliged to liquidate his possessions. Maitre Cruchot, thepresident, and the abbe, aided by their adherents, were able toprevent the sale of the estate in little lots. The notary concluded abargain with the young man for the whole property, payable in gold,persuading him that suits without number would have to be broughtagainst the purchasers of small lots before he could get the money forthem; it was better, therefore, to sell the whole to Monsieur Grandet,who was solvent and able to pay for the estate in ready money. Thefine marquisate of Froidfond was accordingly conveyed down the gulletof Monsieur Grandet, who, to the great astonishment of Saumur, paidfor it, under proper discount, with the usual formalities.This affair echoed from Nantes to Orleans. Monsieur Grandet tookadvantage of a cart returning by way of Froidfond to go and see hischateau. Having cast a master's eye over the whole property, hereturned to Saumur, satisfied that he had invested his money at fiveper cent, and seized by the stupendous thought of extending andincreasing the marquisate of Froidfond by concentrating all hisproperty there. Then, to fill up his coffers, now nearly empty, heresolved to thin out his woods and his forests, and to sell off thepoplars in the meadows.

°°°°II

°°°°It is now easy to understand the full meaning of the term, "the houseof Monsieur Grandet,"--that cold, silent, pallid dwelling, standingabove the town and sheltered by the ruins of the ramparts. The twopillars and the arch, which made the porte-cochere on which the dooropened, were built, like the house itself, of tufa,--a white stonepeculiar to the shores of the Loire, and so soft that it lasts hardlymore than two centuries. Numberless irregular holes, capriciouslybored or eaten out by the inclemency of the weather, gave anappearance of the vermiculated stonework of French architecture to thearch and the side walls of this entrance, which bore some resemblanceto the gateway of a jail. Above the arch was a long bas-relief, inhard stone, representing the four seasons, the faces already crumblingaway and blackened. This bas-relief was surmounted by a projectingplinth, upon which a variety of chance growths had sprung up,--yellowpellitory, bindweed, convolvuli, nettles, plantain, and even a littlecherry-tree, already grown to some height.

°°°°The door of the archway was made of solid oak, brown, shrunken, andsplit in many places; though frail in appearance, it was firmly heldin place by a system of iron bolts arranged in symmetrical patterns. Asmall square grating, with close bars red with rust, filled up themiddle panel and made, as it were, a motive for the knocker, fastenedto it by a ring, which struck upon the grinning head of a huge nail.This knocker, of the oblong shape and kind which our ancestors called/jaquemart/, looked like a huge note of exclamation; an antiquary whoexamined it attentively might have found indications of the figure,essentially burlesque, which it once represented, and which long usagehad now effaced. Through this little grating--intended in olden timesfor the recognition of friends in times of civil war--inquisitivepersons could perceive, at the farther end of the dark and slimyvault, a few broken steps which led to a garden, picturesquely shut inby walls that were thick and damp, and through which oozed a moisturethat nourished tufts of sickly herbage. These walls were the ruins ofthe ramparts, under which ranged the gardens of several neighboringhouses.

°°°°The most important room on the ground-floor of the house was a largehall, entered directly from beneath the vault of the porte-cochere.Few people know the importance of a hall in the little towns of Anjou,Touraine, and Berry. The hall is at one and the same time antechamber,salon, office, boudoir, and dining-room; it is the theatre of domesticlife, the common living-room. There the barber of the neighborhoodcame, twice a year, to cut Monsieur Grandet's hair; there the farmers,the cure, the under-prefect, and the miller's boy came on business.This room, with two windows looking on the street, was entirely ofwood. Gray panels with ancient mouldings covered the walls from top tobottom; the ceiling showed all its beams, which were likewise paintedgray, while the space between them had been washed over in white, nowyellow with age. An old brass clock, inlaid with arabesques, adornedthe mantel of the ill-cut white stone chimney-piece, above which was agreenish mirror, whose edges, bevelled to show the thickness of theglass, reflected a thread of light the whole length of a gothic framein damascened steel-work. The two copper-gilt candelabra whichdecorated the corners of the chimney-piece served a double purpose: bytaking off the side-branches, each of which held a socket, the mainstem--which was fastened to a pedestal of bluish marble tipped withcopper--made a candlestick for one candle, which was sufficient forordinary occasions. The chairs, antique in shape, were covered withtapestry representing the fables of La Fontaine; it was necessary,however, to know that writer well to guess at the subjects, for thefaded colors and the figures, blurred by much darning, were difficultto distinguish.

°°°°At the four corners of the hall were closets, or rather buffets,surmounted by dirty shelves. An old card-table in marquetry, of whichthe upper part was a chess-board, stood in the space between the twowindows. Above this table was an oval barometer with a black borderenlivened with gilt bands, on which the flies had so licentiouslydisported themselves that the gilding had become problematical. On thepanel opposite to the chimney-piece were two portraits in pastel,supposed to represent the grandfather of Madame Grandet, old Monsieurde la Bertelliere, as a lieutenant in the French guard, and thedeceased Madame Gentillet in the guise of a shepherdess. The windowswere draped with curtains of red /gros de Tours/ held back by silkencords with ecclesiastical tassels. This luxurious decoration, littlein keeping with the habits of Monsieur Grandet, had been, togetherwith the steel pier-glass, the tapestries, and the buffets, which wereof rose-wood, included in the purchase of the house.

°°°°By the window nearest to the door stood a straw chair, whose legs wereraised on castors to lift its occupant, Madame Grandet, to a heightfrom which she could see the passers-by. A work-table of stainedcherry-wood filled up the embrasure, and the little armchair ofEugenie Grandet stood beside it. In this spot the lives had flowedpeacefully onward for fifteen years, in a round of constant work fromthe month of April to the month of November. On the first day of thelatter month they took their winter station by the chimney. Not untilthat day did Grandet permit a fire to be lighted; and on the thirty-first of March it was extinguished, without regard either to thechills of the early spring or to those of a wintry autumn. A foot-warmer, filled with embers from the kitchen fire, which la GrandeNanon contrived to save for them, enabled Madame and MademoiselleGrandet to bear the chilly mornings and evenings of April and October.Mother and daughter took charge of the family linen, and spent theirdays so conscientiously upon a labor properly that of working-women,that if Eugenie wished to embroider a collar for her mother she wasforced to take the time from sleep, and deceive her father to obtainthe necessary light. For a long time the miser had given out thetallow candle to his daughter and la Grande Nanon just as he gave outevery morning the bread and other necessaries for the dailyconsumption.

°°°°La Grande Nanon was perhaps the only human being capable of acceptingwillingly the despotism of her master. The whole town envied Monsieurand Madame Grandet the possession of her. La Grande Nanon, so calledon account of her height, which was five feet eight inches, had livedwith Monsieur Grandet for thirty-five years. Though she received onlysixty francs a year in wages, she was supposed to be one of therichest serving-women in Saumur. Those sixty francs, accumulatingthrough thirty-five years, had recently enabled her to invest fourthousand francs in an annuity with Maitre Cruchot. This result of herlong and persistent economy seemed gigantic. Every servant in thetown, seeing that the poor sexagenarian was sure of bread for her oldage, was jealous of her, and never thought of the hard slavery throughwhich it had been won.

°°°°At twenty-two years of age the poor girl had been unable to find asituation, so repulsive was her face to almost every one. Yet thefeeling was certainly unjust: the face would have been much admired onthe shoulders of a grenadier of the guard; but all things, so theysay, should be in keeping. Forced to leave a farm where she kept thecows, because the dwelling-house was burned down, she came to Saumurto find a place, full of the robust courage that shrinks from nolabor. Le Pere Grandet was at that time thinking of marriage and aboutto set up his household. He espied the girl, rejected as she was fromdoor to door. A good judge of corporeal strength in his trade as acooper, he guessed the work that might be got out of a female creatureshaped like a Hercules, as firm on her feet as an oak sixty years oldon its roots, strong in the hips, square in the back, with the handsof a cartman and an honesty as sound as her unblemished virtue.Neither the warts which adorned her martial visage, nor the red-bricktints of her skin, nor the sinewy arms, nor the ragged garments of laGrande Nanon, dismayed the cooper, who was at that time still of anage when the heart shudders. He fed, shod, and clothed the poor girl,gave her wages, and put her to work without treating her too roughly.Seeing herself thus welcomed, la Grande Nanon wept secretly tears ofjoy, and attached herself in all sincerity to her master, who fromthat day ruled her and worked her with feudal authority. Nanon dideverything. She cooked, she made the lye, she washed the linen in theLoire and brought it home on her shoulders; she got up early, she wentto bed late; she prepared the food of the vine-dressers during theharvest, kept watch upon the market-people, protected the property ofher master like a faithful dog, and even, full of blind confidence,obeyed without a murmur his most absurd exactions.

°°°°In the famous year of 1811, when the grapes were gathered withunheard-of difficulty, Grandet resolved to give Nanon his old watch,--the first present he had made her during twenty years of service.Though he turned over to her his old shoes (which fitted her), it isimpossible to consider that quarterly benefit as a gift, for the shoeswere always thoroughly worn-out. Necessity had made the poor girl soniggardly that Grandet had grown to love her as we love a dog, andNanon had let him fasten a spiked collar round her throat, whosespikes no longer pricked her. If Grandet cut the bread with rather toomuch parsimony, she made no complaint; she gaily shared the hygienicbenefits derived from the severe regime of the household, in which noone was ever ill. Nanon was, in fact, one of the family; she laughedwhen Grandet laughed, felt gloomy or chilly, warmed herself, andtoiled as he did. What pleasant compensations there were in suchequality! Never did the master have occasion to find fault with theservant for pilfering the grapes, nor for the plums and nectarineseaten under the trees. "Come, fall-to, Nanon!" he would say in yearswhen the branches bent under the fruit and the farmers were obliged togive it to the pigs.

°°°°To the poor peasant who in her youth had earned nothing but harshtreatment, to the pauper girl picked up by charity, Grandet'sambiguous laugh was like a sunbeam. Moreover, Nanon's simple heart andnarrow head could hold only one feeling and one idea. For thirty-fiveyears she had never ceased to see herself standing before the wood-yard of Monsieur Grandet, ragged and barefooted, and to hear him say:"What do you want, young one?" Her gratitude was ever new. SometimesGrandet, reflecting that the poor creature had never heard aflattering word, that she was ignorant of all the tender sentimentsinspired by women, that she might some day appear before the throne ofGod even more chaste than the Virgin Mary herself,--Grandet, struckwith pity, would say as he looked at her, "Poor Nanon!" Theexclamation was always followed by an undefinable look cast upon himin return by the old servant. The words, uttered from time to time,formed a chain of friendship that nothing ever parted, and to whicheach exclamation added a link. Such compassion arising in the heart ofthe miser, and accepted gratefully by the old spinster, had somethinginconceivably horrible about it. This cruel pity, recalling, as itdid, a thousand pleasures to the heart of the old cooper, was forNanon the sum total of happiness. Who does not likewise say, "PoorNanon!" God will recognize his angels by the inflexions of theirvoices and by their secret sighs.

°°°°There were very many households in Saumur where the servants werebetter treated, but where the masters received far less satisfactionin return. Thus it was often said: "What have the Grandets ever doneto make their Grande Nanon so attached to them? She would go throughfire and water for their sake!" Her kitchen, whose barred windowslooked into the court, was always clean, neat, cold,--a true miser'skitchen, where nothing went to waste. When Nanon had washed herdishes, locked up the remains of the dinner, and put out her fire, sheleft the kitchen, which was separated by a passage from the living-room, and went to spin hemp beside her masters. One tallow candlesufficed the family for the evening. The servant slept at the end ofthe passage in a species of closet lighted only by a fan-light. Herrobust health enabled her to live in this hole with impunity; thereshe could hear the slightest noise through the deep silence whichreigned night and day in that dreary house. Like a watch-dog, sheslept with one ear open, and took her rest with a mind alert.A description of the other parts of the dwelling will be foundconnected with the events of this history, though the foregoing sketchof the hall, where the whole luxury of the household appears, mayenable the reader to surmise the nakedness of the upper floors.In 1819, at the beginning of an evening in the middle of November, laGrande Nanon lighted the fire for the first time. The autumn had beenvery fine. This particular day was a fete-day well known to theCruchotines and the Grassinists. The six antagonists, armed at allpoints, were making ready to meet at the Grandets and surpass eachother in testimonials of friendship. That morning all Saumur had seenMadame and Mademoiselle Grandet, accompanied by Nanon, on their way tohear Mass at the parish church, and every one remembered that the daywas the anniversary of Mademoiselle Eugenie's birth. Calculating thehour at which the family dinner would be over, Maitre Cruchot, theAbbe Cruchot, and Monsieur C. de Bonfons hastened to arrive before thedes Grassins, and be the first to pay their compliments toMademoiselle Eugenie. All three brought enormous bouquets, gathered intheir little green-houses. The stalks of the flowers which thepresident intended to present were ingeniously wound round with awhite satin ribbon adorned with gold fringe. In the morning MonsieurGrandet, following his usual custom on the days that commemorated thebirth and the fete of Eugenie, went to her bedside and solemnlypresented her with his paternal gift,--which for the last thirteenyears had consisted regularly of a curious gold-piece. Madame Grandetgave her daughter a winter dress or a summer dress, as the case mightbe. These two dresses and the gold-pieces, of which she received twoothers on New Year's day and on her father's fete-day, gave Eugenie alittle revenue of a hundred crowns or thereabouts, which Grandet lovedto see her amass. Was it not putting his money from one strong-box toanother, and, as it were, training the parsimony of his heiress? fromwhom he sometimes demanded an account of her treasure (formerlyincreased by the gifts of the Bertellieres), saying: "It is to be yourmarriage dozen."

°°°°The "marriage dozen" is an old custom sacredly preserved and still inforce in many parts of central France. In Berry and in Anjou, when ayoung girl marries, her family, or that of the husband, must give hera purse, in which they place, according to their means, twelve pieces,or twelve dozen pieces, or twelve hundred pieces of gold. The poorestshepherd-girl never marries without her dozen, be it only a dozencoppers. They still tell in Issoudun of a certain "dozen" presented toa rich heiress, which contained a hundred and forty-four /portugaisesd'or/. Pope Clement VII., uncle of Catherine de' Medici, gave her whenhe married her to Henri II. a dozen antique gold medals of pricelessvalue.

°°°°During dinner the father, delighted to see his Eugenie looking well ina new gown, exclaimed: "As it is Eugenie's birthday let us have afire; it will be a good omen."

°°°°"Mademoiselle will be married this year, that's certain," said laGrande Nanon, carrying away the remains of the goose,--the pheasant oftradesmen.

°°°°"I don't see any one suitable for her in Saumur," said Madame Grandet,glancing at her husband with a timid look which, considering heryears, revealed the conjugal slavery under which the poor womanlanguished.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter and exclaimed gaily,--

°°°°"She is twenty-three years old to-day, the child; we must soon beginto think of it."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother silently exchanged a glance of intelligence.Madame Grandet was a dry, thin woman, as yellow as a quince, awkward,slow, one of those women who are born to be down-trodden. She had bigbones, a big nose, a big forehead, big eyes, and presented at firstsight a vague resemblance to those mealy fruits that have neithersavor nor succulence. Her teeth were black and few in number, hermouth was wrinkled, her chin long and pointed. She was an excellentwoman, a true la Bertelliere. L'abbe Cruchot found occasionalopportunity to tell her that she had not done ill; and she believedhim. Angelic sweetness, the resignation of an insect tortured bychildren, a rare piety, a good heart, an unalterable equanimity ofsoul, made her universally pitied and respected. Her husband nevergave her more than six francs at a time for her personal expenses.Ridiculous as it may seem, this woman, who by her own fortune and hervarious inheritances brought Pere Grandet more than three hundredthousand francs, had always felt so profoundly humiliated by herdependence and the slavery in which she lived, against which thegentleness of her spirit prevented her from revolting, that she hadnever asked for one penny or made a single remark on the deeds whichMaitre Cruchot brought for her signature. This foolish secret pride,this nobility of soul perpetually misunderstood and wounded byGrandet, ruled the whole conduct of the wife.

°°°°Madame Grandet was attired habitually in a gown of greenish levantinesilk, endeavoring to make it last nearly a year; with it she wore alarge kerchief of white cotton cloth, a bonnet made of plaited strawssewn together, and almost always a black-silk apron. As she seldomleft the house she wore out very few shoes. She never asked anythingfor herself. Grandet, seized with occasional remorse when heremembered how long a time had elapsed since he gave her the last sixfrancs, always stipulated for the "wife's pin-money" when he sold hisyearly vintage. The four or five louis presented by the Belgian or theDutchman who purchased the wine were the chief visible signs of MadameGrandet's annual revenues. But after she had received the five louis,her husband would often say to her, as though their purse were held incommon: "Can you lend me a few sous?" and the poor woman, glad to beable to do something for a man whom her confessor held up to her asher lord and master, returned him in the course of the winter severalcrowns out of the "pin-money." When Grandet drew from his pocket thefive-franc piece which he allowed monthly for the minor expenses,--thread, needles, and toilet,--of his daughter, he never failed to sayas he buttoned his breeches' pocket: "And you, mother, do you wantanything?"

°°°°"My friend," Madame Grandet would answer, moved by a sense of maternaldignity, "we will see about that later."

°°°°Wasted dignity! Grandet thought himself very generous to his wife.Philosophers who meet the like of Nanon, of Madame Grandet, ofEugenie, have surely a right to say that irony is at the bottom of theways of Providence.

°°°°After the dinner at which for the first time allusion had been made toEugenie's marriage, Nanon went to fetch a bottle of black-currantratafia from Monsieur Grandet's bed-chamber, and nearly fell as shecame down the stairs.

°°°°"You great stupid!" said her master; "are you going to tumble aboutlike other people, hey?"

°°°°"Monsieur, it was that step on your staircase which has given way.""She is right," said Madame Grandet; "it ought to have been mendedlong ago. Yesterday Eugenie nearly twisted her ankle."

°°°°"Here," said Grandet to Nanon, seeing that she looked quite pale, "asit is Eugenie's birthday, and you came near falling, take a littleglass of ratafia to set you right."

°°°°"Faith! I've earned it," said Nanon; "most people would have brokenthe bottle; but I'd sooner have broken my elbow holding it up high.""Poor Nanon!" said Grandet, filling a glass.

°°°°"Did you hurt yourself?" asked Eugenie, looking kindly at her."No, I didn't fall; I threw myself back on my haunches."

°°°°"Well! as it is Eugenie's birthday," said Grandet, "I'll have the stepmended. You people don't know how to set your foot in the corner wherethe wood is still firm."

°°°°Grandet took the candle, leaving his wife, daughter, and servantwithout any other light than that from the hearth, where the flameswere lively, and went into the bakehouse to fetch planks, nails, andtools.

°°°°"Can I help you?" cried Nanon, hearing him hammer on the stairs."No, no! I'm an old hand at it," answered the former cooper.At the moment when Grandet was mending his worm-eaten staircase andwhistling with all his might, in remembrance of the days of his youth,the three Cruchots knocked at the door.

°°°°"Is it you, Monsieur Cruchot?" asked Nanon, peeping through the littlegrating.

°°°°"Yes," answered the president.

°°°°Nanon opened the door, and the light from the hearth, reflected on theceiling, enabled the three Cruchots to find their way into the room."Ha! you've come a-greeting," said Nanon, smelling the flowers."Excuse me, messieurs," cried Grandet, recognizing their voices; "I'llbe with you in a moment. I'm not proud; I am patching up a step on mystaircase."

°°°°"Go on, go on, Monsieur Grandet; a man's house is his castle," saidthe president sententiously.

°°°°Madame and Mademoiselle Grandet rose. The president, profiting by thedarkness, said to Eugenie:

°°°°"Will you permit me, mademoiselle, to wish you, on this the day ofyour birth, a series of happy years and the continuance of the healthwhich you now enjoy?"

°°°°He offered her a huge bouquet of choice flowers which were rare inSaumur; then, taking the heiress by the elbows, he kissed her on eachside of her neck with a complacency that made her blush. Thepresident, who looked like a rusty iron nail, felt that his courtshipwas progressing.

°°°°"Don't stand on ceremony," said Grandet, entering. "How well you dothings on fete-days, Monsieur le president!"

°°°°"When it concerns mademoiselle," said the abbe, armed with his ownbouquet, "every day is a fete-day for my nephew."

°°°°The abbe kissed Eugenie's hand. As for Maitre Cruchot, he boldlykissed her on both cheeks, remarking: "How we sprout up, to be sure!Every year is twelve months."

°°°°As he replaced the candlestick beside the clock, Grandet, who neverforgot his own jokes, and repeated them to satiety when he thoughtthem funny, said,--

°°°°"As this is Eugenie's birthday let us illuminate."

°°°°He carefully took off the branches of the candelabra, put a socket oneach pedestal, took from Nanon a new tallow candle with paper twistedround the end of it, put it into the hollow, made it firm, lit it, andthen sat down beside his wife, looking alternately at his friends, hisdaughter, and the two candles. The Abbe Cruchot, a plump, puffy littleman, with a red wig plastered down and a face like an old femalegambler, said as he stretched out his feet, well shod in stout shoeswith silver buckles: "The des Grassins have not come?"

°°°°"Not yet," said Grandet.

°°°°"But are they coming?" asked the old notary, twisting his face, whichhad as many holes as a collander, into a queer grimace.

°°°°"I think so," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Are your vintages all finished?" said Monsieur de Bonfons to Grandet."Yes, all of them," said the old man, rising to walk up and down theroom, his chest swelling with pride as he said the words, "all ofthem." Through the door of the passage which led to the kitchen he sawla Grande Nanon sitting beside her fire with a candle and preparing tospin there, so as not to intrude among the guests.

°°°°"Nanon," he said, going into the passage, "put out that fire and thatcandle, and come and sit with us. Pardieu! the hall is big enough forall."

°°°°"But monsieur, you are to have the great people."

°°°°"Are not you as good as they? They are descended from Adam, and so areyou."

°°°°Grandet came back to the president and said,--

°°°°"Have you sold your vintage?"

°°°°"No, not I; I shall keep it. If the wine is good this year, it will bebetter two years hence. The proprietors, you know, have made anagreement to keep up the price; and this year the Belgians won't getthe better of us. Suppose they are sent off empty-handed for once,faith! they'll come back."

°°°°"Yes, but let us mind what we are about," said Grandet in a tone whichmade the president tremble.

°°°°"Is he driving some bargain?" thought Cruchot.

°°°°At this moment the knocker announced the des Grassins family, andtheir arrival interrupted a conversation which had begun betweenMadame Grandet and the abbe.

°°°°Madame des Grassins was one of those lively, plump little women, withpink-and-white skins, who, thanks to the claustral calm of theprovinces and the habits of a virtuous life, keep their youth untilthey are past forty. She was like the last rose of autumn,--pleasantto the eye, though the petals have a certain frostiness, and theirperfume is slight. She dressed well, got her fashions from Paris, setthe tone to Saumur, and gave parties. Her husband, formerly aquartermaster in the Imperial guard, who had been desperately woundedat Austerlitz, and had since retired, still retained, in spite of hisrespect for Grandet, the seeming frankness of an old soldier."Good evening, Grandet," he said, holding out his hand and affecting asort of superiority, with which he always crushed the Cruchots."Mademoiselle," he added, turning to Eugenie, after bowing to MadameGrandet, "you are always beautiful and good, and truly I do not knowwhat to wish you." So saying, he offered her a little box which hisservant had brought and which contained a Cape heather,--a flowerlately imported into Europe and very rare.

°°°°Madame des Grassins kissed Eugenie very affectionately, pressed herhand, and said: "Adolphe wishes to make you my little offering."A tall, blond young man, pale and slight, with tolerable manners andseemingly rather shy, although he had just spent eight or ten thousandfrancs over his allowance in Paris, where he had been sent to studylaw, now came forward and kissed Eugenie on both cheeks, offering hera workbox with utensils in silver-gilt,--mere show-case trumpery, inspite of the monogram E.G. in gothic letters rather well engraved,which belonged properly to something in better taste. As she openedit, Eugenie experienced one of those unexpected and perfect delightswhich make a young girl blush and quiver and tremble with pleasure.She turned her eyes to her father as if to ask permission to acceptit, and Monsieur Grandet replied: "Take it, my daughter," in a tonewhich would have made an actor illustrious.

°°°°The three Cruchots felt crushed as they saw the joyous, animated lookcast upon Adolphe des Grassins by the heiress, to whom such richeswere unheard-of. Monsieur des Grassins offered Grandet a pinch ofsnuff, took one himself, shook off the grains as they fell on theribbon of the Legion of honor which was attached to the button-hole ofhis blue surtout; then he looked at the Cruchots with an air thatseemed to say, "Parry that thrust if you can!" Madame des Grassinscast her eyes on the blue vases which held the Cruchot bouquets,looking at the enemy's gifts with the pretended interest of asatirical woman. At this delicate juncture the Abbe Cruchot left thecompany seated in a circle round the fire and joined Grandet at thelower end of the hall. As the two men reached the embrasure of thefarthest window the priest said in the miser's ear: "Those peoplethrow money out of the windows."

°°°°"What does that matter if it gets into my cellar?" retorted the oldwine-grower.

°°°°"If you want to give gilt scissors to your daughter, you have themeans," said the abbe.

°°°°"I give her something better than scissors," answered Grandet."My nephew is a blockhead," thought the abbe as he looked at thepresident, whose rumpled hair added to the ill grace of his browncountenance. "Couldn't he have found some little trifle which costmoney?"

°°°°"We will join you at cards, Madame Grandet," said Madame des Grassins."We might have two tables, as we are all here."

°°°°"As it is Eugenie's birthday you had better play loto all together,"said Pere Grandet: "the two young ones can join"; and the old cooper,who never played any game, motioned to his daughter and Adolphe."Come, Nanon, set the tables."

°°°°"We will help you, Mademoiselle Nanon," said Madame des Grassinsgaily, quite joyous at the joy she had given Eugenie.

°°°°"I have never in my life been so pleased," the heiress said to her; "Ihave never seen anything so pretty."

°°°°"Adolphe brought it from Paris, and he chose it," Madame des Grassinswhispered in her ear.

°°°°"Go on! go on! damned intriguing thing!" thought the president. "Ifyou ever have a suit in court, you or your husband, it shall go hardwith you."

°°°°The notary, sitting in his corner, looked calmly at the abbe, sayingto himself: "The des Grassins may do what they like; my property andmy brother's and that of my nephew amount in all to eleven hundredthousand francs. The des Grassins, at the most, have not half that;besides, they have a daughter. They may give what presents they like;heiress and presents too will be ours one of these days."At half-past eight in the evening the two card-tables were set out.Madame des Grassins succeeded in putting her son beside Eugenie. Theactors in this scene, so full of interest, commonplace as it seems,were provided with bits of pasteboard striped in many colors andnumbered, and with counters of blue glass, and they appeared to belistening to the jokes of the notary, who never drew a number withoutmaking a remark, while in fact they were all thinking of MonsieurGrandet's millions. The old cooper, with inward self-conceit, wascontemplating the pink feathers and the fresh toilet of Madame desGrassins, the martial head of the banker, the faces of Adolphe, thepresident, the abbe, and the notary, saying to himself:--"They are all after my money. Hey! neither the one nor the other shallhave my daughter; but they are useful--useful as harpoons to fishwith."

°°°°This family gaiety in the old gray room dimly lighted by two tallowcandles; this laughter, accompanied by the whirr of Nanon's spinning-wheel, sincere only upon the lips of Eugenie or her mother; thistriviality mingled with important interests; this young girl, who,like certain birds made victims of the price put upon them, was nowlured and trapped by proofs of friendship of which she was the dupe,--all these things contributed to make the scene a melancholy comedy. Isit not, moreover, a drama of all times and all places, though herebrought down to its simplest expression? The figure of Grandet,playing his own game with the false friendship of the two families andgetting enormous profits from it, dominates the scene and throws lightupon it. The modern god,--the only god in whom faith is preserved,--money, is here, in all its power, manifested in a single countenance.The tender sentiments of life hold here but a secondary place; onlythe three pure, simple hearts of Nanon, of Eugenie, and of her motherwere inspired by them. And how much of ignorance there was in thesimplicity of these poor women! Eugenie and her mother knew nothing ofGrandet's wealth; they could only estimate the things of life by theglimmer of their pale ideas, and they neither valued nor despisedmoney, because they were accustomed to do without it. Their feelings,bruised, though they did not know it, but ever-living, were the secretspring of their existence, and made them curious exceptions in themidst of these other people whose lives were purely material.Frightful condition of the human race! there is no one of its joysthat does not come from some species of ignorance.

°°°°At the moment when Madame Grandet had won a loto of sixteen sous,--thelargest ever pooled in that house,--and while la Grande Nanon waslaughing with delight as she watched madame pocketing her riches, theknocker resounded on the house-door with such a noise that the womenall jumped in their chairs.

°°°°"There is no man in Saumur who would knock like that," said thenotary.

°°°°"How can they bang in that way!" exclaimed Nanon; "do they want tobreak in the door?"

°°°°"Who the devil is it?" cried Grandet.

°°°°III

°°°°Nanon took one of the candles and went to open the door, followed byher master.

°°°°"Grandet! Grandet!" cried his wife, moved by a sudden impulse of fear,and running to the door of the room.

°°°°All the players looked at each other.

°°°°"Suppose we all go?" said Monsieur des Grassins; "that knock strikesme as evil-intentioned."

°°°°Hardly was Monsieur des Grassins allowed to see the figure of a youngman, accompanied by a porter from the coach-office carrying two largetrunks and dragging a carpet-bag after him, than Monsieur Grandetturned roughly on his wife and said,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, go back to your loto; leave me to speak withmonsieur."

°°°°Then he pulled the door quickly to, and the excited players returnedto their seats, but did not continue the game.

°°°°"Is it any one belonging to Saumur, Monsieur des Grassins?" asked hiswife.

°°°°"No, it is a traveller."

°°°°"He must have come from Paris."

°°°°"Just so," said the notary, pulling out his watch, which was twoinches thick and looked like a Dutch man-of-war; "it's nine o'clock;the diligence of the Grand Bureau is never late."

°°°°"Is the gentleman young?" inquired the Abbe Cruchot.

°°°°"Yes," answered Monsieur des Grassins, "and he has brought luggagewhich must weigh nearly three tons."

°°°°"Nanon does not come back," said Eugenie.

°°°°"It must be one of your relations," remarked the president."Let us go on with our game," said Madame Grandet gently. "I know fromMonsieur Grandet's tone of voice that he is annoyed; perhaps he wouldnot like to find us talking of his affairs."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said Adolphe to his neighbor, "it is no doubt yourcousin Grandet,--a very good-looking young man; I met him at the ballof Monsieur de Nucingen." Adolphe did not go on, for his mother trodon his toes; and then, asking him aloud for two sous to put on herstake, she whispered: "Will you hold your tongue, you great goose!"At this moment Grandet returned, without la Grande Nanon, whose steps,together with those of the porter, echoed up the staircase; and he wasfollowed by the traveller who had excited such curiosity and so filledthe lively imaginations of those present that his arrival at thisdwelling, and his sudden fall into the midst of this assembly, canonly be likened to that of a snail into a beehive, or the introductionof a peacock into some village poultry-yard.

°°°°"Sit down near the fire," said Grandet.

°°°°Before seating himself, the young stranger saluted the assembledcompany very gracefully. The men rose to answer by a courteousinclination, and the women made a ceremonious bow.

°°°°"You are cold, no doubt, monsieur," said Madame Grandet; "you have,perhaps, travelled from--"

°°°°"Just like all women!" said the old wine-grower, looking up from aletter he was reading. "Do let monsieur rest himself!"

°°°°"But, father, perhaps monsieur would like to take something," saidEugenie.

°°°°"He has got a tongue," said the old man sternly.

°°°°The stranger was the only person surprised by this scene; all theothers were well-used to the despotic ways of the master. However,after the two questions and the two replies had been exchanged, thenewcomer rose, turned his back towards the fire, lifted one foot so asto warm the sole of its boot, and said to Eugenie,--

°°°°"Thank you, my cousin, but I dined at Tours. And," he added, lookingat Grandet, "I need nothing; I am not even tired."

°°°°"Monsieur has come from the capital?" asked Madame des Grassins.Monsieur Charles,--such was the name of the son of Monsieur Grandet ofParis,--hearing himself addressed, took a little eye-glass, suspendedby a chain from his neck, applied it to his right eye to examine whatwas on the table, and also the persons sitting round it. He ogledMadame des Grassins with much impertinence, and said to her, after hehad observed all he wished,--

°°°°"Yes, madame. You are playing at loto, aunt," he added. "Do not let meinterrupt you, I beg; go on with your game: it is too amusing toleave."

°°°°"I was certain it was the cousin," thought Madame des Grassins,casting repeated glances at him.

°°°°"Forty-seven!" cried the old abbe. "Mark it down, Madame des Grassins.Isn't that your number?"

°°°°Monsieur des Grassins put a counter on his wife's card, who satwatching first the cousin from Paris and then Eugenie, withoutthinking of her loto, a prey to mournful presentiments. From time totime the young the heiress glanced furtively at her cousin, and thebanker's wife easily detected a /crescendo/ of surprise and curiosityin her mind.

°°°°Monsieur Charles Grandet, a handsome young man of twenty-two,presented at this moment a singular contrast to the worthyprovincials, who, considerably disgusted by his aristocratic manners,were all studying him with sarcastic intent. This needs anexplanation. At twenty-two, young people are still so near childhoodthat they often conduct themselves childishly. In all probability, outof every hundred of them fully ninety-nine would have behavedprecisely as Monsieur Charles Grandet was now behaving.

°°°°Some days earlier than this his father had told him to go and spendseveral months with his uncle at Saumur. Perhaps Monsieur Grandet wasthinking of Eugenie. Charles, sent for the first time in his life intothe provinces, took a fancy to make his appearance with thesuperiority of a man of fashion, to reduce the whole arrondissement todespair by his luxury, and to make his visit an epoch, importing intothose country regions all the refinements of Parisian life. In short,to explain it in one word, he mean to pass more time at Saumur inbrushing his nails than he ever thought of doing in Paris, and toassume the extra nicety and elegance of dress which a young man offashion often lays aside for a certain negligence which in itself isnot devoid of grace. Charles therefore brought with him a completehunting-costume, the finest gun, the best hunting-knife in theprettiest sheath to be found in all Paris. He brought his wholecollection of waistcoats. They were of all kinds,--gray, black, white,scarabaeus-colored: some were shot with gold, some spangled, some/chined/; some were double-breasted and crossed like a shawl, otherswere straight in the collar; some had turned-over collars, somebuttoned up to the top with gilt buttons. He brought every variety ofcollar and cravat in fashion at that epoch. He brought two ofBuisson's coats and all his finest linen He brought his pretty goldtoilet-set,--a present from his mother. He brought all his dandyknick-knacks, not forgetting a ravishing little desk presented to himby the most amiable of women,--amiable for him, at least,--a fine ladywhom he called Annette and who at this moment was travelling,matrimonially and wearily, in Scotland, a victim to certain suspicionswhich required a passing sacrifice of happiness; in the desk was muchpretty note-paper on which to write to her once a fortnight.In short, it was as complete a cargo of Parisian frivolities as it waspossible for him to get together,--a collection of all the implementsof husbandry with which the youth of leisure tills his life, from thelittle whip which helps to begin a duel, to the handsomely chasedpistols which end it. His father having told him to travel alone andmodestly, he had taken the coupe of the diligence all to himself,rather pleased at not having to damage a delightful travelling-carriage ordered for a journey on which he was to meet his Annette,the great lady who, etc.,--whom he intended to rejoin at Baden in thefollowing June. Charles expected to meet scores of people at hisuncle's house, to hunt in his uncle's forests,--to live, in short, theusual chateau life; he did not know that his uncle was in Saumur, andhad only inquired about him incidentally when asking the way toFroidfond. Hearing that he was in town, he supposed that he shouldfind him in a suitable mansion.

°°°°In order that he might make a becoming first appearance before hisuncle either at Saumur or at Froidfond, he had put on his most eleganttravelling attire, simple yet exquisite,--"adorable," to use the wordwhich in those days summed up the special perfections of a man or athing. At Tours a hairdresser had re-curled his beautiful chestnutlocks; there he changed his linen and put on a black satin cravat,which, combined with a round shirt-collar, framed his fair and smilingcountenance agreeably. A travelling great-coat, only half buttoned up,nipped in his waist and disclosed a cashmere waistcoat crossed infront, beneath which was another waistcoat of white material. Hiswatch, negligently slipped into a pocket, was fastened by a short goldchain to a buttonhole. His gray trousers, buttoned up at the sides,were set off at the seams with patterns of black silk embroidery. Hegracefully twirled a cane, whose chased gold knob did not mar thefreshness of his gray gloves. And to complete all, his cap was inexcellent taste. None but a Parisian, and a Parisian of the upperspheres, could thus array himself without appearing ridiculous; noneother could give the harmony of self-conceit to all these fopperies,which were carried off, however, with a dashing air,--the air of ayoung man who has fine pistols, a sure aim, and Annette.

°°°°Now if you wish to understand the mutual amazement of the provincialparty and the young Parisian; if you would clearly see the brilliancewhich the traveller's elegance cast among the gray shadows of the roomand upon the faces of this family group,--endeavor to picture to yourminds the Cruchots. All three took snuff, and had long ceased torepress the habit of snivelling or to remove the brown blotches whichstrewed the frills of their dingy shirts and the yellowing creases oftheir crumpled collars. Their flabby cravats were twisted into ropesas soon as they wound them about their throats. The enormous quantityof linen which allowed these people to have their clothing washed onlyonce in six months, and to keep it during that time in the depths oftheir closets, also enabled time to lay its grimy and decaying stainsupon it. There was perfect unison of ill-grace and senility aboutthem; their faces, as faded as their threadbare coats, as creased astheir trousers, were worn-out, shrivelled-up, and puckered. As for theothers, the general negligence of their dress, which was incompleteand wanting in freshness,--like the toilet of all country places,where insensibly people cease to dress for others and come to thinkseriously of the price of a pair of gloves,--was in keeping with thenegligence of the Cruchots. A horror of fashion was the only point onwhich the Grassinists and the Cruchotines agreed.

°°°°When the Parisian took up his eye-glass to examine the strangeaccessories of this dwelling,--the joists of the ceiling, the color ofthe woodwork, and the specks which the flies had left there insufficient number to punctuate the "Moniteur" and the "Encyclopaediaof Sciences,"--the loto-players lifted their noses and looked at himwith as much curiosity as they might have felt about a giraffe.Monsieur des Grassins and his son, to whom the appearance of a man offashion was not wholly unknown, were nevertheless as much astonishedas their neighbors, whether it was that they fell under theindefinable influence of the general feeling, or that they reallyshared it as with satirical glances they seemed to say to theircompatriots,--

°°°°"That is what you see in Paris!"

°°°°They were able to examine Charles at their leisure without fearing todisplease the master of the house. Grandet was absorbed in the longletter which he held in his hand; and to read it he had taken the onlycandle upon the card-table, paying no heed to his guests or theirpleasure. Eugenie, to whom such a type of perfection, whether of dressor of person, was absolutely unknown, thought she beheld in her cousina being descended from seraphic spheres. She inhaled with delight thefragrance wafted from the graceful curls of that brilliant head. Shewould have liked to touch the soft kid of the delicate gloves. Sheenvied Charles his small hands, his complexion, the freshness andrefinement of his features. In short,--if it is possible to sum up theeffect this elegant being produced upon an ignorant young girlperpetually employed in darning stockings or in mending her father'sclothes, and whose life flowed on beneath these unclean rafters,seeing none but occasional passers along the silent street,--thisvision of her cousin roused in her soul an emotion of delicate desirelike that inspired in a young man by the fanciful pictures of womendrawn by Westall for the English "Keepsakes," and that engraved by theFindens with so clever a tool that we fear, as we breathe upon thepaper, that the celestial apparitions may be wafted away. Charles drewfrom his pocket a handkerchief embroidered by the great lady nowtravelling in Scotland. As Eugenie saw this pretty piece of work, donein the vacant hours which were lost to love, she looked at her cousinto see if it were possible that he meant to make use of it. Themanners of the young man, his gestures, the way in which he took uphis eye-glass, his affected superciliousness, his contemptuous glanceat the coffer which had just given so much pleasure to the richheiress, and which he evidently regarded as without value, or even asridiculous,--all these things, which shocked the Cruchots and the desGrassins, pleased Eugenie so deeply that before she slept she dreamedlong dreams of her phoenix cousin.

°°°°The loto-numbers were drawn very slowly, and presently the game camesuddenly to an end. La Grand Nanon entered and said aloud: "Madame, Iwant the sheets for monsieur's bed."

°°°°Madame Grandet followed her out. Madame des Grassins said in a lowvoice: "Let us keep our sous and stop playing." Each took his or hertwo sous from the chipped saucer in which they had been put; then theparty moved in a body toward the fire.

°°°°"Have you finished your game?" said Grandet, without looking up fromhis letter.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" replied Madame des Grassins, taking a seat near Charles.Eugenie, prompted by a thought often born in the heart of a young girlwhen sentiment enters it for the first time, left the room to go andhelp her mother and Nanon. Had an able confessor then questioned hershe would, no doubt, have avowed to him that she thought neither ofher mother nor of Nanon, but was pricked by a poignant desire to lookafter her cousin's room and concern herself with her cousin; to supplywhat might be needed, to remedy any forgetfulness, to see that all wasdone to make it, as far as possible, suitable and elegant; and, infact, she arrived in time to prove to her mother and Nanon thateverything still remained to be done. She put into Nanon's head thenotion of passing a warming-pan between the sheets. She herselfcovered the old table with a cloth and requested Nanon to change itevery morning; she convinced her mother that it was necessary to lighta good fire, and persuaded Nanon to bring up a great pile of wood intothe corridor without saying anything to her father. She ran to get,from one of the corner-shelves of the hall, a tray of old lacquerwhich was part of the inheritance of the late Monsieur de laBertelliere, catching up at the same time a six-sided crystal goblet,a little tarnished gilt spoon, an antique flask engraved with cupids,all of which she put triumphantly on the corner of her cousin'schimney-piece. More ideas surged through her head in one quarter of anhour than she had ever had since she came into the world."Mamma," she said, "my cousin will never bear the smell of a tallowcandle; suppose we buy a wax one?" And she darted, swift as a bird, toget the five-franc piece which she had just received for her monthlyexpenses. "Here, Nanon," she cried, "quick!"

°°°°"What will your father say?" This terrible remonstrance was uttered byMadame Grandet as she beheld her daughter armed with an old Sevressugar-basin which Grandet had brought home from the chateau ofFroidfond. "And where will you get the sugar? Are you crazy?""Mamma, Nanon can buy some sugar as well as the candle."

°°°°"But your father?"

°°°°"Surely his nephew ought not to go without a glass of /eau sucree/?Besides, he will not notice it."

°°°°"Your father sees everything," said Madame Grandet, shaking her head.Nanon hesitated; she knew her master.

°°°°"Come, Nanon, go,--because it is my birthday."

°°°°Nanon gave a loud laugh as she heard the first little jest her youngmistress had ever made, and then obeyed her.

°°°°While Eugenie and her mother were trying to embellish the bedroomassigned by Monsieur Grandet for his nephew, Charles himself was theobject of Madame des Grassins' attentions; to all appearances she wassetting her cap at him.

°°°°"You are very courageous, monsieur," she said to the young dandy, "toleave the pleasures of the capital at this season and take up yourabode in Saumur. But if we do not frighten you away, you will findthere are some amusements even here."

°°°°She threw him the ogling glance of the provinces, where women put somuch prudence and reserve into their eyes that they impart to them theprudish concupiscence peculiar to certain ecclesiastics to whom allpleasure is either a theft or an error. Charles was so completely outof his element in this abode, and so far from the vast chateau and thesumptuous life with which his fancy had endowed his uncle, that as helooked at Madame des Grassins he perceived a dim likeness to Parisianfaces. He gracefully responded to the species of invitation addressedto him, and began very naturally a conversation, in which Madame desGrassins gradually lowered her voice so as to bring it into harmonywith the nature of the confidences she was making. With her, as withCharles, there was the need of conference; so after a few momentsspent in coquettish phrases and a little serious jesting, the cleverprovincial said, thinking herself unheard by the others, who werediscussing the sale of wines which at that season filled the heads ofevery one in Saumur,--

°°°°"Monsieur if you will do us the honor to come and see us, you willgive as much pleasure to my husband as to myself. Our salon is theonly one in Saumur where you will find the higher business circlesmingling with the nobility. We belong to both societies, who meet atour house simply because they find it amusing. My husband--I say itwith pride--is as much valued by the one class as by the other. Wewill try to relieve the monotony of your visit here. If you stay allthe time with Monsieur Grandet, good heavens! what will become of you?Your uncle is a sordid miser who thinks of nothing but his vines; youraunt is a pious soul who can't put two ideas together; and your cousinis a little fool, without education, perfectly common, no fortune, whowill spend her life in darning towels."

°°°°"She is really very nice, this woman," thought Charles Grandet as heduly responded to Madame des Grassins' coquetries.

°°°°"It seems to me, wife, that you are taking possession of monsieur,"said the stout banker, laughing.

°°°°On this remark the notary and the president said a few words that weremore or less significant; but the abbe, looking at them slyly, broughttheir thoughts to a focus by taking a pinch of snuff and saying as hehanded round his snuff-box: "Who can do the honors of Saumur formonsieur so well as madame?"

°°°°"Ah! what do you mean by that, monsieur l'abbe?" demanded Monsieur desGrassins.

°°°°"I mean it in the best possible sense for you, for madame, for thetown of Saumur, and for monsieur," said the wily old man, turning toCharles.

°°°°The Abbe Cruchot had guessed the conversation between Charles andMadame des Grassins without seeming to pay attention to it."Monsieur," said Adolphe to Charles with an air which he tried to makefree and easy, "I don't know whether you remember me, but I had thehonor of dancing as your /vis-a-vis/ at a ball given by the Baron deNucingen, and--"

°°°°"Perfectly; I remember perfectly, monsieur," answered Charles, pleasedto find himself the object of general attention.

°°°°"Monsieur is your son?" he said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°The abbe looked at her maliciously.

°°°°"Yes, monsieur," she answered.

°°°°"Then you were very young when you were in Paris?" said Charles,addressing Adolphe.

°°°°"You must know, monsieur," said the abbe, "that we send them toBabylon as soon as they are weaned."

°°°°Madame des Grassins examined the abbe with a glance of extremepenetration.

°°°°"It is only in the provinces," he continued, "that you will find womenof thirty and more years as fresh as madame, here, with a son about totake his degree. I almost fancy myself back in the days when the youngmen stood on chairs in the ball-room to see you dance, madame," saidthe abbe, turning to his female adversary. "To me, your triumphs arebut of yesterday--"

°°°°"The old rogue!" thought Madame Grassins; "can he have guessed myintentions?"

°°°°"It seems that I shall have a good deal of success in Saumur," thoughtCharles as he unbuttoned his great-coat, put a hand into hiswaistcoat, and cast a glance into the far distance, to imitate theattitude which Chantrey has given to Lord Byron.

°°°°The inattention of Pere Grandet, or, to speak more truly, thepreoccupation of mind into which the reading of the letter had plungedhim, did not escape the vigilance of the notary and the president, whotried to guess the contents of the letter by the almost imperceptiblemotions of the miser's face, which was then under the full light ofthe candle. He maintained the habitual calm of his features withevident difficulty; we may, in fact, picture to ourselves thecountenance such a man endeavored to preserve as he read the fatalletter which here follows:--

°°°°My Brother,--It is almost twenty-three years since we have seen

°°°°each other. My marriage was the occasion of our last interview,

°°°°after which we parted, and both of us were happy. Assuredly I

°°°°could not then foresee that you would one day be the prop of the

°°°°family whose prosperity you then predicted.

°°°°When you hold this letter within your hands I shall be no longer

°°°°living. In the position I now hold I cannot survive the disgrace

°°°°of bankruptcy. I have waited on the edge of the gulf until the

°°°°last moment, hoping to save myself. The end has come, I must sink

°°°°into it. The double bankruptcies of my broker and of Roguin, my

°°°°notary, have carried off my last resources and left me nothing. I

°°°°have the bitterness of owing nearly four millions, with assets not

°°°°more than twenty-five per cent in value to pay them. The wines in

°°°°my warehouses suffer from the fall in prices caused by the

°°°°abundance and quality of your vintage. In three days Paris will

°°°°cry out: "Monsieur Grandet was a knave!" and I, an honest man,

°°°°shall be lying in my winding-sheet of infamy. I deprive my son of

°°°°a good name, which I have stained, and the fortune of his mother,

°°°°which I have lost. He knows nothing of all this,--my unfortunate

°°°°child whom I idolize! We parted tenderly. He was ignorant,

°°°°happily, that the last beatings of my heart were spent in that

°°°°farewell. Will he not some day curse me? My brother, my brother!

°°°°the curses of our children are horrible; they can appeal against

°°°°ours, but theirs are irrevocable. Grandet, you are my elder

°°°°brother, you owe me your protection; act for me so that Charles

°°°°may cast no bitter words upon my grave! My brother, if I were

°°°°writing with my blood, with my tears, no greater anguish could I

°°°°put into this letter,--nor as great, for then I should weep, I

°°°°should bleed, I should die, I should suffer no more, but now I

°°°°suffer and look at death with dry eyes.

°°°°From henceforth you are my son's father; he has no relations, as

°°°°you well know, on his mother's side. Why did I not consider social

°°°°prejudices? Why did I yield to love? Why did I marry the natural

°°°°daughter of a great lord? Charles has no family. Oh, my unhappy

°°°°son! my son! Listen, Grandet! I implore nothing for myself,--

°°°°besides, your property may not be large enough to carry a mortgage

°°°°of three millions,--but for my son! Brother, my suppliant hands

°°°°are clasped as I think of you; behold them! Grandet, I confide my

°°°°son to you in dying, and I look at the means of death with less

°°°°pain as I think that you will be to him a father. He loved me

°°°°well, my Charles; I was good to him, I never thwarted him; he will

°°°°not curse me. Ah, you see! he is gentle, he is like his mother, he

°°°°will cause you no grief. Poor boy! accustomed to all the

°°°°enjoyments of luxury, he knows nothing of the privations to which

°°°°you and I were condemned by the poverty of our youth. And I leave

°°°°him ruined! alone! Yes, all my friends will avoid him, and it is I

°°°°who have brought this humiliation upon him! Would that I had the

°°°°force to send him with one thrust into the heavens to his mother's

°°°°side! Madness! I come back to my disaster--to his. I send him to

°°°°you that you may tell him in some fitting way of my death, of his

°°°°future fate. Be a father to him, but a good father. Do not tear

°°°°him all at once from his idle life, it would kill him. I beg him

°°°°on my knees to renounce all rights that, as his mother's heir, he

°°°°may have on my estate. But the prayer is superfluous; he is

°°°°honorable, and he will feel that he must not appear among my

°°°°creditors. Bring him to see this at the right time; reveal to him

°°°°the hard conditions of the life I have made for him: and if he

°°°°still has tender thoughts of me, tell him in my name that all is

°°°°not lost for him. Yes, work, labor, which saved us both, may give

°°°°him back the fortune of which I have deprived him; and if he

°°°°listens to his father's voice as it reaches him from the grave, he

°°°°will go the Indies. My brother, Charles is an upright and

°°°°courageous young man; give him the wherewithal to make his

°°°°venture; he will die sooner than not repay you the funds which you

°°°°may lend him. Grandet! if you will not do this, you will lay up

°°°°for yourself remorse. Ah, should my child find neither tenderness

°°°°nor succor in you, I would call down the vengeance of God upon

°°°°your cruelty!

°°°°If I had been able to save something from the wreck, I might have

°°°°had the right to leave him at least a portion of his mother's

°°°°property; but my last monthly payments have absorbed everything. I

°°°°did not wish to die uncertain of my child's fate; I hoped to feel

°°°°a sacred promise in a clasp of your hand which might have warmed

°°°°my heart: but time fails me. While Charles is journeying to you I

°°°°shall be preparing my assignment. I shall endeavor to show by the

°°°°order and good faith of my accounts that my disaster comes neither

°°°°from a faulty life nor from dishonesty. It is for my son's sake

°°°°that I strive to do this.

°°°°Farewell, my brother! May the blessing of God be yours for the

°°°°generous guardianship I lay upon you, and which, I doubt not, you

°°°°will accept. A voice will henceforth and forever pray for you in

°°°°that world where we must all go, and where I am now as you read

°°°°these lines.

°°°°Victor-Ange-Guillaume Grandet.

°°°°"So you are talking?" said Pere Grandet as he carefully folded theletter in its original creases and put it into his waistcoat-pocket.He looked at his nephew with a humble, timid air, beneath which he hidhis feelings and his calculations. "Have you warmed yourself?" he saidto him.

°°°°"Thoroughly, my dear uncle."

°°°°"Well, where are the women?" said his uncle, already forgetting thathis nephew was to sleep at the house. At this moment Eugenie andMadame Grandet returned.

°°°°"Is the room all ready?" said Grandet, recovering his composure."Yes, father."

°°°°"Well then, my nephew, if you are tired, Nanon shall show you yourroom. It isn't a dandy's room; but you will excuse a poor wine-growerwho never has a penny to spare. Taxes swallow up everything.""We do not wish to intrude, Grandet," said the banker; "you may wantto talk to your nephew, and therefore we will bid you good-night."At these words the assembly rose, and each made a parting bow inkeeping with his or her own character. The old notary went to the doorto fetch his lantern and came back to light it, offering to accompanythe des Grassins on their way. Madame des Grassins had not foreseenthe incident which brought the evening prematurely to an end, herservant therefore had not arrived.

°°°°"Will you do me the honor to take my arm, madame?" said the abbe."Thank you, monsieur l'abbe, but I have my son," she answered dryly."Ladies cannot compromise themselves with me," said the abbe."Take Monsieur Cruchot's arm," said her husband.

°°°°The abbe walked off with the pretty lady so quickly that they weresoon some distance in advance of the caravan.

°°°°"That is a good-looking young man, madame," he said, pressing her arm."Good-by to the grapes, the vintage is done. It is all over with us.We may as well say adieu to Mademoiselle Grandet. Eugenie will belongto the dandy. Unless this cousin is enamoured of some Parisian woman,your son Adolphe will find another rival in--"

°°°°"Not at all, monsieur l'abbe. This young man cannot fail to see thatEugenie is a little fool,--a girl without the least freshness. Did younotice her to-night? She was as yellow as a quince."

°°°°"Perhaps you made the cousin notice it?"

°°°°"I did not take the trouble--"

°°°°"Place yourself always beside Eugenie, madame, and you need never takethe trouble to say anything to the young man against his cousin; hewill make his own comparisons, which--"

°°°°"Well, he has promised to dine with me the day after to-morrow.""Ah! if you only /would/, madame--" said the abbe.

°°°°"What is it that you wish me to do, monsieur l'abbe? Do you mean tooffer me bad advice? I have not reached the age of thirty-nine,without a stain upon my reputation, thank God! to compromise myselfnow, even for the empire of the Great Mogul. You and I are of an agewhen we both know the meaning of words. For an ecclesiastic, youcertainly have ideas that are very incongruous. Fie! it is worthy ofFaublas!"

°°°°"You have read Faublas?"

°°°°"No, monsieur l'abbe; I meant to say the /Liaisons dangereuses/.""Ah! that book is infinitely more moral," said the abbe, laughing."But you make me out as wicked as a young man of the present day; Ionly meant--"

°°°°"Do you dare to tell me you were not thinking of putting wicked thingsinto my head? Isn't it perfectly clear? If this young man--who I admitis very good-looking--were to make love to me, he would not think ofhis cousin. In Paris, I know, good mothers do devote themselves inthis way to the happiness and welfare of their children; but we livein the provinces, monsieur l'abbe."

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"And," she continued, "I do not want, and Adolphe himself would notwant, a hundred millions brought at such a price."

°°°°"Madame, I said nothing about a hundred millions; that temptationmight be too great for either of us to withstand. Only, I do thinkthat an honest woman may permit herself, in all honor, certainharmless little coquetries, which are, in fact, part of her socialduty and which--"

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"Are we not bound, madame, to make ourselves agreeable to each other?--Permit me to blow my nose.--I assure you, madame," he resumed, "thatthe young gentleman ogled you through his glass in a more flatteringmanner than he put on when he looked at me; but I forgive him fordoing homage to beauty in preference to old age--"

°°°°"It is quite apparent," said the president in his loud voice, "thatMonsieur Grandet of Paris has sent his son to Saumur with extremelymatrimonial intentions."

°°°°"But in that case the cousin wouldn't have fallen among us like acannon-ball," answered the notary.

°°°°"That doesn't prove anything," said Monsieur des Grassins; "the oldmiser is always making mysteries."

°°°°"Des Grassins, my friend, I have invited the young man to dinner. Youmust go and ask Monsieur and Madame de Larsonniere and the du Hautoys,with the beautiful demoiselle du Hautoy, of course. I hope she will beproperly dressed; that jealous mother of hers does make such a frightof her! Gentlemen, I trust that you will all do us the honor to come,"she added, stopping the procession to address the two Cruchots."Here you are at home, madame," said the notary.

°°°°After bowing to the three des Grassins, the three Cruchots returnedhome, applying their provincial genius for analysis to studying, underall its aspects, the great event of the evening, which undoubtedlychanged the respective positions of Grassinists and Cruchotines. Theadmirable common-sense which guided all the actions of these greatmachinators made each side feel the necessity of a momentary allianceagainst a common enemy. Must they not mutually hinder Eugenie fromloving her cousin, and the cousin from thinking of Eugenie? Could theParisian resist the influence of treacherous insinuations, soft-spokencalumnies, slanders full of faint praise and artless denials, whichshould be made to circle incessantly about him and deceive him?IV

°°°°When the four relations were left alone, Monsieur Grandet said to hisnephew,--

°°°°"We must go to bed. It is too late to talk about the matters whichhave brought you here; to-morrow we will take a suitable moment. Webreakfast at eight o'clock; at midday we eat a little fruit or a bitof bread, and drink a glass of white wine; and we dine, like theParisians, at five o'clock. That's the order of the day. If you liketo go and see the town and the environs you are free to do so. Youwill excuse me if my occupations do not permit me to accompany you.You may perhaps hear people say that I am rich,--Monsieur Grandetthis, Monsieur Grandet that. I let them talk; their gossip does nothurt my credit. But I have not a penny; I work in my old age like anapprentice whose worldly goods are a bad plane and two good arms.Perhaps you'll soon know yourself what a franc costs when you have gotto sweat for it. Nanon, where are the candles?"

°°°°"I trust, my nephew, that you will find all you want," said MadameGrandet; "but if you should need anything else, you can call Nanon.""My dear aunt, I shall need nothing; I have, I believe, broughteverything with me. Permit me to bid you good-night, and my youngcousin also."

°°°°Charles took a lighted wax candle from Nanon's hand,--an Anjou candle,very yellow in color, and so shopworn that it looked like tallow anddeceived Monsieur Grandet, who, incapable of suspecting its presenceunder his roof, did not perceive this magnificence.

°°°°"I will show you the way," he said.

°°°°Instead of leaving the hall by the door which opened under thearchway, Grandet ceremoniously went through the passage which dividedthe hall from the kitchen. A swing-door, furnished with a large ovalpane of glass, shut this passage from the staircase, so as to fend offthe cold air which rushed through it. But the north wind whistled nonethe less keenly in winter, and, in spite of the sand-bags at thebottom of the doors of the living-room, the temperature within couldscarcely be kept at a proper height. Nanon went to bolt the outerdoor; then she closed the hall and let loose a wolf-dog, whose barkwas so strangled that he seemed to have laryngitis. This animal, notedfor his ferocity, recognized no one but Nanon; the two untutoredchildren of the fields understood each other.

°°°°When Charles saw the yellow, smoke-stained walls of the well of thestaircase, where each worm-eaten step shook under the heavy foot-fallof his uncle, his expectations began to sober more and more. Hefancied himself in a hen-roost. His aunt and cousin, to whom he turnedan inquiring look, were so used to the staircase that they did notguess the cause of his amazement, and took the glance for anexpression of friendliness, which they answered by a smile that madehim desperate.

°°°°"Why the devil did my father send me to such a place?" he said tohimself.

°°°°When they reached the first landing he saw three doors painted inEtruscan red and without casings,--doors sunk in the dusty walls andprovided with iron bars, which in fact were bolts, each ending withthe pattern of a flame, as did both ends of the long sheath of thelock. The first door at the top of the staircase, which opened into aroom directly above the kitchen, was evidently walled up. In fact, theonly entrance to that room was through Grandet's bedchamber; the roomitself was his office. The single window which lighted it, on the sideof the court, was protected by a lattice of strong iron bars. No one,not even Madame Grandet, had permission to enter it. The old man choseto be alone, like an alchemist in his laboratory. There, no doubt,some hiding-place had been ingeniously constructed; there the title-deeds of property were stored; there hung the scales on which to weighthe louis; there were devised, by night and secretly, the estimates,the profits, the receipts, so that business men, finding Grandetprepared at all points, imagined that he got his cue from fairies ordemons; there, no doubt, while Nanon's loud snoring shook the rafters,while the wolf-dog watched and yawned in the courtyard, while Madameand Mademoiselle Grandet were quietly sleeping, came the old cooper tocuddle, to con over, to caress and clutch and clasp his gold. Thewalls were thick, the screens sure. He alone had the key of thislaboratory, where--so people declared--he studied the maps on whichhis fruit-trees were marked, and calculated his profits to a vine, andalmost to a twig.

°°°°The door of Eugenie's chamber was opposite to the walled-up entranceto this room. At the other end of the landing were the appartements ofthe married pair, which occupied the whole front of the house. MadameGrandet had a room next to that of Eugenie, which was entered througha glass door. The master's chamber was separated from that of his wifeby a partition, and from the mysterious strong-room by a thick wall.Pere Grandet lodged his nephew on the second floor, in the highmansarde attic which was above his own bedroom, so that he might hearhim if the young man took it into his head to go and come. WhenEugenie and her mother reached the middle of the landing they kissedeach other for good-night; then with a few words of adieu to Charles,cold upon the lips, but certainly very warm in the heart of the younggirl, they withdrew into their own chambers.

°°°°"Here you are in your room, my nephew," said Pere Grandet as he openedthe door. "If you need to go out, call Nanon; without her, beware! thedog would eat you up without a word. Sleep well. Good-night. Ha! why,they have made you a fire!" he cried.

°°°°At this moment Nanon appeared with the warming pan.

°°°°"Here's something more!" said Monsieur Grandet. "Do you take my nephewfor a lying-in woman? Carry off your brazier, Nanon!"

°°°°"But, monsieur, the sheets are damp, and this gentleman is as delicateas a woman."

°°°°"Well, go on, as you've taken it into your head," said Grandet,pushing her by the shoulders; "but don't set things on fire." Sosaying, the miser went down-stairs, grumbling indistinct sentences.Charles stood aghast in the midst of his trunks. After casting hiseyes on the attic-walls covered with that yellow paper sprinkled withbouquets so well known in dance-houses, on the fireplace of ribbedstone whose very look was chilling, on the chairs of yellow wood withvarnished cane seats that seemed to have more than the usual fourangles, on the open night-table capacious enough to hold a smallsergeant-at-arms, on the meagre bit of rag-carpet beside the bed, onthe tester whose cloth valance shook as if, devoured by moths, it wasabout to fall, he turned gravely to la Grande Nanon and said,--"Look here! my dear woman, just tell me, am I in the house of MonsieurGrandet, formerly mayor of Saumur, and brother to Monsieur Grandet ofParis?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur; and a very good, a very kind, a very perfectgentleman. Shall I help you to unpack your trunks?"

°°°°"Faith! yes, if you will, my old trooper. Didn't you serve in themarines of the Imperial Guard?"

°°°°"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Nanon. "What's that,--the marines of the guard?Is it salt? Does it go in the water?"

°°°°"Here, get me my dressing-gown out of that valise; there's the key."Nanon was wonder-struck by the sight of a dressing-gown made of greensilk, brocaded with gold flowers of an antique design.

°°°°"Are you going to put that on to go to bed with?" she asked."Yes."

°°°°"Holy Virgin! what a beautiful altar-cloth it would make for theparish church! My dear darling monsieur, give it to the church, andyou'll save your soul; if you don't, you'll lose it. Oh, how nice youlook in it! I must call mademoiselle to see you."

°°°°"Come, Nanon, if Nanon you are, hold your tongue; let me go to bed.I'll arrange my things to-morrow. If my dressing-gown pleases you somuch, you shall save your soul. I'm too good a Christian not to giveit to you when I go away, and you can do what you like with it."Nanon stood rooted to the ground, gazing at Charles and unable to putfaith into his words.

°°°°"Good night, Nanon."

°°°°"What in the world have I come here for?" thought Charles as he wentto sleep. "My father is not a fool; my journey must have some object.Pshaw! put off serious thought till the morrow, as some Greek idiotsaid."

°°°°"Blessed Virgin! how charming he is, my cousin!" Eugenie was saying,interrupting her prayers, which that night at least were neverfinished.

°°°°Madame Grandet had no thoughts at all as she went to bed. She heardthe miser walking up and down his room through the door ofcommunication which was in the middle of the partition. Like all timidwomen, she had studied the character of her lord. Just as the petrelforesees the storm, she knew by imperceptible signs when an inwardtempest shook her husband; and at such times, to use an expression ofher own, she "feigned dead."

°°°°Grandet gazed at the door lined with sheet-iron which he lately put tohis sanctum, and said to himself,--

°°°°"What a crazy idea of my brother to bequeath his son to me! A finelegacy! I have not fifty francs to give him. What are fifty francs toa dandy who looked at my barometer as if he meant to make firewood ofit!"

°°°°In thinking over the consequences of that legacy of anguish Grandetwas perhaps more agitated than his brother had been at the moment ofwriting it.

°°°°"I shall have that golden robe," thought Nanon, who went to sleeptricked out in her altar-cloth, dreaming for the first time in herlife of flowers, embroidery, and damask, just as Eugenie was dreamingof love.

°°°°*****

°°°°In the pure and monotonous life of young girls there comes a delicioushour when the sun sheds its rays into their soul, when the flowersexpress their thoughts, when the throbbings of the heart send upwardto the brain their fertilizing warmth and melt all thoughts into avague desire,--day of innocent melancholy and of dulcet joys! Whenbabes begin to see, they smile; when a young girl first perceives thesentiment of nature, she smiles as she smiled when an infant. If lightis the first love of life, is not love a light to the heart? Themoment to see within the veil of earthly things had come for Eugenie.An early riser, like all provincial girls, she was up betimes and saidher prayers, and then began the business of dressing,--a businesswhich henceforth was to have a meaning. First she brushed and smoothedher chestnut hair and twisted its heavy masses to the top of her headwith the utmost care, preventing the loose tresses from straying, andgiving to her head a symmetry which heightened the timid candor of herface; for the simplicity of these accessories accorded well with theinnocent sincerity of its lines. As she washed her hands again andagain in the cold water which hardened and reddened the skin, shelooked at her handsome round arms and asked herself what her cousindid to make his hands so softly white, his nails so delicately curved.She put on new stockings and her prettiest shoes. She laced her corsetstraight, without skipping a single eyelet. And then, wishing for thefirst time in her life to appear to advantage, she felt the joy ofhaving a new gown, well made, which rendered her attractive.As she finished her toilet the clock of the parish church struck thehour; to her astonishment, it was only seven. The desire of havingplenty of time for dressing carefully had led her to get up too early.Ignorant of the art of retouching every curl and studying everyeffect, Eugenie simply crossed her arms, sat down by the window, andlooked at the court-yard, the narrow garden, and the high terracedwalls that over-topped it: a dismal, hedged-in prospect, yet notwholly devoid of those mysterious beauties which belong to solitary oruncultivated nature. Near the kitchen was a well surrounded by a curb,with a pulley fastened to a bent iron rod clasped by a vine whoseleaves were withered, reddened, and shrivelled by the season. Fromthence the tortuous shoots straggled to the wall, clutched it, and ranthe whole length of the house, ending near the wood-pile, where thelogs were ranged with as much precision as the books in a library. Thepavement of the court-yard showed the black stains produced in time bylichens, herbage, and the absence of all movement or friction. Thethick walls wore a coating of green moss streaked with waving brownlines, and the eight stone steps at the bottom of the court-yard whichled up to the gate of the garden were disjointed and hidden beneathtall plants, like the tomb of a knight buried by his widow in the daysof the Crusades. Above a foundation of moss-grown, crumbling stoneswas a trellis of rotten wood, half fallen from decay; over themclambered and intertwined at will a mass of clustering creepers. Oneach side of the latticed gate stretched the crooked arms of twostunted apple-trees. Three parallel walks, gravelled and separatedfrom each other by square beds, where the earth was held in by box-borders, made the garden, which terminated, beneath a terrace of theold walls, in a group of lindens. At the farther end were raspberry-bushes; at the other, near the house, an immense walnut-tree droopedits branches almost into the window of the miser's sanctum.A clear day and the beautiful autumnal sun common to the banks of theLoire was beginning to melt the hoar-frost which the night had laid onthese picturesque objects, on the walls, and on the plants whichswathed the court-yard. Eugenie found a novel charm in the aspect ofthings lately so insignificant to her. A thousand confused thoughtscame to birth in her mind and grew there, as the sunbeams grew withoutalong the wall. She felt that impulse of delight, vague, inexplicable,which wraps the moral being as a cloud wraps the physical body. Herthoughts were all in keeping with the details of this strangelandscape, and the harmonies of her heart blended with the harmoniesof nature. When the sun reached an angle of the wall where the "Venus-hair" of southern climes drooped its thick leaves, lit with thechanging colors of a pigeon's breast, celestial rays of hope illuminedthe future to her eyes, and thenceforth she loved to gaze upon thatpiece of wall, on its pale flowers, its blue harebells, its wiltingherbage, with which she mingled memories as tender as those ofchildhood. The noise made by each leaf as it fell from its twig in thevoid of that echoing court gave answer to the secret questionings ofthe young girl, who could have stayed there the livelong day withoutperceiving the flight of time. Then came tumultuous heavings of thesoul. She rose often, went to her glass, and looked at herself, as anauthor in good faith looks at his work to criticise it and blame it inhis own mind.

°°°°"I am not beautiful enough for him!" Such was Eugenie's thought,--ahumble thought, fertile in suffering. The poor girl did not do herselfjustice; but modesty, or rather fear, is among the first of love'svirtues. Eugenie belonged to the type of children with sturdyconstitutions, such as we see among the lesser bourgeoisie, whosebeauties always seem a little vulgar; and yet, though she resembledthe Venus of Milo, the lines of her figure were ennobled by the softerChristian sentiment which purifies womanhood and gives it adistinction unknown to the sculptors of antiquity. She had an enormoushead, with the masculine yet delicate forehead of the Jupiter ofPhidias, and gray eyes, to which her chaste life, penetrating fullyinto them, carried a flood of light. The features of her round face,formerly fresh and rosy, were at one time swollen by the small-pox,which destroyed the velvet texture of the skin, though it kindly leftno other traces, and her cheek was still so soft and delicate that hermother's kiss made a momentary red mark upon it. Her nose was somewhattoo thick, but it harmonized well with the vermilion mouth, whoselips, creased in many lines, were full of love and kindness. Thethroat was exquisitely round. The bust, well curved and carefullycovered, attracted the eye and inspired reverie. It lacked, no doubt,the grace which a fitting dress can bestow; but to a connoisseur thenon-flexibility of her figure had its own charm. Eugenie, tall andstrongly made, had none of the prettiness which pleases the masses;but she was beautiful with a beauty which the spirit recognizes, andnone but artists truly love. A painter seeking here below for a typeof Mary's celestial purity, searching womankind for those proud modesteyes which Raphael divined, for those virgin lines, often due tochances of conception, which the modesty of Christian life alone canbestow or keep unchanged,--such a painter, in love with his ideal,would have found in the face of Eugenie the innate nobleness that isignorant of itself; he would have seen beneath the calmness of thatbrow a world of love; he would have felt, in the shape of the eyes, inthe fall of the eyelids, the presence of the nameless something thatwe call divine. Her features, the contour of her head, which noexpression of pleasure had ever altered or wearied, were like thelines of the horizon softly traced in the far distance across thetranquil lakes. That calm and rosy countenance, margined with lightlike a lovely full-blown flower, rested the mind, held the eye, andimparted the charm of the conscience that was there reflected. Eugeniewas standing on the shore of life where young illusions flower, wheredaisies are gathered with delights ere long to be unknown; and thusshe said, looking at her image in the glass, unconscious as yet oflove: "I am too ugly; he will not notice me."

°°°°Then she opened the door of her chamber which led to the staircase,and stretched out her neck to listen for the household noises. "He isnot up," she thought, hearing Nanon's morning cough as the good soulwent and came, sweeping out the halls, lighting her fire, chaining thedog, and speaking to the beasts in the stable. Eugenie at once wentdown and ran to Nanon, who was milking the cow.

°°°°"Nanon, my good Nanon, make a little cream for my cousin's breakfast.""Why, mademoiselle, you should have thought of that yesterday," saidNanon, bursting into a loud peal of laughter. "I can't make cream.Your cousin is a darling, a darling! oh, that he is! You should haveseen him in his dressing-gown, all silk and gold! I saw him, I did! Hewears linen as fine as the surplice of monsieur le cure.""Nanon, please make us a /galette/."

°°°°"And who'll give me wood for the oven, and flour and butter for thecakes?" said Nanon, who in her function of prime-minister to Grandetassumed at times enormous importance in the eyes of Eugenie and hermother. "Mustn't rob the master to feast the cousin. You ask him forbutter and flour and wood: he's your father, perhaps he'll give yousome. See! there he is now, coming to give out the provisions."Eugenie escaped into the garden, quite frightened as she heard thestaircase shaking under her father's step. Already she felt theeffects of that virgin modesty and that special consciousness ofhappiness which lead us to fancy, not perhaps without reason, that ourthoughts are graven on our foreheads and are open to the eyes of all.Perceiving for the first time the cold nakedness of her father'shouse, the poor girl felt a sort of rage that she could not put it inharmony with her cousin's elegance. She felt the need of doingsomething for him,--what, she did not know. Ingenuous and truthful,she followed her angelic nature without mistrusting her impressions orher feelings. The mere sight of her cousin had wakened within her thenatural yearnings of a woman,--yearnings that were the more likely todevelop ardently because, having reached her twenty-third year, shewas in the plenitude of her intelligence and her desires. For thefirst time in her life her heart was full of terror at the sight ofher father; in him she saw the master of the fate, and she fanciedherself guilty of wrong-doing in hiding from his knowledge certainthoughts. She walked with hasty steps, surprised to breathe a purerair, to feel the sun's rays quickening her pulses, to absorb fromtheir heat a moral warmth and a new life. As she turned over in hermind some stratagem by which to get the cake, a quarrel--an event asrare as the sight of swallows in winter--broke out between la GrandeNanon and Grandet. Armed with his keys, the master had come to doleout provisions for the day's consumption.

°°°°"Is there any bread left from yesterday?" he said to Nanon."Not a crumb, monsieur."

°°°°Grandet took a large round loaf, well floured and moulded in one ofthe flat baskets which they use for baking in Anjou, and was about tocut it, when Nanon said to him,--

°°°°"We are five, to-day, monsieur."

°°°°"That's true," said Grandet, "but your loaves weigh six pounds;there'll be some left. Besides, these young fellows from Paris don'teat bread, you'll see."

°°°°"Then they must eat /frippe/?" said Nanon.

°°°°/Frippe/ is a word of the local lexicon of Anjou, and means anyaccompaniment of bread, from butter which is spread upon it, thecommonest kind of /frippe/, to peach preserve, the most distinguishedof all the /frippes/; those who in their childhood have licked the/frippe/ and left the bread, will comprehend the meaning of Nanon'sspeech.

°°°°"No," answered Grandet, "they eat neither bread nor /frippe/; they aresomething like marriageable girls."

°°°°After ordering the meals for the day with his usual parsimony, thegoodman, having locked the closets containing the supplies, was aboutto go towards the fruit-garden, when Nanon stopped him to say,--"Monsieur, give me a little flour and some butter, and I'll make a/galette/ for the young ones."

°°°°"Are you going to pillage the house on account of my nephew?""I wasn't thinking any more of your nephew than I was of your dog,--not more than you think yourself; for, look here, you've only forkedout six bits of sugar. I want eight."

°°°°"What's all this, Nanon? I have never seen you like this before. Whathave you got in your head? Are you the mistress here? You sha'n't havemore than six pieces of sugar."

°°°°"Well, then, how is your nephew to sweeten his coffee?"

°°°°"With two pieces; I'll go without myself."

°°°°"Go without sugar at your age! I'd rather buy you some out of my ownpocket."

°°°°"Mind your own business."

°°°°In spite of the recent fall in prices, sugar was still in Grandet'seyes the most valuable of all the colonial products; to him it wasalways six francs a pound. The necessity of economizing it, acquiredunder the Empire, had grown to be the most inveterate of his habits.All women, even the greatest ninnies, know how to dodge and dodge toget their ends; Nanon abandoned the sugar for the sake of getting the/galette/.

°°°°"Mademoiselle!" she called through the window, "do you want some/galette/?"

°°°°"No, no," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Come, Nanon," said Grandet, hearing his daughter's voice. "See here."He opened the cupboard where the flour was kept, gave her a cupful,and added a few ounces of butter to the piece he had already cut off."I shall want wood for the oven," said the implacable Nanon."Well, take what you want," he answered sadly; "but in that case youmust make us a fruit-tart, and you'll cook the whole dinner in theoven. In that way you won't need two fires."

°°°°"Goodness!" cried Nanon, "you needn't tell me that."

°°°°Grandet cast a look that was well-nigh paternal upon his faithfuldeputy.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she cried, when his back was turned, "we shall havethe /galette/."

°°°°Pere Grandet returned from the garden with the fruit and arranged aplateful on the kitchen-table.

°°°°"Just see, monsieur," said Nanon, "what pretty boots your nephew has.What leather! why it smells good! What does he clean it with, Iwonder? Am I to put your egg-polish on it?"

°°°°"Nanon, I think eggs would injure that kind of leather. Tell him youdon't know how to black morocco; yes, that's morocco. He will get yousomething himself in Saumur to polish those boots with. I have heardthat they put sugar into the blacking to make it shine."

°°°°"They look good to eat," said the cook, putting the boots to her nose."Bless me! if they don't smell like madame's eau-de-cologne. Ah! howfunny!"

°°°°"Funny!" said her master. "Do you call it funny to put more money intoboots than the man who stands in them is worth?"

°°°°"Monsieur," she said, when Grandet returned the second time, afterlocking the fruit-garden, "won't you have the /pot-au-feu/ put on onceor twice a week on account of your nephew?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Am I to go to the butcher's?"

°°°°"Certainly not. We will make the broth of fowls; the farmers willbring them. I shall tell Cornoiller to shoot some crows; they make thebest soup in the world."

°°°°"Isn't it true, monsieur, that crows eat the dead?"

°°°°"You are a fool, Nanon. They eat what they can get, like the rest ofthe world. Don't we all live on the dead? What are legacies?"Monsieur Grandet, having no further orders to give, drew out hiswatch, and seeing that he had half an hour to dispose of beforebreakfast, he took his hat, went and kissed his daughter, and said toher:

°°°°"Do you want to come for a walk in the fields, down by the Loire? Ihave something to do there."

°°°°Eugenie fetched her straw bonnet, lined with pink taffeta; then thefather and daughter went down the winding street to the shore."Where are you going at this early hour?" said Cruchot, the notary,meeting them.

°°°°"To see something," answered Grandet, not duped by the matutinalappearance of his friend.

°°°°When Pere Grandet went to "see something," the notary knew byexperience there was something to be got by going with him; so hewent.

°°°°"Come, Cruchot," said Grandet, "you are one of my friends. I'll showyou what folly it is to plant poplar-trees on good ground.""Do you call the sixty thousand francs that you pocketed for thosethat were in your fields down by the Loire, folly?" said MaitreCruchot, opening his eyes with amazement. "What luck you have had! Tocut down your trees at the very time they ran short of white-wood atNantes, and to sell them at thirty francs!"

°°°°Eugenie listened, without knowing that she approached the most solemnmoment of her whole life, and that the notary was about to bring downupon her head a paternal and supreme sentence. Grandet had now reachedthe magnificent fields which he owned on the banks of the Loire, wherethirty workmen were employed in clearing away, filling up, andlevelling the spots formerly occupied by the poplars.

°°°°"Maitre Cruchot, see how much ground this tree once took up! Jean," hecried to a laborer, "m-m-measure with your r-r-rule, b-both ways.""Four times eight feet," said the man.

°°°°"Thirty-two feet lost," said Grandet to Cruchot. "I had three hundredpoplars in this one line, isn't that so? Well, then, three h-h-hundredtimes thir-thirty-two lost m-m-me five hundred in h-h-hay; add twiceas much for the side rows,--fifteen hundred; the middle rows as muchmore. So we may c-c-call it a th-thousand b-b-bales of h-h-hay--""Very good," said Cruchot, to help out his friend; "a thousand balesare worth about six hundred francs."

°°°°"Say t-t-twelve hundred, be-c-cause there's three or four hundredfrancs on the second crop. Well, then, c-c-calculate that t-twelvethousand francs a year for f-f-forty years with interest c-c-comesto--"

°°°°"Say sixty thousand francs," said the notary.

°°°°"I am willing; c-c-comes t-t-to sixty th-th-thousand. Very good,"continued Grandet, without stuttering: "two thousand poplars fortyyears old will only yield me fifty thousand francs. There's a loss. Ihave found that myself," said Grandet, getting on his high horse."Jean, fill up all the holes except those at the bank of the river;there you are to plant the poplars I have bought. Plant 'em there, andthey'll get nourishment from the government," he said, turning toCruchot, and giving a slight motion to the wen on his nose, whichexpressed more than the most ironical of smiles.

°°°°"True enough; poplars should only be planted on poor soil," saidCruchot, amazed at Grandet's calculations.

°°°°"Y-y-yes, monsieur," answered the old man satirically.

°°°°Eugenie, who was gazing at the sublime scenery of the Loire, andpaying no attention to her father's reckonings, presently turned anear to the remarks of Cruchot when she heard him say,--

°°°°"So you have brought a son-in-law from Paris. All Saumur is talkingabout your nephew. I shall soon have the marriage-contract to draw up,hey! Pere Grandet?"

°°°°"You g-g-got up very early to t-t-tell me that," said Grandet,accompanying the remark with a motion of his wen. "Well, oldc-c-comrade, I'll be frank, and t-t-tell you what you want t-t-toknow. I would rather, do you see, f-f-fling my daughter into the Loirethan g-g-give her to her c-c-cousin. You may t-t-tell that everywhere,--no, never mind; let the world t-t-talk."

°°°°This answer dazzled and blinded the young girl with sudden light. Thedistant hopes upspringing in her heart bloomed suddenly, became real,tangible, like a cluster of flowers, and she saw them cut down andwilting on the earth. Since the previous evening she had attachedherself to Charles by those links of happiness which bind soul tosoul; from henceforth suffering was to rivet them. Is it not the nobledestiny of women to be more moved by the dark solemnities of griefthan by the splendors of fortune? How was it that fatherly feeling haddied out of her father's heart? Of what crime had Charles been guilty?Mysterious questions! Already her dawning love, a mystery so profound,was wrapping itself in mystery. She walked back trembling in all herlimbs; and when she reached the gloomy street, lately so joyous toher, she felt its sadness, she breathed the melancholy which time andevents had printed there. None of love's lessons lacked. A few stepsfrom their own door she went on before her father and waited at thethreshold. But Grandet, who saw a newspaper in the notary's hand,stopped short and asked,--

°°°°"How are the Funds?"

°°°°"You never listen to my advice, Grandet," answered Cruchot. "Buy soon;you will still make twenty per cent in two years, besides getting anexcellent rate of interest,--five thousand a year for eighty thousandfrancs fifty centimes."

°°°°"We'll see about that," answered Grandet, rubbing his chin."Good God!" exclaimed the notary.

°°°°"Well, what?" cried Grandet; and at the same moment Cruchot put thenewspaper under his eyes and said:

°°°°"Read that!"

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, one of the most respected merchants in Paris,

°°°°blew his brains out yesterday, after making his usual appearance

°°°°at the Bourse. He had sent his resignation to the president of the

°°°°Chamber of Deputies, and had also resigned his functions as a

°°°°judge of the commercial courts. The failures of Monsieur Roguin

°°°°and Monsieur Souchet, his broker and his notary, had ruined him.

°°°°The esteem felt for Monsieur Grandet and the credit he enjoyed

°°°°were nevertheless such that he might have obtained the necessary

°°°°assistance from other business houses. It is much to be regretted

°°°°that so honorable a man should have yielded to momentary despair,"

°°°°etc.

°°°°"I knew it," said the old wine-grower to the notary.

°°°°The words sent a chill of horror through Maitre Cruchot, who,notwithstanding his impassibility as a notary, felt the cold runningdown his spine as he thought that Grandet of Paris had possiblyimplored in vain the millions of Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"And his son, so joyous yesterday--"

°°°°"He knows nothing as yet," answered Grandet, with the same composure."Adieu! Monsieur Grandet," said Cruchot, who now understood the stateof the case, and went off to reassure Monsieur de Bonfons.On entering, Grandet found breakfast ready. Madame Grandet, roundwhose neck Eugenie had flung her arms, kissing her with the quickeffusion of feeling often caused by secret grief, was already seatedin her chair on castors, knitting sleeves for the coming winter."You can begin to eat," said Nanon, coming downstairs four steps at atime; "the young one is sleeping like a cherub. Isn't he a darlingwith his eyes shut? I went in and I called him: no answer.""Let him sleep," said Grandet; "he'll wake soon enough to hear ill-tidings."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Eugenie, putting into her coffee the two littlebits of sugar weighing less than half an ounce which the old miseramused himself by cutting up in his leisure hours. Madame Grandet, whodid not dare to put the question, gazed at her husband.

°°°°"His father has blown his brains out."

°°°°"My uncle?" said Eugenie.

°°°°"Poor young man!" exclaimed Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Poor indeed!" said Grandet; "he isn't worth a sou!"

°°°°"Eh! poor boy, and he's sleeping like the king of the world!" saidNanon in a gentle voice.

°°°°Eugenie stopped eating. Her heart was wrung, as the young heart iswrung when pity for the suffering of one she loves overflows, for thefirst time, the whole being of a woman. The poor girl wept."What are you crying about? You didn't know your uncle," said herfather, giving her one of those hungry tigerish looks he doubtlessthrew upon his piles of gold.

°°°°"But, monsieur," said Nanon, "who wouldn't feel pity for the pooryoung man, sleeping there like a wooden shoe, without knowing what'scoming?"

°°°°"I didn't speak to you, Nanon. Hold your tongue!"

°°°°Eugenie learned at that moment that the woman who loves must be ableto hide her feelings. She did not answer.

°°°°"You will say nothing to him about it, Ma'ame Grandet, till I return,"said the old man. "I have to go and straighten the line of my hedgealong the high-road. I shall be back at noon, in time for the secondbreakfast, and then I will talk with my nephew about his affairs. Asfor you, Mademoiselle Eugenie, if it is for that dandy you are crying,that's enough, child. He's going off like a shot to the Indies. Youwill never see him again."

°°°°The father took his gloves from the brim of his hat, put them on withhis usual composure, pushed them in place by shoving the fingers ofboth hands together, and went out.

°°°°"Mamma, I am suffocating!" cried Eugenie when she was alone with hermother; "I have never suffered like this."

°°°°Madame Grandet, seeing that she turned pale, opened the window and lether breathe fresh air.

°°°°"I feel better!" said Eugenie after a moment.

°°°°This nervous excitement in a nature hitherto, to all appearance, calmand cold, reacted on Madame Grandet; she looked at her daughter withthe sympathetic intuition with which mothers are gifted for theobjects of their tenderness, and guessed all. In truth the life of theHungarian sisters, bound together by a freak of nature, could scarcelyhave been more intimate than that of Eugenie and her mother,--alwaystogether in the embrasure of that window, and sleeping together in thesame atmosphere.

°°°°"My poor child!" said Madame Grandet, taking Eugenie's head and layingit upon her bosom.

°°°°At these words the young girl raised her head, questioned her motherby a look, and seemed to search out her inmost thought.

°°°°"Why send him to the Indies?" she said. "If he is unhappy, ought henot to stay with us? Is he not our nearest relation?"

°°°°"Yes, my child, it seems natural; but your father has his reasons: wemust respect them."

°°°°The mother and daughter sat down in silence, the former upon herraised seat, the latter in her little armchair, and both took up theirwork. Swelling with gratitude for the full heart-understanding hermother had given her, Eugenie kissed the dear hand, saying,--"How good you are, my kind mamma!"

°°°°The words sent a glow of light into the motherly face, worn andblighted as it was by many sorrows.

°°°°"You like him?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°Madame Grandet only smiled in reply. Then, after a moment's silence,she said in a low voice: "Do you love him already? That is wrong.""Wrong?" said Eugenie. "Why is it wrong? You are pleased with him,Nanon is pleased with him; why should he not please me? Come, mamma,let us set the table for his breakfast."

°°°°She threw down her work, and her mother did the same, saying, "Foolishchild!" But she sanctioned the child's folly by sharing it. Eugeniecalled Nanon.

°°°°"What do you want now, mademoiselle?"

°°°°"Nanon, can we have cream by midday?"

°°°°"Ah! midday, to be sure you can," answered the old servant."Well, let him have his coffee very strong; I heard Monsieur desGrassins say that they make the coffee very strong in Paris. Put in agreat deal."

°°°°"Where am I to get it?"

°°°°"Buy some."

°°°°"Suppose monsieur meets me?"

°°°°"He has gone to his fields."

°°°°"I'll run, then. But Monsieur Fessard asked me yesterday if the Magihad come to stay with us when I bought the wax candle. All the townwill know our goings-on."

°°°°"If your father finds it out," said Madame Grandet, "he is capable ofbeating us."

°°°°"Well, let him beat us; we will take his blows on our knees."Madame Grandet for all answer raised her eyes to heaven. Nanon put onher hood and went off. Eugenie got out some clean table-linen, andwent to fetch a few bunches of grapes which she had amused herself byhanging on a string across the attic; she walked softly along thecorridor, so as not to waken her cousin, and she could not helplistening at the door to his quiet breathing.

°°°°"Sorrow is watching while he sleeps," she thought.

°°°°She took the freshest vine-leaves and arranged her dish of grapes ascoquettishly as a practised house-keeper might have done, and placedit triumphantly on the table. She laid hands on the pears counted outby her father, and piled them in a pyramid mixed with leaves. She wentand came, and skipped and ran. She would have liked to lay undercontribution everything in her father's house; but the keys were inhis pocket. Nanon came back with two fresh eggs. At sight of themEugenie almost hugged her round the neck.

°°°°"The farmer from Lande had them in his basket. I asked him for them,and he gave them to me, the darling, for nothing, as an attention!"VAfter two hours' thought and care, during which Eugenie jumped uptwenty times from her work to see if the coffee were boiling, or to goand listen to the noise her cousin made in dressing, she succeeded inpreparing a simple little breakfast, very inexpensive, but which,nevertheless, departed alarmingly from the inveterate customs of thehouse. The midday breakfast was always taken standing. Each took aslice of bread, a little fruit or some butter, and a glass of wine. AsEugenie looked at the table drawn up near the fire with an arm-chairplaced before her cousin's plate, at the two dishes of fruit, the egg-cup, the bottle of white wine, the bread, and the sugar heaped up in asaucer, she trembled in all her limbs at the mere thought of the lookher father would give her if he should come in at that moment. Sheglanced often at the clock to see if her cousin could breakfast beforethe master's return.

°°°°"Don't be troubled, Eugenie; if your father comes in, I will take itall upon myself," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Eugenie could not repress a tear.

°°°°"Oh, my good mother!" she cried, "I have never loved you enough."Charles, who had been tramping about his room for some time, singingto himself, now came down. Happily, it was only eleven o'clock. Thetrue Parisian! he had put as much dandyism into his dress as if hewere in the chateau of the noble lady then travelling in Scotland. Hecame into the room with the smiling, courteous manner so becoming toyouth, which made Eugenie's heart beat with mournful joy. He had takenthe destruction of his castles in Anjou as a joke, and came up to hisaunt gaily.

°°°°"Have you slept well, dear aunt? and you, too, my cousin?""Very well, monsieur; did you?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"I? perfectly."

°°°°"You must be hungry, cousin," said Eugenie; "will you take your seat?""I never breakfast before midday; I never get up till then. However, Ifared so badly on the journey that I am glad to eat something at once.Besides--" here he pulled out the prettiest watch Breguet ever made."Dear me! I am early, it is only eleven o'clock!"

°°°°"Early?" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Yes; but I wanted to put my things in order. Well, I shall be glad tohave anything to eat,--anything, it doesn't matter what, a chicken, apartridge."

°°°°"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Nanon, overhearing the words.

°°°°"A partridge!" whispered Eugenie to herself; she would gladly havegiven the whole of her little hoard for a partridge.

°°°°"Come and sit down," said his aunt.

°°°°The young dandy let himself drop into an easy-chair, just as a prettywoman falls gracefully upon a sofa. Eugenie and her mother tookordinary chairs and sat beside him, near the fire.

°°°°"Do you always live here?" said Charles, thinking the room uglier bydaylight than it had seemed the night before.

°°°°"Always," answered Eugenie, looking at him, "except during thevintage. Then we go and help Nanon, and live at the Abbaye desNoyers."

°°°°"Don't you ever take walks?"

°°°°"Sometimes on Sunday after vespers, when the weather is fine," saidMadame Grandet, "we walk on the bridge, or we go and watch thehaymakers."

°°°°"Have you a theatre?"

°°°°"Go to the theatre!" exclaimed Madame Grandet, "see a play! Why,monsieur, don't you know it is a mortal sin?"

°°°°"See here, monsieur," said Nanon, bringing in the eggs, "here are yourchickens,--in the shell."

°°°°"Oh! fresh eggs," said Charles, who, like all people accustomed toluxury, had already forgotten about his partridge, "that is delicious:now, if you will give me the butter, my good girl."

°°°°"Butter! then you can't have the /galette/."

°°°°"Nanon, bring the butter," cried Eugenie.

°°°°The young girl watched her cousin as he cut his sippets, with as muchpleasure as a grisette takes in a melodrama where innocence and virtuetriumph. Charles, brought up by a charming mother, improved, andtrained by a woman of fashion, had the elegant, dainty, foppishmovements of a coxcomb. The compassionate sympathy and tenderness of ayoung girl possess a power that is actually magnetic; so that Charles,finding himself the object of the attentions of his aunt and cousin,could not escape the influence of feelings which flowed towards him,as it were, and inundated him. He gave Eugenie a bright, caressinglook full of kindness,--a look which seemed itself a smile. Heperceived, as his eyes lingered upon her, the exquisite harmony offeatures in the pure face, the grace of her innocent attitude, themagic clearness of the eyes, where young love sparkled and desireshone unconsciously.

°°°°"Ah! my dear cousin, if you were in full dress at the Opera, I assureyou my aunt's words would come true,--you would make the men committhe mortal sin of envy, and the women the sin of jealousy."The compliment went to Eugenie's heart and set it beating, though shedid not understand its meaning.

°°°°"Oh! cousin," she said, "you are laughing at a poor little countrygirl."

°°°°"If you knew me, my cousin, you would know that I abhor ridicule; itwithers the heart and jars upon all my feelings." Here he swallowedhis buttered sippet very gracefully. "No, I really have not enoughmind to make fun of others; and doubtless it is a great defect. InParis, when they want to disparage a man, they say: 'He has a goodheart.' The phrase means: 'The poor fellow is as stupid as arhinoceros.' But as I am rich, and known to hit the bull's-eye atthirty paces with any kind of pistol, and even in the open fields,ridicule respects me."

°°°°"My dear nephew, that bespeaks a good heart."

°°°°"You have a very pretty ring," said Eugenie; "is there any harm inasking to see it?"

°°°°Charles held out his hand after loosening the ring, and Eugenieblushed as she touched the pink nails of her cousin with the tips ofher fingers.

°°°°"See, mamma, what beautiful workmanship."

°°°°"My! there's a lot of gold!" said Nanon, bringing in the coffee."What is that?" exclaimed Charles, laughing, as he pointed to anoblong pot of brown earthenware, glazed on the inside, and edged witha fringe of ashes, from the bottom of which the coffee-grounds werebubbling up and falling in the boiling liquid.

°°°°"It is boiled coffee," said Nanon.

°°°°"Ah! my dear aunt, I shall at least leave one beneficent trace of myvisit here. You are indeed behind the age! I must teach you to makegood coffee in a Chaptal coffee-pot."

°°°°He tried to explain the process of a Chaptal coffee-pot.

°°°°"Gracious! if there are so many things as all that to do," said Nanon,"we may as well give up our lives to it. I shall never make coffeethat way; I know that! Pray, who is to get the fodder for the cowwhile I make the coffee?"

°°°°"I will make it," said Eugenie.

°°°°"Child!" said Madame Grandet, looking at her daughter.

°°°°The word recalled to their minds the sorrow that was about to fallupon the unfortunate young man; the three women were silent, andlooked at him with an air of commiseration that caught his attention."Is anything the matter, my cousin?" he said.

°°°°"Hush!" said Madame Grandet to Eugenie, who was about to answer; "youknow, my daughter, that your father charged us not to speak tomonsieur--"

°°°°"Say Charles," said young Grandet.

°°°°"Ah! you are called Charles? What a beautiful name!" cried Eugenie.Presentiments of evil are almost always justified. At this momentNanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie, who had all three been thinkingwith a shudder of the old man's return, heard the knock whose echoesthey knew but too well.

°°°°"There's papa!" said Eugenie.

°°°°She removed the saucer filled with sugar, leaving a few pieces on thetable-cloth; Nanon carried off the egg-cup; Madame Grandet sat up likea frightened hare. It was evidently a panic, which amazed Charles, whowas wholly unable to understand it.

°°°°"Why! what is the matter?" he asked.

°°°°"My father has come," answered Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, what of that?"

°°°°Monsieur Grandet entered the room, threw his keen eye upon the table,upon Charles, and saw the whole thing.

°°°°"Ha! ha! so you have been making a feast for your nephew; very good,very good, very good indeed!" he said, without stuttering. "When thecat's away, the mice will play."

°°°°"Feast!" thought Charles, incapable of suspecting or imagining therules and customs of the household.

°°°°"Give me my glass, Nanon," said the master

°°°°Eugenie brought the glass. Grandet drew a horn-handled knife with abig blade from his breeches' pocket, cut a slice of bread, took asmall bit of butter, spread it carefully on the bread, and ate itstanding. At this moment Charlie was sweetening his coffee. PereGrandet saw the bits of sugar, looked at his wife, who turned pale,and made three steps forward; he leaned down to the poor woman's earand said,--

°°°°"Where did you get all that sugar?"

°°°°"Nanon fetched it from Fessard's; there was none."

°°°°It is impossible to picture the profound interest the three women tookin this mute scene. Nanon had left her kitchen and stood looking intothe room to see what would happen. Charles, having tasted his coffee,found it bitter and glanced about for the sugar, which Grandet hadalready put away.

°°°°"What do you want?" said his uncle.

°°°°"The sugar."

°°°°"Put in more milk," answered the master of the house; "your coffeewill taste sweeter."

°°°°Eugenie took the saucer which Grandet had put away and placed it onthe table, looking calmly at her father as she did so. Most assuredly,the Parisian woman who held a silken ladder with her feeble arms tofacilitate the flight of her lover, showed no greater courage thanEugenie displayed when she replaced the sugar upon the table. Thelover rewarded his mistress when she proudly showed him her beautifulbruised arm, and bathed every swollen vein with tears and kisses tillit was cured with happiness. Charles, on the other hand, never so muchas knew the secret of the cruel agitation that shook and bruised theheart of his cousin, crushed as it was by the look of the old miser."You are not eating your breakfast, wife."

°°°°The poor helot came forward with a piteous look, cut herself a pieceof bread, and took a pear. Eugenie boldly offered her father somegrapes, saying,--

°°°°"Taste my preserves, papa. My cousin, you will eat some, will you not?I went to get these pretty grapes expressly for you."

°°°°"If no one stops them, they will pillage Saumur for you, nephew. Whenyou have finished, we will go into the garden; I have something totell you which can't be sweetened."

°°°°Eugenie and her mother cast a look on Charles whose meaning the youngman could not mistake.

°°°°"What is it you mean, uncle? Since the death of my poor mother"--atthese words his voice softened--"no other sorrow can touch me.""My nephew, who knows by what afflictions God is pleased to try us?"said his aunt.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta," said Grandet, "there's your nonsense beginning. I amsorry to see those white hands of yours, nephew"; and he showed theshoulder-of-mutton fists which Nature had put at the end of his ownarms. "There's a pair of hands made to pick up silver pieces. You'vebeen brought up to put your feet in the kid out of which we make thepurses we keep our money in. A bad look-out! Very bad!"

°°°°"What do you mean, uncle? I'll be hanged if I understand a single wordof what you are saying."

°°°°"Come!" said Grandet.

°°°°The miser closed the blade of his knife with a snap, drank the last ofhis wine, and opened the door.

°°°°"My cousin, take courage!"

°°°°The tone of the young girl struck terror to Charles's heart, and hefollowed his terrible uncle, a prey to disquieting thoughts. Eugenie,her mother, and Nanon went into the kitchen, moved by irresistiblecuriosity to watch the two actors in the scene which was about to takeplace in the garden, where at first the uncle walked silently ahead ofthe nephew. Grandet was not at all troubled at having to tell Charlesof the death of his father; but he did feel a sort of compassion inknowing him to be without a penny, and he sought for some phrase orformula by which to soften the communication of that cruel truth. "Youhave lost your father," seemed to him a mere nothing to say; fathersdie before their children. But "you are absolutely without means,"--all the misfortunes of life were summed up in those words! Grandetwalked round the garden three times, the gravel crunching under hisheavy step.

°°°°In the crucial moments of life our minds fasten upon the localitywhere joys or sorrows overwhelm us. Charles noticed with minuteattention the box-borders of the little garden, the yellow leaves asthey fluttered down, the dilapidated walls, the gnarled fruit-trees,--picturesque details which were destined to remain forever in hismemory, blending eternally, by the mnemonics that belong exclusivelyto the passions, with the recollections of this solemn hour."It is very fine weather, very warm," said Grandet, drawing a longbreath.

°°°°"Yes, uncle; but why--"

°°°°"Well, my lad," answered his uncle, "I have some bad news to give you.Your father is ill--"

°°°°"Then why am I here?" said Charles. "Nanon," he cried, "order post-horses! I can get a carriage somewhere?" he added, turning to hisuncle, who stood motionless.

°°°°"Horses and carriages are useless," answered Grandet, looking atCharles, who remained silent, his eyes growing fixed. "Yes, my poorboy, you guess the truth,--he is dead. But that's nothing; there issomething worse: he blew out his brains."

°°°°"My father!"

°°°°"Yes, but that's not the worst; the newspapers are all talking aboutit. Here, read that."

°°°°Grandet, who had borrowed the fatal article from Cruchot, thrust thepaper under his nephew's eyes. The poor young man, still a child,still at an age when feelings wear no mask, burst into tears."That's good!" thought Grandet; "his eyes frightened me. He'll be allright if he weeps,--That is not the worst, my poor nephew," he saidaloud, not noticing whether Charles heard him, "that is nothing; youwill get over it: but--"

°°°°"Never, never! My father! Oh, my father!"

°°°°"He has ruined you, you haven't a penny."

°°°°"What does that matter? My father! Where is my father?"

°°°°His sobs resounded horribly against those dreary walls andreverberated in the echoes. The three women, filled with pity, weptalso; for tears are often as contagious as laughter. Charles, withoutlistening further to his uncle, ran through the court and up thestaircase to his chamber, where he threw himself across the bed andhid his face in the sheets, to weep in peace for his lost parents."The first burst must have its way," said Grandet, entering theliving-room, where Eugenie and her mother had hastily resumed theirseats and were sewing with trembling hands, after wiping their eyes."But that young man is good for nothing; his head is more taken upwith the dead than with his money."

°°°°Eugenie shuddered as she heard her father's comment on the most sacredof all griefs. From that moment she began to judge him. Charles'ssobs, though muffled, still sounded through the sepulchral house; andhis deep groans, which seemed to come from the earth beneath, onlyceased towards evening, after growing gradually feebler.

°°°°"Poor young man!" said Madame Grandet.

°°°°Fatal exclamation! Pere Grandet looked at his wife, at Eugenie, and atthe sugar-bowl. He recollected the extraordinary breakfast preparedfor the unfortunate youth, and he took a position in the middle of theroom.

°°°°"Listen to me," he said, with his usual composure. "I hope that youwill not continue this extravagance, Madame Grandet. I don't give youMY money to stuff that young fellow with sugar."

°°°°"My mother had nothing to do with it," said Eugenie; "it was I who--""Is it because you are of age," said Grandet, interrupting hisdaughter, "that you choose to contradict me? Remember, Eugenie--""Father, the son of your brother ought to receive from us--""Ta, ta, ta, ta!" exclaimed the cooper on four chromatic tones; "theson of my brother this, my nephew that! Charles is nothing at all tous; he hasn't a farthing, his father has failed; and when this dandyhas cried his fill, off he goes from here. I won't have himrevolutionize my household."

°°°°"What is 'failing,' father?" asked Eugenie.

°°°°"To fail," answered her father, "is to commit the most dishonorableaction that can disgrace a man."

°°°°"It must be a great sin," said Madame Grandet, "and our brother may bedamned."

°°°°"There, there, don't begin with your litanies!" said Grandet,shrugging his shoulders. "To fail, Eugenie," he resumed, "is to commita theft which the law, unfortunately, takes under its protection.People have given their property to Guillaume Grandet trusting to hisreputation for honor and integrity; he has made away with it all, andleft them nothing but their eyes to weep with. A highway robber isbetter than a bankrupt: the one attacks you and you can defendyourself, he risks his own life; but the other--in short, Charles isdishonored."

°°°°The words rang in the poor girl's heart and weighed it down with theirheavy meaning. Upright and delicate as a flower born in the depths ofa forest, she knew nothing of the world's maxims, of its deceitfularguments and specious sophisms; she therefore believed the atrociousexplanation which her father gave her designedly, concealing thedistinction which exists between an involuntary failure and anintentional one.

°°°°"Father, could you not have prevented such a misfortune?""My brother did not consult me. Besides, he owes four millions.""What is a 'million,' father?" she asked, with the simplicity of achild which thinks it can find out at once all that it wants to know."A million?" said Grandet, "why, it is a million pieces of twenty souseach, and it takes five twenty sous pieces to make five francs.""Dear me!" cried Eugenie, "how could my uncle possibly have had fourmillions? Is there any one else in France who ever had so manymillions?" Pere Grandet stroked his chin, smiled, and his wen seemedto dilate. "But what will become of my cousin Charles?"

°°°°"He is going off to the West Indies by his father's request, and hewill try to make his fortune there."

°°°°"Has he got the money to go with?"

°°°°"I shall pay for his journey as far as--yes, as far as Nantes."Eugenie sprang into his arms.

°°°°"Oh, father, how good you are!"

°°°°She kissed him with a warmth that almost made Grandet ashamed ofhimself, for his conscience galled him a little.

°°°°"Will it take much time to amass a million?" she asked.

°°°°"Look here!" said the old miser, "you know what a napoleon is? Well,it takes fifty thousand napoleons to make a million."

°°°°"Mamma, we must say a great many /neuvaines/ for him."

°°°°"I was thinking so," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"That's the way, always spending my money!" cried the father. "Do youthink there are francs on every bush?"

°°°°At this moment a muffled cry, more distressing than all the others,echoed through the garrets and struck a chill to the hearts of Eugenieand her mother.

°°°°"Nanon, go upstairs and see that he does not kill himself," saidGrandet. "Now, then," he added, looking at his wife and daughter, whohad turned pale at his words, "no nonsense, you two! I must leave you;I have got to see about the Dutchmen who are going away to-day. Andthen I must find Cruchot, and talk with him about all this."He departed. As soon as he had shut the door Eugenie and her motherbreathed more freely. Until this morning the young girl had never feltconstrained in the presence of her father; but for the last few hoursevery moment wrought a change in her feelings and ideas.

°°°°"Mamma, how many louis are there in a cask of wine?"

°°°°"Your father sells his from a hundred to a hundred and fifty francs,sometimes two hundred,--at least, so I've heard say."

°°°°"Then papa must be rich?"

°°°°"Perhaps he is. But Monsieur Cruchot told me he bought Froidfond twoyears ago; that may have pinched him."

°°°°Eugenie, not being able to understand the question of her father'sfortune, stopped short in her calculations.

°°°°"He didn't even see me, the darling!" said Nanon, coming back from hererrand. "He's stretched out like a calf on his bed and crying like theMadeleine, and that's a blessing! What's the matter with the poor dearyoung man!"

°°°°"Let us go and console him, mamma; if any one knocks, we can comedown."

°°°°Madame Grandet was helpless against the sweet persuasive tones of herdaughter's voice. Eugenie was sublime: she had become a woman. Thetwo, with beating hearts, went up to Charles's room. The door wasopen. The young man heard and saw nothing; plunged in grief, he onlyuttered inarticulate cries.

°°°°"How he loves his father!" said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°In the utterance of those words it was impossible to mistake the hopesof a heart that, unknown to itself, had suddenly become passionate.Madame Grandet cast a mother's look upon her daughter, and thenwhispered in her ear,--

°°°°"Take care, you will love him!"

°°°°"Love him!" answered Eugenie. "Ah! if you did but know what my fathersaid to Monsieur Cruchot."

°°°°Charles turned over, and saw his aunt and cousin.

°°°°"I have lost my father, my poor father! If he had told me his secrettroubles we might have worked together to repair them. My God! my poorfather! I was so sure I should see him again that I think I kissed himquite coldly--"

°°°°Sobs cut short the words.

°°°°"We will pray for him," said Madame Grandet. "Resign yourself to thewill of God."

°°°°"Cousin," said Eugenie, "take courage! Your loss is irreparable;therefore think only of saving your honor."

°°°°With the delicate instinct of a woman who intuitively puts her mindinto all things, even at the moment when she offers consolation,Eugenie sought to cheat her cousin's grief by turning his thoughtsinward upon himself.

°°°°"My honor?" exclaimed the young man, tossing aside his hair with animpatient gesture as he sat up on his bed and crossed his arms. "Ah!that is true. My uncle said my father had failed." He uttered a heart-rending cry, and hid his face in his hands. "Leave me, leave me,cousin! My God! my God! forgive my father, for he must have sufferedsorely!"

°°°°There was something terribly attractive in the sight of this youngsorrow, sincere without reasoning or afterthought. It was a virgingrief which the simple hearts of Eugenie and her mother were fitted tocomprehend, and they obeyed the sign Charles made them to leave him tohimself. They went downstairs in silence and took their accustomedplaces by the window and sewed for nearly an hour without exchanging aword. Eugenie had seen in the furtive glance that she cast about theyoung man's room--that girlish glance which sees all in the twinklingof an eye--the pretty trifles of his dressing-case, his scissors, hisrazors embossed with gold. This gleam of luxury across her cousin'sgrief only made him the more interesting to her, possibly by way ofcontrast. Never before had so serious an event, so dramatic a sight,touched the imaginations of these two passive beings, hitherto sunk inthe stillness and calm of solitude.

°°°°"Mamma," said Eugenie, "we must wear mourning for my uncle.""Your father will decide that," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°They relapsed into silence. Eugenie drew her stitches with a uniformmotion which revealed to an observer the teeming thoughts of hermeditation. The first desire of the girl's heart was to share hercousin's mourning.

°°°°VI

°°°°About four o'clock an abrupt knock at the door struck sharply on theheart of Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What can have happened to your father?" she said to her daughter.Grandet entered joyously. After taking off his gloves, he rubbed hishands hard enough to take off their skin as well, if his epidermis hadnot been tanned and cured like Russia leather,--saving, of course, theperfume of larch-trees and incense. Presently his secret escaped him."Wife," he said, without stuttering, "I've trapped them all! Our wineis sold! The Dutch and the Belgians have gone. I walked about themarket-place in front of their inn, pretending to be doing nothing.That Belgian fellow--you know who I mean--came up to me. The owners ofall the good vineyards have kept back their vintages, intending towait; well, I didn't hinder them. The Belgian was in despair; I sawthat. In a minute the bargain was made. He takes my vintage at twohundred francs the puncheon, half down. He paid me in gold; the notesare drawn. Here are six louis for you. In three months wines will havefallen."

°°°°These words, uttered in a quiet tone of voice, were nevertheless sobitterly sarcastic that the inhabitants of Saumur, grouped at thismoment in the market-place and overwhelmed by the news of the saleGrandet had just effected, would have shuddered had they heard them.Their panic would have brought the price of wines down fifty per centat once.

°°°°"Did you have a thousand puncheons this year, father?"

°°°°"Yes, little one."

°°°°That term applied to his daughter was the superlative expression ofthe old miser's joy.

°°°°"Then that makes two hundred thousand pieces of twenty sous each?""Yes, Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"Then, father, you can easily help Charles."

°°°°The amazement, the anger, the stupefaction of Belshazzar when he sawthe /Mene-Tekel-Upharsin/ before his eyes is not to be compared withthe cold rage of Grandet, who, having forgotten his nephew, now foundhim enshrined in the heart and calculations of his daughter."What's this? Ever since that dandy put foot in MY house everythinggoes wrong! You behave as if you had the right to buy sugar-plums andmake feasts and weddings. I won't have that sort of thing. I hope Iknow my duty at my time of life! I certainly sha'n't take lessons frommy daughter, or from anybody else. I shall do for my nephew what it isproper to do, and you have no need to poke your nose into it. As foryou, Eugenie," he added, facing her, "don't speak of this again, orI'll send you to the Abbaye des Noyers with Nanon, see if I don't; andno later than to-morrow either, if you disobey me! Where is thatfellow, has he come down yet?"

°°°°"No, my friend," answered Madame Grandet.

°°°°"What is he doing then?"

°°°°"He is weeping for his father," said Eugenie.

°°°°Grandet looked at his daughter without finding a word to say; afterall, he was a father. He made a couple of turns up and down the room,and then went hurriedly to his secret den to think over an investmenthe was meditating in the public Funds. The thinning out of his twothousand acres of forest land had yielded him six hundred thousandfrancs: putting this sum to that derived from the sale of his poplarsand to his other gains for the last year and for the current year, hehad amassed a total of nine hundred thousand francs, without countingthe two hundred thousand he had got by the sale just concluded. Thetwenty per cent which Cruchot assured him would gain in a short timefrom the Funds, then quoted at seventy, tempted him. He figured outhis calculation on the margin of the newspaper which gave the accountof his brother's death, all the while hearing the moans of his nephew,but without listening to them. Nanon came and knocked on the wall tosummon him to dinner. On the last step of the staircase he was sayingto himself as he came down,--

°°°°"I'll do it; I shall get eight per cent interest. In two years I shallhave fifteen hundred thousand francs, which I will then draw out ingood gold,--Well, where's my nephew?"

°°°°"He says he doesn't want anything to eat," answered Nanon; "that's notgood for him."

°°°°"So much saved," retorted her master.

°°°°"That's so," she said.

°°°°"Bah! he won't cry long. Hunger drives the wolves out of the woods."The dinner was eaten in silence.

°°°°"My good friend," said Madame Grandet, when the cloth was removed, "wemust put on mourning."

°°°°"Upon my word, Madame Grandet! what will you invent next to spendmoney on? Mourning is in the heart, and not in the clothes.""But mourning for a brother is indispensable; and the Church commandsus to--"

°°°°"Buy your mourning out of your six louis. Give me a hat-band; that'senough for me."

°°°°Eugenie raised her eyes to heaven without uttering a word. Hergenerous instincts, slumbering and long repressed but now suddenly andfor the first time awakened, were galled at every turn. The eveningpassed to all appearance like a thousand other evenings of theirmonotonous life, yet it was certainly the most horrible. Eugenie sewedwithout raising her head, and did not use the workbox which Charleshad despised the night before. Madame Grandet knitted her sleeves.Grandet twirled his thumbs for four hours, absorbed in calculationswhose results were on the morrow to astonish Saumur. No one came tovisit the family that day. The whole town was ringing with the news ofthe business trick just played by Grandet, the failure of his brother,and the arrival of his nephew. Obeying the desire to gossip over theirmutual interests, all the upper and middle-class wine-growers inSaumur met at Monsieur des Grassins, where terrible imprecations werebeing fulminated against the ex-mayor. Nanon was spinning, and thewhirr of her wheel was the only sound heard beneath the gray raftersof that silent hall.

°°°°"We don't waste our tongues," she said, showing her teeth, as largeand white as peeled almonds.

°°°°"Nothing should be wasted," answered Grandet, rousing himself from hisreverie. He saw a perspective of eight millions in three years, and hewas sailing along that sheet of gold. "Let us go to bed. I will bid mynephew good-night for the rest of you, and see if he will takeanything."

°°°°Madame Grandet remained on the landing of the first storey to hear theconversation that was about to take place between the goodman and hisnephew. Eugenie, bolder than her mother, went up two stairs."Well, nephew, you are in trouble. Yes, weep, that's natural. A fatheris a father; but we must bear our troubles patiently. I am a gooduncle to you, remember that. Come, take courage! Will you have alittle glass of wine?" (Wine costs nothing in Saumur, and they offerit as tea is offered in China.) "Why!" added Grandet, "you have got nolight! That's bad, very bad; you ought to see what you are about," andhe walked to the chimney-piece. "What's this?" he cried. "A waxcandle! How the devil did they filch a wax candle? The spendthriftswould tear down the ceilings of my house to boil the fellow's eggs."Hearing these words, mother and daughter slipped back into their roomsand burrowed in their beds, with the celerity of frightened micegetting back to their holes.

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you found a mine?" said the man, coming into thechamber of his wife.

°°°°"My friend, wait; I am saying my prayers," said the poor mother in atrembling voice.

°°°°"The devil take your good God!" growled Grandet in reply.Misers have no belief in a future life; the present is their all inall. This thought casts a terrible light upon our present epoch, inwhich, far more than at any former period, money sways the laws andpolitics and morals.  Institutions, books, men, and dogmas, allconspire to undermine belief in a future life,--a belief upon whichthe social edifice has rested for eighteen hundred years. The grave,as a means of transition, is little feared in our day. The future,which once opened to us beyond the requiems, has now been importedinto the present. To obtain /per fas et nefas/ a terrestrial paradiseof luxury and earthly enjoyment, to harden the heart and macerate thebody for the sake of fleeting possessions, as the martyrs oncesuffered all things to reach eternal joys, this is now the universalthought--a thought written everywhere, even in the very laws which askof the legislator, "What do you pay?" instead of asking him, "What doyou think?" When this doctrine has passed down from the bourgeoisie tothe populace, where will this country be?

°°°°"Madame Grandet, have you done?" asked the old man.

°°°°"My friend, I am praying for you."

°°°°"Very good! Good-night; to-morrow morning we will have a talk."The poor woman went to sleep like a schoolboy who, not having learnedhis lessons, knows he will see his master's angry face on the morrow.At the moment when, filled with fear, she was drawing the sheet aboveher head that she might stifle hearing, Eugenie, in her night-gown andwith naked feet, ran to her side and kissed her brow.

°°°°"Oh! my good mother," she said, "to-morrow I will tell him it was I.""No; he would send you to Noyers. Leave me to manage it; he cannot eatme."

°°°°"Do you hear, mamma?"

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"/He/ is weeping still."

°°°°"Go to bed, my daughter; you will take cold in your feet: the floor isdamp."

°°°°*****

°°°°Thus passed the solemn day which was destined to weight upon the wholelife of the rich and poor heiress, whose sleep was never again to beso calm, nor yet so pure, as it had been up to this moment. It oftenhappens that certain actions of human life seem, literally speaking,improbable, though actual. Is not this because we constantly omit toturn the stream of psychological light upon our impulsivedeterminations, and fail to explain the subtile reasons, mysteriouslyconceived in our minds, which impelled them? Perhaps Eugenie's deeppassion should be analyzed in its most delicate fibres; for it became,scoffers might say, a malady which influenced her whole existence.Many people prefer to deny results rather than estimate the force ofties and links and bonds, which secretly join one fact to another inthe moral order. Here, therefore, Eugenie's past life will offer toobservers of human nature an explanation of her naive want ofreflection and the suddenness of the emotions which overflowed hersoul. The more tranquil her life had been, the more vivid was herwomanly pity, the more simple-minded were the sentiments now developedin her soul.

°°°°Made restless by the events of the day, she woke at intervals tolisten to her cousin, thinking she heard the sighs which still echoedin her heart. Sometimes she saw him dying of his trouble, sometimesshe dreamed that he fainted from hunger. Towards morning she wascertain that she heard a startling cry. She dressed at once and ran,in the dawning light, with a swift foot to her cousin's chamber, thedoor of which he had left open. The candle had burned down to thesocket. Charles, overcome by nature, was sleeping, dressed and sittingin an armchair beside the bed, on which his head rested; he dreamed asmen dream on an empty stomach. Eugenie might weep at her ease; shemight admire the young and handsome face blotted with grief, the eyesswollen with weeping, that seemed, sleeping as they were, to wellforth tears. Charles felt sympathetically the young girl's presence;he opened his eyes and saw her pitying him.

°°°°"Pardon me, my cousin," he said, evidently not knowing the hour northe place in which he found himself.

°°°°"There are hearts who hear you, cousin, and /we/ thought you mightneed something. You should go to bed; you tire yourself by sittingthus."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, then, adieu!"

°°°°She escaped, ashamed and happy at having gone there. Innocence alonecan dare to be so bold. Once enlightened, virtue makes hercalculations as well as vice. Eugenie, who had not trembled beside hercousin, could scarcely stand upon her legs when she regained herchamber. Her ignorant life had suddenly come to an end; she reasoned,she rebuked herself with many reproaches.

°°°°"What will he think of me? He will think that I love him!"That was what she most wished him to think. An honest love has its ownprescience, and knows that love begets love. What an event for thispoor solitary girl thus to have entered the chamber of a young man!Are there not thoughts and actions in the life of love which tocertain souls bear the full meaning of the holiest espousals? An hourlater she went to her mother and dressed her as usual. Then they bothcame down and sat in their places before the window waiting forGrandet, with that cruel anxiety which, according to the individualcharacter, freezes the heart or warms it, shrivels or dilates it, whena scene is feared, a punishment expected,--a feeling so natural thateven domestic animals possess it, and whine at the slightest pain ofpunishment, though they make no outcry when they inadvertently hurtthemselves. The goodman came down; but he spoke to his wife with anabsent manner, kissed Eugenie, and sat down to table without appearingto remember his threats of the night before.

°°°°"What has become of my nephew? The lad gives no trouble.""Monsieur, he is asleep," answered Nanon.

°°°°"So much the better; he won't want a wax candle," said Grandet in ajeering tone.

°°°°This unusual clemency, this bitter gaiety, struck Madame Grandet withamazement, and she looked at her husband attentively. The goodman--here it may be well to explain that in Touraine, Anjou, Pitou, andBretagne the word "goodman," already used to designate Grandet, isbestowed as often upon harsh and cruel men as upon those of kindlytemperament, when either have reached a certain age; the title meansnothing on the score of individual gentleness--the goodman took hishat and gloves, saying as he went out,--

°°°°"I am going to loiter about the market-place and find Cruchot.""Eugenie, your father certainly has something on his mind."Grandet, who was a poor sleeper, employed half his nights in thepreliminary calculations which gave such astonishing accuracy to hisviews and observations and schemes, and secured to them the unfailingsuccess at sight of which his townsmen stood amazed. All human poweris a compound of time and patience. Powerful beings will and wait. Thelife of a miser is the constant exercise of human power put to theservice of self. It rests on two sentiments only,--self-love and self-interest; but self-interest being to a certain extent compact andintelligent self-love, the visible sign of real superiority, itfollows that self-love and self-interest are two parts of the samewhole,--egotism. From this arises, perhaps, the excessive curiosityshown in the habits of a miser's life whenever they are put before theworld. Every nature holds by a thread to those beings who challengeall human sentiments by concentrating all in one passion. Where is theman without desire? and what social desire can be satisfied withoutmoney?

°°°°Grandet unquestionably "had something on his mind," to use his wife'sexpression. There was in him, as in all misers, a persistent cravingto play a commercial game with other men and win their money legally.To impose upon other people was to him a sign of power, a perpetualproof that he had won the right to despise those feeble beings whosuffer themselves to be preyed upon in this world. Oh! who has evertruly understood the lamb lying peacefully at the feet of God?--touching emblem of all terrestrial victims, myth of their future,suffering and weakness glorified! This lamb it is which the miserfattens, puts in his fold, slaughters, cooks, eats, and then despises.The pasture of misers is compounded of money and disdain. During thenight Grandet's ideas had taken another course, which was the reasonof his sudden clemency. He had hatched a plot by which to trick theParisians, to decoy and dupe and snare them, to drive them into atrap, and make them go and come and sweat and hope and turn pale,--aplot by which to amuse himself, the old provincial cooper, sittingthere beneath his gloomy rafters, or passing up and down the rottenstaircase of his house in Saumur. His nephew filled his mind. Hewished to save the honor of his dead brother without the cost of apenny to the son or to himself. His own funds he was about to investfor three years; he had therefore nothing further to do than to managehis property in Saumur. He needed some nutriment for his maliciousactivity, and he found it suddenly in his brother's failure. Feelingnothing to squeeze between his own paws, he resolved to crush theParisians in behalf of Charles, and to play the part of a good brotheron the cheapest terms. The honor of the family counted for so littlein this scheme that his good intentions might be likened to theinterest a gambler takes in seeing a game well played in which he hasno stake. The Cruchots were a necessary part of his plan; but he wouldnot seek them,--he resolved to make them come to him, and to lead upthat very evening to a comedy whose plot he had just conceived, whichshould make him on the morrow an object of admiration to the wholetown without its costing him a single penny.

°°°°In her father's absence Eugenie had the happiness of busying herselfopenly with her much-loved cousin, of spending upon him fearlessly thetreasures of her pity,--woman's sublime superiority, the sole shedesires to have recognized, the sole she pardons man for letting herassume. Three or four times the young girl went to listen to hercousin's breathing, to know if he were sleeping or awake; then, whenhe had risen, she turned her thoughts to the cream, the eggs, thefruits, the plates, the glasses,--all that was a part of his breakfastbecame the object of some special care. At length she ran lightly upthe old staircase to listen to the noise her cousin made. Was hedressing? Did he still weep? She reached the door.

°°°°"My cousin!"

°°°°"Yes, cousin."

°°°°"Will you breakfast downstairs, or in your room?"

°°°°"Where you like."

°°°°"How do you feel?"

°°°°"Dear cousin, I am ashamed of being hungry."

°°°°This conversation, held through the closed door, was like an episodein a poem to Eugenie.

°°°°"Well, then, we will bring your breakfast to your own room, so as notto annoy my father."

°°°°She ran to the kitchen with the swiftness and lightness of a bird."Nanon, go and do his room!"

°°°°That staircase, so often traversed, which echoed to the slightestnoise, now lost its decaying aspect in the eyes of Eugenie. It grewluminous; it had a voice and spoke to her; it was young like herself,--young like the love it was now serving. Her mother, her kind,indulgent mother, lent herself to the caprices of the child's love,and after the room was put in order, both went to sit with the unhappyyouth and keep him company. Does not Christian charity makeconsolation a duty? The two women drew a goodly number of littlesophistries from their religion wherewith to justify their conduct.Charles was made the object of the tenderest and most loving care. Hissaddened heart felt the sweetness of the gentle friendship, theexquisite sympathy which these two souls, crushed under perpetualrestraint, knew so well how to display when, for an instant, they wereleft unfettered in the regions of suffering, their natural sphere.Claiming the right of relationship, Eugenie began to fold the linenand put in order the toilet articles which Charles had brought; thusshe could marvel at her ease over each luxurious bauble and thevarious knick-knacks of silver or chased gold, which she held long inher hand under a pretext of examining them. Charles could not seewithout emotion the generous interest his aunt and cousin felt in him;he knew society in Paris well enough to feel assured that, placed ashe now was, he would find all hearts indifferent or cold. Eugenie thusappeared to him in the splendor of a special beauty, and fromthenceforth he admired the innocence of life and manners which theprevious evening he had been inclined to ridicule. So when Eugenietook from Nanon the bowl of coffee and cream, and began to pour it outfor her cousin with the simplicity of real feeling, giving him akindly glance, the eyes of the Parisian filled with tears; he took herhand and kissed it.

°°°°"What troubles you?" she said.

°°°°"Oh! these are tears of gratitude," he answered.

°°°°Eugenie turned abruptly to the chimney-piece to take the candlesticks."Here, Nanon, carry them away!" she said.

°°°°When she looked again towards her cousin she was still blushing, buther looks could at least deceive, and did not betray the excess of joywhich innundated her heart; yet the eyes of both expressed the samesentiment as their souls flowed together in one thought,--the futurewas theirs. This soft emotion was all the more precious to Charles inthe midst of his heavy grief because it was wholly unexpected. Thesound of the knocker recalled the women to their usual station.Happily they were able to run downstairs with sufficient rapidity tobe seated at their work when Grandet entered; had he met them underthe archway it would have been enough to rouse his suspicions. Afterbreakfast, which the goodman took standing, the keeper from Froidfond,to whom the promised indemnity had never yet been paid, made hisappearance, bearing a hare and some partridges shot in the park, witheels and two pike sent as tribute by the millers.

°°°°"Ha, ha! poor Cornoiller; here he comes, like fish in Lent. Is allthat fit to eat?"

°°°°"Yes, my dear, generous master; it has been killed two days.""Come, Nanon, bestir yourself," said Grandet; "take these things,they'll do for dinner. I have invited the two Cruchots."

°°°°Nanon opened her eyes, stupid with amazement, and looked at everybodyin the room.

°°°°"Well!" she said, "and how am I to get the lard and the spices?""Wife," said Grandet, "give Nanon six francs, and remind me to getsome of the good wine out of the cellar."

°°°°"Well, then, Monsieur Grandet," said the keeper, who had come preparedwith an harangue for the purpose of settling the question of theindemnity, "Monsieur Grandet--"

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet; "I know what you want to say. You area good fellow; we will see about it to-morrow, I'm too busy to-day.Wife, give him five francs," he added to Madame Grandet as hedecamped.

°°°°The poor woman was only too happy to buy peace at the cost of elevenfrancs. She knew that Grandet would let her alone for a fortnightafter he had thus taken back, franc by franc, the money he had givenher.

°°°°"Here, Cornoiller," she said, slipping ten francs into the man's hand,"some day we will reward your services."

°°°°Cornoiller could say nothing, so he went away.

°°°°"Madame," said Nanon, who had put on her black coif and taken herbasket, "I want only three francs. You keep the rest; it'll go fastenough somehow."

°°°°"Have a good dinner, Nanon; my cousin will come down," said Eugenie."Something very extraordinary is going on, I am certain of it," saidMadame Grandet. "This is only the third time since our marriage thatyour father has given a dinner."

°°°°*****

°°°°About four o'clock, just as Eugenie and her mother had finishedsetting the table for six persons, and after the master of the househad brought up a few bottles of the exquisite wine which provincialscherish with true affection, Charles came down into the hall. Theyoung fellow was pale; his gestures, the expression of his face, hisglance, and the tones of his voice, all had a sadness which was fullof grace. He was not pretending grief, he truly suffered; and the veilof pain cast over his features gave him an interesting air dear to theheart of women. Eugenie loved him the more for it. Perhaps she feltthat sorrow drew him nearer to her. Charles was no longer the rich anddistinguished young man placed in a sphere far above her, but arelation plunged into frightful misery. Misery begets equality. Womenhave this in common with the angels,--suffering humanity belongs tothem. Charles and Eugenie understood each other and spoke only withtheir eyes; for the poor fallen dandy, orphaned and impoverished, satapart in a corner of the room, and was proudly calm and silent. Yet,from time to time, the gentle and caressing glance of the young girlshone upon him and constrained him away from his sad thoughts, drawinghim with her into the fields of hope and of futurity, where she lovedto hold him at her side.

°°°°VII

°°°°At this moment the town of Saumur was more excited about the dinnergiven by Grandet to the Cruchots than it had been the night before atthe sale of his vintage, though that constituted a crime of high-treason against the whole wine-growing community. If the politic oldmiser had given his dinner from the same idea that cost the dog ofAlcibiades his tail, he might perhaps have been called a great man;but the fact is, considering himself superior to a community which hecould trick on all occasions, he paid very little heed to what Saumurmight say.

°°°°The des Grassins soon learned the facts of the failure and the violentdeath of Guillaume Grandet, and they determined to go to theirclient's house that very evening to commiserate his misfortune andshow him some marks of friendship, with a view of ascertaining themotives which had led him to invite the Cruchots to dinner. Atprecisely five o'clock Monsieur C. de Bonfons and his uncle the notaryarrived in their Sunday clothes. The party sat down to table and beganto dine with good appetites. Grandet was grave, Charles silent,Eugenie dumb, and Madame Grandet did not say more than usual; so thatthe dinner was, very properly, a repast of condolence. When they rosefrom table Charles said to his aunt and uncle,--

°°°°"Will you permit me to retire? I am obliged to undertake a long andpainful correspondence."

°°°°"Certainly, nephew."

°°°°As soon as the goodman was certain that Charles could hear nothing andwas probably deep in his letter-writing, he said, with a dissimulatingglance at his wife,--

°°°°"Madame Grandet, what we have to talk about will be Latin to you; itis half-past seven; you can go and attend to your household accounts.Good-night, my daughter."

°°°°He kissed Eugenie, and the two women departed. A scene now took placein which Pere Grandet brought to bear, more than at any other momentof his life, the shrewd dexterity he had acquired in his intercoursewith men, and which had won him from those whose flesh he sometimesbit too sharply the nickname of "the old dog." If the mayor of Saumurhad carried his ambition higher still, if fortunate circumstances,drawing him towards the higher social spheres, had sent him intocongresses where the affairs of nations were discussed, and had hethere employed the genius with which his personal interests hadendowed him, he would undoubtedly have proved nobly useful to hisnative land. Yet it is perhaps equally certain that outside of Saumurthe goodman would have cut a very sorry figure. Possibly there areminds like certain animals which cease to breed when transplanted fromthe climates in which they are born.

°°°°"M-m-mon-sieur le p-p-president, you said t-t-that b-b-bankruptcy--"The stutter which for years the old miser had assumed when it suitedhim, and which, together with the deafness of which he sometimescomplained in rainy weather, was thought in Saumur to be a naturaldefect, became at this crisis so wearisome to the two Cruchots thatwhile they listened they unconsciously made faces and moved theirlips, as if pronouncing the words over which he was hesitating andstuttering at will. Here it may be well to give the history of thisimpediment of the speech and hearing of Monsieur Grandet. No one inAnjou heard better, or could pronounce more crisply the Frenchlanguage (with an Angevin accent) than the wily old cooper. Some yearsearlier, in spite of his shrewdness, he had been taken in by anIsraelite, who in the course of the discussion held his hand behindhis ear to catch sounds, and mangled his meaning so thoroughly intrying to utter his words that Grandet fell a victim to his humanityand was compelled to prompt the wily Jew with the words and ideas heseemed to seek, to complete himself the arguments of the said Jew, tosay what that cursed Jew ought to have said for himself; in short, tobe the Jew instead of being Grandet. When the cooper came out of thiscurious encounter he had concluded the only bargain of which in thecourse of a long commercial life he ever had occasion to complain. Butif he lost at the time pecuniarily, he gained morally a valuablelesson; later, he gathered its fruits. Indeed, the goodman ended byblessing that Jew for having taught him the art of irritating hiscommercial antagonist and leading him to forget his own thoughts inhis impatience to suggest those over which his tormentor wasstuttering. No affair had ever needed the assistance of deafness,impediments of speech, and all the incomprehensible circumlocutionswith which Grandet enveloped his ideas, as much as the affair now inhand. In the first place, he did not mean to shoulder theresponsibility of his own scheme; in the next, he was determined toremain master of the conversation and to leave his real intentions indoubt.

°°°°"M-m-monsieur de B-B-Bonfons,"--for the second time in three yearsGrandet called the Cruchot nephew Monsieur de Bonfons; the presidentfelt he might consider himself the artful old fellow's son-in-law,--"you-ou said th-th-that b-b-bankruptcy c-c-could, in some c-c-cases,b-b-be p-p-prevented b-b-by--"

°°°°"By the courts of commerce themselves. It is done constantly," saidMonsieur C. de Bonfons, bestriding Grandet's meaning, or thinking heguessed it, and kindly wishing to help him out with it. "Listen.""Y-yes," said Grandet humbly, with the mischievous expression of a boywho is inwardly laughing at his teacher while he pays him the greatestattention.

°°°°"When a man so respected and important as, for example, your latebrother--"

°°°°"M-my b-b-brother, yes."

°°°°"--is threatened with insolvency--"

°°°°"They c-c-call it in-ins-s-solvency?"

°°°°"Yes; when his failure is imminent, the court of commerce, to which heis amenable (please follow me attentively), has the power, by adecree, to appoint a receiver. Liquidation, you understand, is not thesame as failure. When a man fails, he is dishonored; but when hemerely liquidates, he remains an honest man."

°°°°"T-t-that's very d-d-different, if it d-d-doesn't c-c-cost m-m-more,"said Grandet.

°°°°"But a liquidation can be managed without having recourse to thecourts at all. For," said the president, sniffing a pinch of snuff,"don't you know how failures are declared?"

°°°°"N-n-no, I n-n-never t-t-thought," answered Grandet.

°°°°"In the first place," resumed the magistrate, "by filing the schedulein the record office of the court, which the merchant may do himself,or his representative for him with a power of attorney duly certified.In the second place, the failure may be declared under compulsion fromthe creditors. Now if the merchant does not file his schedule, and ifno creditor appears before the courts to obtain a decree of insolvencyagainst the merchant, what happens?"

°°°°"W-w-what h-h-happens?"

°°°°"Why, the family of the deceased, his representatives, his heirs, orthe merchant himself, if he is not dead, or his friends if he is onlyhiding, liquidate his business. Perhaps you would like to liquidateyour brother's affairs?"

°°°°"Ah! Grandet," said the notary, "that would be the right thing to do.There is honor down here in the provinces. If you save your name--forit is your name--you will be a man--"

°°°°"A noble man!" cried the president, interrupting his uncle."Certainly," answered the old man, "my b-b-brother's name wasG-G-Grandet, like m-m-mine. Th-that's c-c-certain; I d-d-don'td-d-deny it. And th-th-this l-l-liquidation might be, in m-m-manyways, v-v-very advan-t-t-tageous t-t-to the interests of m-m-myn-n-nephew, whom I l-l-love. But I must consider. I don't k-k-know thet-t-tricks of P-P-Paris. I b-b-belong to Sau-m-mur, d-d-don't you see?M-m-my vines, my d-d-drains--in short, I've my own b-b-business. Inever g-g-give n-n-notes. What are n-n-notes? I t-t-take a goodm-m-many, but I have never s-s-signed one. I d-d-don't understand suchthings. I have h-h-heard say that n-n-notes c-c-can be b-b-bought up.""Of course," said the president. "Notes can be bought in the market,less so much per cent. Don't you understand?"

°°°°Grandet made an ear-trumpet of his hand, and the president repeatedhis words.

°°°°"Well, then," replied the man, "there's s-s-something to be g-g-gotout of it? I k-know n-nothing at my age about such th-th-things. Il-l-live here and l-l-look after the v-v-vines. The vines g-g-grow,and it's the w-w-wine that p-p-pays. L-l-look after the v-v-vintage,t-t-that's my r-r-rule. My c-c-chief interests are at Froidfond. Ic-c-can't l-l-leave my h-h-house to m-m-muddle myself with ad-d-devilish b-b-business I kn-know n-n-nothing about. You say I oughtto l-l-liquidate my b-b-brother's af-f-fairs, to p-p-prevent thef-f-failure. I c-c-can't be in two p-p-places at once, unless I were alittle b-b-bird, and--"

°°°°"I understand," cried the notary. "Well, my old friend, you havefriends, old friends, capable of devoting themselves to yourinterests."

°°°°"All right!" thought Grandet, "make haste and come to the point!""Suppose one of them went to Paris and saw your brother Guillaume'schief creditor and said to him--"

°°°°"One m-m-moment," interrupted the goodman, "said wh-wh-what? Somethingl-l-like this. Monsieur Gr-Grandet of Saumur this, Monsieur Grandet ofSaumur that. He l-loves his b-b-brother, he loves his n-nephew.Grandet is a g-g-good uncle; he m-m-means well. He has sold hisv-v-vintage. D-d-don't declare a f-f-failure; c-c-call a meeting;l-l-liquidate; and then Gr-Gr-Grandet will see what he c-c-can do.B-b-better liquidate than l-let the l-l-law st-st-stick its n-n-nosein. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Exactly so," said the president.

°°°°"B-because, don't you see, Monsieur de B-Bonfons, a man must l-l-lookb-b-before he l-leaps. If you c-c-can't, you c-c-can't. M-m-must knowall about the m-m-matter, all the resources and the debts, if youd-d-don't want to be r-r-ruined. Hein? isn't it so?"

°°°°"Certainly," said the president. "I'm of opinion that in a few monthsthe debts might be bought up for a certain sum, and then paid in fullby an agreement. Ha! ha! you can coax a dog a long way if you show hima bit of lard. If there has been no declaration of failure, and youhold a lien on the debts, you come out of the business as white as thedriven snow."

°°°°"Sn-n-now," said Grandet, putting his hand to his ear, "wh-wh-whatabout s-now?"

°°°°"But," cried the president, "do pray attend to what I am saying.""I am at-t-tending."

°°°°"A note is merchandise,--an article of barter which rises and falls inprices. That is a deduction from Jeremy Bentham's theory about usury.That writer has proved that the prejudice which condemned usurers toreprobation was mere folly."

°°°°"Whew!" ejaculated the goodman.

°°°°"Allowing that money, according to Bentham, is an article ofmerchandise, and that whatever represents money is equallymerchandise," resumed the president; "allowing also that it isnotorious that the commercial note, bearing this or that signature, isliable to the fluctuation of all commercial values, rises or falls inthe market, is dear at one moment, and is worth nothing at another,the courts decide--ah! how stupid I am, I beg your pardon--I aminclined to think you could buy up your brother's debts for twenty-five per cent."

°°°°"D-d-did you c-c-call him Je-Je-Jeremy B-Ben?"

°°°°"Bentham, an Englishman.'

°°°°"That's a Jeremy who might save us a lot of lamentations in business,"said the notary, laughing.

°°°°"Those Englishmen s-sometimes t-t-talk sense," said Grandet. "So,ac-c-cording to Ben-Bentham, if my b-b-brother's n-notes are worthn-n-nothing; if Je-Je--I'm c-c-correct, am I not? That seems c-c-clearto my m-m-mind--the c-c-creditors would be--No, would not be; Iunderstand."

°°°°"Let me explain it all," said the president. "Legally, if you acquirea title to all the debts of the Maison Grandet, your brother or hisheirs will owe nothing to any one. Very good."

°°°°"Very g-good," repeated Grandet.

°°°°"In equity, if your brother's notes are negotiated--negotiated, do youclearly understand the term?--negotiated in the market at a reductionof so much per cent in value, and if one of your friends happening tobe present should buy them in, the creditors having sold them of theirown free-will without constraint, the estate of the late Grandet ishonorably released."

°°°°"That's t-true; b-b-business is b-business," said the cooper."B-b-but, st-still, you know, it is d-d-difficult. I h-have n-nom-m-money and n-no t-t-time."

°°°°"Yes, but you need not undertake it. I am quite ready to go to Paris(you may pay my expenses, they will only be a trifle). I will see thecreditors and talk with them and get an extension of time, andeverything can be arranged if you will add something to the assets soas to buy up all title to the debts."

°°°°"We-we'll see about th-that. I c-c-can't and I w-w-won't bind myselfwithout--He who c-c-can't, can't; don't you see?"

°°°°"That's very true."

°°°°"I'm all p-p-put ab-b-bout by what you've t-t-told me. This is thef-first t-t-time in my life I have b-been obliged to th-th-think--""Yes, you are not a lawyer."

°°°°"I'm only a p-p-poor wine-g-grower, and know n-nothing about wh-whatyou have just t-told me; I m-m-must th-think about it."

°°°°"Very good," said the president, preparing to resume his argument."Nephew!" said the notary, interrupting him in a warning tone."Well, what, uncle?" answered the president.

°°°°"Let Monsieur Grandet explain his own intentions. The matter inquestion is of the first importance. Our good friend ought to definehis meaning clearly, and--"

°°°°A loud knock, which announced the arrival of the des Grassins family,succeeded by their entrance and salutations, hindered Cruchot fromconcluding his sentence. The notary was glad of the interruption, forGrandet was beginning to look suspiciously at him, and the wen gavesigns of a brewing storm. In the first place, the notary did not thinkit becoming in a president of the Civil courts to go to Paris andmanipulate creditors and lend himself to an underhand job whichclashed with the laws of strict integrity; moreover, never havingknown old Grandet to express the slightest desire to pay anything, nomatter what, he instinctively feared to see his nephew taking part inthe affair. He therefore profited by the entrance of the des Grassinsto take the nephew by the arm and lead him into the embrasure of thewindow,--

°°°°"You have said enough, nephew; you've shown enough devotion. Yourdesire to win the girl blinds you. The devil! you mustn't go at ittooth and nail. Let me sail the ship now; you can haul on the braces.Do you think it right to compromise your dignity as a magistrate insuch a--"

°°°°He stopped, for he heard Monsieur des Grassins saying to the oldcooper as they shook hands,--

°°°°"Grandet, we have heard of the frightful misfortunes which have justbefallen your family,--the failure of the house of Guillaume Grandetand the death of your brother. We have come to express our grief atthese sad events."

°°°°"There is but one sad event," said the notary, interrupting thebanker,--"the death of Monsieur Grandet, junior; and he would neverhave killed himself had he thought in time of applying to his brotherfor help. Our old friend, who is honorable to his finger-nails,intends to liquidate the debts of the Maison Grandet of Paris. To savehim the worry of legal proceedings, my nephew, the president, has justoffered to go to Paris and negotiate with the creditors for asatisfactory settlement."

°°°°These words, corroborated by Grandet's attitude as he stood silentlynursing his chin, astonished the three des Grassins, who had beenleisurely discussing the old man's avarice as they came along, verynearly accusing him of fratricide.

°°°°"Ah! I was sure of it," cried the banker, looking at his wife. "Whatdid I tell you just now, Madame des Grassins? Grandet is honorable tothe backbone, and would never allow his name to remain under theslightest cloud! Money without honor is a disease. There is honor inthe provinces! Right, very right, Grandet. I'm an old soldier, and Ican't disguise my thoughts; I speak roughly. Thunder! it is sublime!""Th-then s-s-sublime th-things c-c-cost d-dear," answered the goodman,as the banker warmly wrung his hand.

°°°°"But this, my dear Grandet,--if the president will excuse me,--is apurely commercial matter, and needs a consummate business man. Youragent must be some one fully acquainted with the markets,--withdisbursements, rebates, interest calculations, and so forth. I amgoing to Paris on business of my own, and I can take charge of--""We'll see about t-t-trying to m-m-manage it b-b-between us, under thep-p-peculiar c-c-circumstances, b-b-but without b-b-binding m-m-myselfto anything th-that I c-c-could not do," said Grandet, stuttering;"because, you see, monsieur le president naturally expects me to paythe expenses of his journey."

°°°°The goodman did not stammer over the last words.

°°°°"Eh!" cried Madame des Grassins, "why it is a pleasure to go to Paris.I would willingly pay to go myself."

°°°°She made a sign to her husband, as if to encourage him in cutting theenemy out of the commission, /coute que coute/; then she glancedironically at the two Cruchots, who looked chap-fallen. Grandet seizedthe banker by a button and drew him into a corner of the room."I have a great deal more confidence in you than in the president," hesaid; "besides, I've other fish to fry," he added, wriggling his wen."I want to buy a few thousand francs in the Funds while they are ateighty. They fall, I'm told, at the end of each month. You know allabout these things, don't you?"

°°°°"Bless me! then, am I to invest enough to give you a few thousandfrancs a year?"

°°°°"That's not much to begin with. Hush! I don't want any one to know Iam going to play that game. You can make the investment by the end ofthe month. Say nothing to the Cruchots; that'll annoy them. If you arereally going to Paris, we will see if there is anything to be done formy poor nephew."

°°°°"Well, it's all settled. I'll start to-morrow by the mail-post," saiddes Grassins aloud, "and I will come and take your last directions at--what hour will suit you?"

°°°°"Five o'clock, just before dinner," said Grandet, rubbing his hands.The two parties stayed on for a short time. Des Grassins said, after apause, striking Grandet on the shoulder,--

°°°°"It is a good thing to have a relation like him."

°°°°"Yes, yes; without making a show," said Grandet, "I am a g-goodrelation. I loved my brother, and I will prove it, unless itc-c-costs--"

°°°°"We must leave you, Grandet," said the banker, interrupting himfortunately before he got to the end of his sentence. "If I hurry mydeparture, I must attend to some matters at once."

°°°°"Very good, very good! I myself--in c-consequence of what I t-told you--I must retire to my own room and 'd-d-deliberate,' as PresidentCruchot says."

°°°°"Plague take him! I am no longer Monsieur de Bonfons," thought themagistrate ruefully, his face assuming the expression of a judge boredby an argument.

°°°°The heads of the two factions walked off together. Neither gave anyfurther thought to the treachery Grandet had been guilty of in themorning against the whole wine-growing community; each tried to fathomwhat the other was thinking about the real intentions of the wily oldman in this new affair, but in vain.

°°°°"Will you go with us to Madame Dorsonval's?" said des Grassins to thenotary.

°°°°"We will go there later," answered the president. "I have promised tosay good-evening to Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt, and we will go therefirst, if my uncle is willing."

°°°°"Farewell for the present!" said Madame des Grassins.

°°°°When the Cruchots were a few steps off, Adolphe remarked to hisfather,--

°°°°"Are not they fuming, hein?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, my son!" said his mother; "they might hear you.Besides, what you say is not in good taste,--law-school language.""Well, uncle," cried the president when he saw the des Grassinsdisappearing, "I began by being de Bonfons, and I have ended asnothing but Cruchot."

°°°°"I saw that that annoyed you; but the wind has set fair for the desGrassins. What a fool you are, with all your cleverness! Let them sailoff on Grandet's 'We'll see about it,' and keep yourself quiet, youngman. Eugenie will none the less be your wife."

°°°°In a few moments the news of Grandet's magnanimous resolve wasdisseminated in three houses at the same moment, and the whole townbegan to talk of his fraternal devotion. Every one forgave Grandet forthe sale made in defiance of the good faith pledged to the community;they admired his sense of honor, and began to laud a generosity ofwhich they had never thought him capable. It is part of the Frenchnature to grow enthusiastic, or angry, or fervent about some meteor ofthe moment. Can it be that collective beings, nationalities, peoples,are devoid of memory?

°°°°When Pere Grandet had shut the door he called Nanon.

°°°°"Don't let the dog loose, and don't go to bed; we have work to dotogether. At eleven o'clock Cornoiller will be at the door with thechariot from Froidfond. Listen for him and prevent his knocking; tellhim to come in softly. Police regulations don't allow nocturnalracket. Besides, the whole neighborhood need not know that I amstarting on a journey."

°°°°So saying, Grandet returned to his private room, where Nanon heard himmoving about, rummaging, and walking to and fro, though with muchprecaution, for he evidently did not wish to wake his wife anddaughter, and above all not to rouse the attention of his nephew, whomhe had begun to anathematize when he saw a thread of light under hisdoor. About the middle of the night Eugenie, intent on her cousin,fancied she heard a cry like that of a dying person. It must beCharles, she thought; he was so pale, so full of despair when she hadseen him last,--could he have killed himself? She wrapped herselfquickly in a loose garment,--a sort of pelisse with a hood,--and wasabout to leave the room when a bright light coming through the chinksof her door made her think of fire. But she recovered herself as sheheard Nanon's heavy steps and gruff voice mingling with the snortingof several horses.

°°°°"Can my father be carrying off my cousin?" she said to herself,opening her door with great precaution lest it should creak, and yetenough to let her see into the corridor.

°°°°Suddenly her eye encountered that of her father; and his glance, vagueand unnoticing as it was, terrified her. The goodman and Nanon wereyoked together by a stout stick, each end of which rested on theirshoulders; a stout rope was passed over it, on which was slung a smallbarrel or keg like those Pere Grandet still made in his bakehouse asan amusement for his leisure hours.

°°°°"Holy Virgin, how heavy it is!" said the voice of Nanon.

°°°°"What a pity that it is only copper sous!" answered Grandet. "Takecare you don't knock over the candlestick."

°°°°The scene was lighted by a single candle placed between two rails ofthe staircase.

°°°°"Cornoiller," said Grandet to his keeper /in partibus/, "have youbrought your pistols?"

°°°°"No, monsieur. Mercy! what's there to fear for your copper sous?""Oh! nothing," said Pere Grandet.

°°°°"Besides, we shall go fast," added the man; "your farmers have pickedout their best horses."

°°°°"Very good. You did not tell them where I was going?"

°°°°"I didn't know where."

°°°°"Very good. Is the carriage strong?"

°°°°"Strong? hear to that, now! Why, it can carry three thousand weight.How much does that old keg weigh?"

°°°°"Goodness!" exclaimed Nanon. "I ought to know! There's pretty nigheighteen hundred--"

°°°°"Will you hold your tongue, Nanon! You are to tell my wife I have goneinto the country. I shall be back to dinner. Drive fast, Cornoiller; Imust get to Angers before nine o'clock."

°°°°The carriage drove off. Nanon bolted the great door, let loose thedog, and went off to bed with a bruised shoulder, no one in theneighborhood suspecting either the departure of Grandet or the objectof his journey. The precautions of the old miser and his reticencewere never relaxed. No one had ever seen a penny in that house, filledas it was with gold. Hearing in the morning, through the gossip of theport, that exchange on gold had doubled in price in consequence ofcertain military preparations undertaken at Nantes, and thatspeculators had arrived at Angers to buy coin, the old wine-grower, bythe simple process of borrowing horses from his farmers, seized thechance of selling his gold and of bringing back in the form oftreasury notes the sum he intended to put into the Funds, havingswelled it considerably by the exchange.

°°°°VIII

°°°°"My father has gone," thought Eugenie, who heard all that took placefrom the head of the stairs. Silence was restored in the house, andthe distant rumbling of the carriage, ceasing by degrees, no longerechoed through the sleeping town. At this moment Eugenie heard in herheart, before the sound caught her ears, a cry which pierced thepartitions and came from her cousin's chamber. A line of light, thinas the blade of a sabre, shone through a chink in the door and fellhorizontally on the balusters of the rotten staircase.

°°°°"He suffers!" she said, springing up the stairs. A second moan broughther to the landing near his room. The door was ajar, she pushed itopen. Charles was sleeping; his head hung over the side of the oldarmchair, and his hand, from which the pen had fallen, nearly touchedthe floor. The oppressed breathing caused by the strained posturesuddenly frightened Eugenie, who entered the room hastily."He must be very tired," she said to herself, glancing at a dozenletters lying sealed upon the table. She read their addresses: "ToMessrs. Farry, Breilmann, & Co., carriage-makers"; "To MonsieurBuisson, tailor," etc.

°°°°"He has been settling all his affairs, so as to leave France at once,"she thought. Her eyes fell upon two open letters. The words, "My dearAnnette," at the head of one of them, blinded her for a moment. Herheart beat fast, her feet were nailed to the floor.

°°°°"His dear Annette! He loves! he is loved! No hope! What does he say toher?"

°°°°These thoughts rushed through her head and heart. She saw the wordseverywhere, even on the bricks of the floor, in letters of fire."Resign him already? No, no! I will not read the letter. I ought to goaway--What if I do read it?"

°°°°She looked at Charles, then she gently took his head and placed itagainst the back of the chair; he let her do so, like a child which,though asleep, knows its mother's touch and receives, without awaking,her kisses and watchful care. Like a mother Eugenie raised thedrooping hand, and like a mother she gently kissed the chestnut hair--"Dear Annette!" a demon shrieked the words in her ear.

°°°°"I am doing wrong; but I must read it, that letter," she said. Sheturned away her head, for her noble sense of honor reproached her. Forthe first time in her life good and evil struggled together in herheart. Up to that moment she had never had to blush for any action.Passion and curiosity triumphed. As she read each sentence her heartswelled more and more, and the keen glow which filled her being as shedid so, only made the joys of first love still more precious.

°°°°My dear Annette,--Nothing could ever have separated us but the

°°°°great misfortune which has now overwhelmed me, and which no human

°°°°foresight could have prevented. My father has killed himself; his

°°°°fortune and mine are irretrievably lost. I am orphaned at an age

°°°°when, through the nature of my education, I am still a child; and

°°°°yet I must lift myself as a man out of the abyss into which I am

°°°°plunged. I have just spent half the night in facing my position.

°°°°If I wish to leave France an honest man,--and there is no doubt of

°°°°that,--I have not a hundred francs of my own with which to try my

°°°°fate in the Indies or in America. Yes, my poor Anna, I must seek

°°°°my fortune in those deadly climates. Under those skies, they tell

°°°°me, I am sure to make it. As for remaining in Paris, I cannot do

°°°°so. Neither my nature nor my face are made to bear the affronts,

°°°°the neglect, the disdain shown to a ruined man, the son of a

°°°°bankrupt! Good God! think of owing two millions! I should be

°°°°killed in a duel the first week; therefore I shall not return

°°°°there. Your love--the most tender and devoted love which ever

°°°°ennobled the heart of man--cannot draw me back. Alas! my beloved,

°°°°I have no money with which to go to you, to give and receive a

°°°°last kiss from which I might derive some strength for my forlorn

°°°°enterprise.

°°°°"Poor Charles! I did well to read the letter. I have gold; I will giveit to him," thought Eugenie.

°°°°She wiped her eyes, and went on reading.

°°°°I have never thought of the miseries of poverty. If I have the

°°°°hundred louis required for the mere costs of the journey, I have

°°°°not a sou for an outfit. But no, I have not the hundred louis, not

°°°°even one louis. I don't know that anything will be left after I

°°°°have paid my debts in Paris. If I have nothing, I shall go quietly

°°°°to Nantes and ship as a common sailor; and I will begin in the new

°°°°world like other men who have started young without a sou and

°°°°brought back the wealth of the Indies. During this long day I have

°°°°faced my future coolly. It seems more horrible for me than for

°°°°another, because I have been so petted by a mother who adored me,

°°°°so indulged by the kindest of fathers, so blessed by meeting, on

°°°°my entrance into life, with the love of an Anna! The flowers of

°°°°life are all I have ever known. Such happiness could not last.

°°°°Nevertheless, my dear Annette, I feel more courage than a careless

°°°°young man is supposed to feel,--above all a young man used to the

°°°°caressing ways of the dearest woman in all Paris, cradled in

°°°°family joys, on whom all things smiled in his home, whose wishes

°°°°were a law to his father--oh, my father! Annette, he is dead!

°°°°Well, I have thought over my position, and yours as well. I have

°°°°grown old in twenty-four hours. Dear Anna, if in order to keep me

°°°°with you in Paris you were to sacrifice your luxury, your dress,

°°°°your opera-box, we should even then not have enough for the

°°°°expenses of my extravagant ways of living. Besides, I would never

°°°°accept such sacrifices. No, we must part now and forever--"He gives her up! Blessed Virgin! What happiness!"

°°°°Eugenie quivered with joy. Charles made a movement, and a chill ofterror ran through her. Fortunately, he did not wake, and she resumedher reading.

°°°°When shall I return? I do not know. The climate of the West Indies

°°°°ages a European, so they say; especially a European who works

°°°°hard. Let us think what may happen ten years hence. In ten years

°°°°your daughter will be eighteen; she will be your companion, your

°°°°spy. To you society will be cruel, and your daughter perhaps more

°°°°cruel still. We have seen cases of the harsh social judgment and

°°°°ingratitude of daughters; let us take warning by them. Keep in the

°°°°depths of your soul, as I shall in mine, the memory of four years

°°°°of happiness, and be faithful, if you can, to the memory of your

°°°°poor friend. I cannot exact such faithfulness, because, do you

°°°°see, dear Annette, I must conform to the exigencies of my new

°°°°life; I must take a commonplace view of them and do the best I

°°°°can. Therefore I must think of marriage, which becomes one of the

°°°°necessities of my future existence; and I will admit to you that I

°°°°have found, here in Saumur, in my uncle's house, a cousin whose

°°°°face, manners, mind, and heart would please you, and who, besides,

°°°°seems to me--

°°°°"He must have been very weary to have ceased writing to her," thoughtEugenie, as she gazed at the letter which stopped abruptly in themiddle of the last sentence.

°°°°Already she defended him. How was it possible that an innocent girlshould perceive the cold-heartedness evinced by this letter? To younggirls religiously brought up, whose minds are ignorant and pure, allis love from the moment they set their feet within the enchantedregions of that passion. They walk there bathed in a celestial lightshed from their own souls, which reflects its rays upon their lover;they color all with the flame of their own emotion and attribute tohim their highest thoughts. A woman's errors come almost always fromher belief in good or her confidence in truth. In Eugenie's simpleheart the words, "My dear Annette, my loved one," echoed like thesweetest language of love; they caressed her soul as, in childhood,the divine notes of the /Venite adoremus/, repeated by the organ,caressed her ear. Moreover, the tears which still lingered on theyoung man's lashes gave signs of that nobility of heart by which younggirls are rightly won. How could she know that Charles, though heloved his father and mourned him truly, was moved far more by paternalgoodness than by the goodness of his own heart? Monsieur and MadameGuillaume Grandet, by gratifying every fancy of their son, andlavishing upon him the pleasures of a large fortune, had kept him frommaking the horrible calculations of which so many sons in Paris becomemore or less guilty when, face to face with the enjoyments of theworld, they form desires and conceive schemes which they see withbitterness must be put off or laid aside during the lifetime of theirparents. The liberality of the father in this instance had shed intothe heart of the son a real love, in which there was no afterthoughtof self-interest.

°°°°Nevertheless, Charles was a true child of Paris, taught by the customsof society and by Annette herself to calculate everything; already anold man under the mask of youth. He had gone through the frightfuleducation of social life, of that world where in one evening morecrimes are committed in thought and speech than justice ever punishesat the assizes; where jests and clever sayings assassinate the noblestideas; where no one is counted strong unless his mind sees clear: andto see clear in that world is to believe in nothing, neither infeelings, nor in men, nor even in events,--for events are falsified.There, to "see clear" we must weigh a friend's purse daily, learn howto keep ourselves adroitly on the top of the wave, cautiously admirenothing, neither works of art nor glorious actions, and remember thatself-interest is the mainspring of all things here below. Aftercommitting many follies, the great lady--the beautiful Annette--compelled Charles to think seriously; with her perfumed hand among hiscurls, she talked to him of his future position; as she rearranged hislocks, she taught him lessons of worldly prudence; she made himeffeminate and materialized him,--a double corruption, but a delicateand elegant corruption, in the best taste.

°°°°"You are very foolish, Charles," she would say to him. "I shall have agreat deal of trouble in teaching you to understand the world. Youbehaved extremely ill to Monsieur des Lupeaulx. I know very well he isnot an honorable man; but wait till he is no longer in power, then youmay despise him as much as you like. Do you know what Madame Campanused to tell us?--'My dears, as long as a man is a minister, adorehim; when he falls, help to drag him in the gutter. Powerful, he is asort of god; fallen, he is lower than Marat in the sewer, because heis living, and Marat is dead. Life is a series of combinations, andyou must study them and understand them if you want to keep yourselvesalways in good position.'"

°°°°Charles was too much a man of the world, his parents had made him toohappy, he had received too much adulation in society, to be possessedof noble sentiments. The grain of gold dropped by his mother into hisheart was beaten thin in the smithy of Parisian society; he had spreadit superficially, and it was worn away by the friction of life.Charles was only twenty-one years old. At that age the freshness ofyouth seems inseparable from candor and sincerity of soul. The voice,the glance, the face itself, seem in harmony with the feelings; andthus it happens that the sternest judge, the most sceptical lawyer,the least complying of usurers, always hesitate to admit decrepitudeof heart or the corruption of worldly calculation while the eyes arestill bathed in purity and no wrinkles seam the brow. Charles, so far,had had no occasion to apply the maxims of Parisian morality; up tothis time he was still endowed with the beauty of inexperience. Andyet, unknown to himself, he had been inoculated with selfishness. Thegerms of Parisian political economy, latent in his heart, wouldassuredly burst forth, sooner or later, whenever the carelessspectator became an actor in the drama of real life.

°°°°Nearly all young girls succumb to the tender promises such an outwardappearance seems to offer: even if Eugenie had been as prudent andobserving as provincial girls are often found to be, she was notlikely to distrust her cousin when his manners, words, and actionswere still in unison with the aspirations of a youthful heart. A merechance--a fatal chance--threw in her way the last effusions of realfeeling which stirred the young man's soul; she heard as it were thelast breathings of his conscience. She laid down the letter--to her sofull of love--and began smilingly to watch her sleeping cousin; thefresh illusions of life were still, for her at least, upon his face;she vowed to herself to love him always. Then she cast her eyes on theother letter, without attaching much importance to this secondindiscretion; and though she read it, it was only to obtain new proofsof the noble qualities which, like all women, she attributed to theman her heart had chosen.

°°°°My dear Alphonse,--When you receive this letter I shall be without

°°°°friends; but let me assure you that while I doubt the friendship

°°°°of the world, I have never doubted yours. I beg you therefore to

°°°°settle all my affairs, and I trust to you to get as much as you

°°°°can out of my possessions. By this time you know my situation. I

°°°°have nothing left, and I intend to go at once to the Indies. I

°°°°have just written to all the people to whom I think I owe money,

°°°°and you will find enclosed a list of their names, as correct as I

°°°°can make it from memory. My books, my furniture, my pictures, my

°°°°horses, etc., ought, I think, to pay my debts. I do not wish to

°°°°keep anything, except, perhaps, a few baubles which might serve as

°°°°the beginning of an outfit for my enterprise. My dear Alphonse, I

°°°°will send you a proper power of attorney under which you can make

°°°°these sales. Send me all my weapons. Keep Briton for yourself;

°°°°nobody would pay the value of that noble beast, and I would rather

°°°°give him to you--like a mourning-ring bequeathed by a dying man to

°°°°his executor. Farry, Breilmann, & Co. built me a very comfortable

°°°°travelling-carriage, which they have not yet delivered; persuade

°°°°them to keep it and not ask for any payment on it. If they refuse,

°°°°do what you can in the matter, and avoid everything that might

°°°°seem dishonorable in me under my present circumstances. I owe the

°°°°British Islander six louis, which I lost at cards; don't fail to

°°°°pay him--

°°°°"Dear cousin!" whispered Eugenie, throwing down the letter and runningsoftly back to her room, carrying one of the lighted candles. A thrillof pleasure passed over her as she opened the drawer of an old oakcabinet, a fine specimen of the period called the Renaissance, onwhich could still be seen, partly effaced, the famous royalsalamander. She took from the drawer a large purse of red velvet withgold tassels, edged with a tarnished fringe of gold wire,--a relicinherited from her grandmother. She weighed it proudly in her hand,and began with delight to count over the forgotten items of her littlehoard. First she took out twenty /portugaises/, still new, struck inthe reign of John V., 1725, worth by exchange, as her father told her,five /lisbonnines/, or a hundred and sixty-eight francs, sixty-fourcentimes each; their conventional value, however, was a hundred andeighty francs apiece, on account of the rarity and beauty of thecoins, which shone like little suns. Item, five /genovines/, or fivehundred-franc pieces of Genoa; another very rare coin worth eighty-seven francs on exchange, but a hundred francs to collectors. Thesehad formerly belonged to old Monsieur de la Bertelliere. Item, threegold /quadruples/, Spanish, of Philip V., struck in 1729, given to herone by one by Madame Gentillet, who never failed to say, using thesame words, when she made the gift, "This dear little canary, thislittle yellow-boy, is worth ninety-eight francs! Keep it, my prettyone, it will be the flower of your treasure." Item (that which herfather valued most of all, the gold of these coins being twenty-threecarats and a fraction), a hundred Dutch ducats, made in the year 1756,and worth thirteen francs apiece. Item, a great curiosity, a speciesof medal precious to the soul of misers,--three rupees with the signof the Scales, and five rupees with the sign of the Virgin, all inpure gold of twenty-four carats; the magnificent money of the GreatMogul, each of which was worth by mere weight thirty-seven francs,forty centimes, but at least fifty francs to those connoisseurs wholove to handle gold. Item, the napoleon of forty francs received theday before, which she had forgotten to put away in the velvet purse.This treasure was all in virgin coins, true works of art, whichGrandet from time to time inquired after and asked to see, pointingout to his daughter their intrinsic merits,--such as the beauty of themilled edge, the clearness of the flat surface, the richness of thelettering, whose angles were not yet rubbed off.

°°°°Eugenie gave no thought to these rarities, nor to her father's maniafor them, nor to the danger she incurred in depriving herself of atreasure so dear to him; no, she thought only of her cousin, and soonmade out, after a few mistakes of calculation, that she possessedabout five thousand eight hundred francs in actual value, which mightbe sold for their additional value to collectors for nearly sixthousand. She looked at her wealth and clapped her hands like a happychild forced to spend its overflowing joy in artless movements of thebody. Father and daughter had each counted up their fortune thisnight,--he, to sell his gold; Eugenie to fling hers into the ocean ofaffection. She put the pieces back into the old purse, took it in herhand, and ran upstairs without hesitation. The secret misery of hercousin made her forget the hour and conventional propriety; she wasstrong in her conscience, in her devotion, in her happiness.As she stood upon the threshold of the door, holding the candle in onehand and the purse in the other, Charles woke, caught sight of her,and remained speechless with surprise. Eugenie came forward, put thecandle on the table, and said in a quivering voice:

°°°°"My cousin, I must beg pardon for a wrong I have done you; but Godwill pardon me--if you--will help me to wipe it out."

°°°°"What is it?" asked Charles, rubbing his eyes.

°°°°"I have read those letters."

°°°°Charles colored.

°°°°"How did it happen?" she continued; "how came I here? Truly, I do notknow. I am tempted not to regret too much that I have read them; theyhave made me know your heart, your soul, and--"

°°°°"And what?" asked Charles.

°°°°"Your plans, your need of a sum--"

°°°°"My dear cousin--"

°°°°"Hush, hush! my cousin, not so loud; we must not wake others. See,"she said, opening her purse, "here are the savings of a poor girl whowants nothing. Charles, accept them! This morning I was ignorant ofthe value of money; you have taught it to me. It is but a means, afterall. A cousin is almost a brother; you can surely borrow the purse ofyour sister."

°°°°Eugenie, as much a woman as a young girl, never dreamed of refusal;but her cousin remained silent.

°°°°"Oh! you will not refuse?" cried Eugenie, the beatings of whose heartcould be heard in the deep silence.

°°°°Her cousin's hesitation mortified her; but the sore need of hisposition came clearer still to her mind, and she knelt down."I will never rise till you have taken that gold!" she said. "Mycousin, I implore you, answer me! let me know if you respect me, ifyou are generous, if--"

°°°°As he heard this cry of noble distress the young man's tears fell uponhis cousin's hands, which he had caught in his own to keep her fromkneeling. As the warm tears touched her, Eugenie sprang to the purseand poured its contents upon the table.

°°°°"Ah! yes, yes, you consent?" she said, weeping with joy. "Fearnothing, my cousin, you will be rich. This gold will bring youhappiness; some day you shall bring it back to me,--are we notpartners? I will obey all conditions. But you should not attach suchvalue to the gift."

°°°°Charles was at last able to express his feelings.

°°°°"Yes, Eugenie; my soul would be small indeed if I did not accept. Andyet,--gift for gift, confidence for confidence."

°°°°"What do you mean?" she said, frightened.

°°°°"Listen, dear cousin; I have here--" He interrupted himself to pointout a square box covered with an outer case of leather which was onthe drawers. "There," he continued, "is something as precious to me aslife itself. This box was a present from my mother. All day I havebeen thinking that if she could rise from her grave, she would herselfsell the gold which her love for me lavished on this dressing-case;but were I to do so, the act would seem to me a sacrilege." Eugeniepressed his hand as she heard these last words. "No," he added, aftera slight pause, during which a liquid glance of tenderness passedbetween them, "no, I will neither sell it nor risk its safety on myjourney. Dear Eugenie, you shall be its guardian. Never did friendcommit anything more sacred to another. Let me show it to you."He went to the box, took it from its outer coverings, opened it, andshowed his delighted cousin a dressing-case where the rich workmanshipgave to the gold ornaments a value far above their weight."What you admire there is nothing," he said, pushing a secret springwhich opened a hidden drawer. "Here is something which to me is worththe whole world." He drew out two portraits, masterpieces of MadameMirbel, richly set with pearls.

°°°°"Oh, how beautiful! Is it the lady to whom you wrote that--""No," he said, smiling; "this is my mother, and here is my father,your aunt and uncle. Eugenie, I beg you on my knees, keep my treasuresafely. If I die and your little fortune is lost, this gold and thesepearls will repay you. To you alone could I leave these portraits; youare worthy to keep them. But destroy them at last, so that they maypass into no other hands." Eugenie was silent. "Ah, yes, say yes! Youconsent?" he added with winning grace.

°°°°Hearing the very words she had just used to her cousin now addressedto herself, she turned upon him a look of love, her first look ofloving womanhood,--a glance in which there is nearly as much ofcoquetry as of inmost depth. He took her hand and kissed it."Angel of purity! between us two money is nothing, never can beanything. Feeling, sentiment, must be all henceforth."

°°°°"You are like your mother,--was her voice as soft as yours?""Oh! much softer--"

°°°°"Yes, for you," she said, dropping her eyelids. "Come, Charles, go tobed; I wish it; you must be tired. Good-night." She gently disengagedher hand from those of her cousin, who followed her to her room,lighting the way. When they were both upon the threshold,--"Ah!" he said, "why am I ruined?"

°°°°"What matter?--my father is rich; I think so," she answered."Poor child!" said Charles, making a step into her room and leaninghis back against the wall, "if that were so, he would never have letmy father die; he would not let you live in this poor way; he wouldlive otherwise himself."

°°°°"But he owns Froidfond."

°°°°"What is Froidfond worth?"

°°°°"I don't know; but he has Noyers."

°°°°"Nothing but a poor farm!"

°°°°"He has vineyards and fields."

°°°°"Mere nothing," said Charles disdainfully. "If your father had onlytwenty-four thousand francs a year do you suppose you would live inthis cold, barren room?" he added, making a step in advance. "Ah!there you will keep my treasures," he said, glancing at the oldcabinet, as if to hide his thoughts.

°°°°"Go and sleep," she said, hindering his entrance into the disorderedroom.

°°°°Charles stepped back, and they bid each other good-night with a mutualsmile.

°°°°Both fell asleep in the same dream; and from that moment the youthbegan to wear roses with his mourning. The next day, before breakfast,Madame Grandet found her daughter in the garden in company withCharles. The young man was still sad, as became a poor fellow who,plunged in misfortune, measures the depths of the abyss into which hehas fallen, and sees the terrible burden of his whole future life."My father will not be home till dinner-time," said Eugenie,perceiving the anxious look on her mother's face.

°°°°It was easy to trace in the face and manners of the young girl and inthe singular sweetness of her voice a unison of thought between herand her cousin. Their souls had espoused each other, perhaps beforethey even felt the force of the feelings which bound them together.Charles spent the morning in the hall, and his sadness was respected.Each of the three women had occupations of her own. Grandet had leftall his affairs unattended to, and a number of persons came onbusiness,--the plumber, the mason, the slater, the carpenter, thediggers, the dressers, the farmers; some to drive a bargain aboutrepairs, others to pay their rent or to be paid themselves forservices. Madame Grandet and Eugenie were obliged to go and come andlisten to the interminable talk of all these workmen and country folk.Nanon put away in her kitchen the produce which they brought astribute. She always waited for her master's orders before she knewwhat portion was to be used in the house and what was to be sold inthe market. It was the goodman's custom, like that of a great manycountry gentlemen, to drink his bad wine and eat his spoiled fruit.Towards five in the afternoon Grandet returned from Angers, havingmade fourteen thousand francs by the exchange on his gold, bringinghome in his wallet good treasury-notes which bore interest until theday he should invest them in the Funds. He had left Cornoiller atAngers to look after the horses, which were well-nigh foundered, withorders to bring them home slowly after they were rested.

°°°°"I have got back from Angers, wife," he said; "I am hungry."Nanon called out to him from the kitchen: "Haven't you eaten anythingsince yesterday?"

°°°°"Nothing," answered the old man.

°°°°Nanon brought in the soup. Des Grassins came to take his client'sorders just as the family sat down to dinner. Grandet had not evenobserved his nephew.

°°°°"Go on eating, Grandet," said the banker; "we can talk. Do you knowwhat gold is worth in Angers? They have come from Nantes after it? Ishall send some of ours."

°°°°"Don't send any," said Grandet; "they have got enough. We are such oldfriends, I ought to save you from such a loss of time."

°°°°"But gold is worth thirteen francs fifty centimes."

°°°°"Say /was/ worth--"

°°°°"Where the devil have they got any?"

°°°°"I went to Angers last night," answered Grandet in a low voice.The banker shook with surprise. Then a whispered conversation beganbetween the two, during which Grandet and des Grassins frequentlylooked at Charles. Presently des Grassins gave a start ofastonishment; probably Grandet was then instructing him to invest thesum which was to give him a hundred thousand francs a year in theFunds.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet," said the banker to Charles, "I am starting forParis; if you have any commissions--"

°°°°"None, monsieur, I thank you," answered Charles.

°°°°"Thank him better than that, nephew. Monsieur is going to settle theaffairs of the house of Guillaume Grandet."

°°°°"Is there any hope?" said Charles eagerly.

°°°°"What!" exclaimed his uncle, with well-acted pride, "are you not mynephew? Your honor is ours. Is not your name Grandet?"

°°°°Charles rose, seized Pere Grandet, kissed him, turned pale, and leftthe room. Eugenie looked at her father with admiration.

°°°°"Well, good-by, des Grassins; it is all in your hands. Decoy thosepeople as best you can; lead 'em by the nose."

°°°°The two diplomatists shook hands. The old cooper accompanied thebanker to the front door. Then, after closing it, he came back andplunged into his armchair, saying to Nanon,--

°°°°"Get me some black-currant ratafia."

°°°°Too excited, however, to remain long in one place, he got up, lookedat the portrait of Monsieur de la Bertelliere, and began to sing,doing what Nanon called his dancing steps,--

°°°°"Dans les gardes francaises

°°°°J'avais un bon papa."

°°°°Nanon, Madame Grandet, and Eugenie looked at each other in silence.The hilarity of the master always frightened them when it reached itsclimax. The evening was soon over. Pere Grandet chose to go to bedearly, and when he went to bed, everybody else was expected to go too;like as when Augustus drank, Poland was drunk. On this occasion Nanon,Charles, and Eugenie were not less tired than the master. As forMadame Grandet, she slept, ate, drank, and walked according to thewill of her husband. However, during the two hours consecrated todigestion, the cooper, more facetious than he had ever been in hislife, uttered a number of his own particular apothegms,--a single oneof which will give the measure of his mind. When he had drunk hisratafia, he looked at his glass and said,--

°°°°"You have no sooner put your lips to a glass than it is empty! Such islife. You can't have and hold. Gold won't circulate and stay in yourpurse. If it were not for that, life would be too fine."

°°°°He was jovial and benevolent. When Nanon came with her spinning-wheel,"You must be tired," he said; "put away your hemp."

°°°°"Ah, bah! then I shall get sleepy," she answered.

°°°°"Poor Nanon! Will you have some ratafia?"

°°°°"I won't refuse a good offer; madame makes it a deal better than theapothecaries. What they sell is all drugs."

°°°°"They put too much sugar," said the master; "you can't taste anythingelse."

°°°°IX

°°°°The following day the family, meeting at eight o'clock for the earlybreakfast, made a picture of genuine domestic intimacy. Grief haddrawn Madame Grandet, Eugenie, and Charles /en rapport/; even Nanonsympathized, without knowing why. The four now made one family. As tothe old man, his satisfied avarice and the certainty of soon gettingrid of the dandy without having to pay more than his journey toNantes, made him nearly indifferent to his presence in the house. Heleft the two children, as he called Charles and Eugenie, free toconduct themselves as they pleased, under the eye of Madame Grandet,in whom he had implicit confidence as to all that concerned public andreligious morality. He busied himself in straightening the boundariesof his fields and ditches along the high-road, in his poplar-plantations beside the Loire, in the winter work of his vineyards, andat Froidfond. All these things occupied his whole time.

°°°°For Eugenie the springtime of love had come. Since the scene at nightwhen she gave her little treasure to her cousin, her heart hadfollowed the treasure. Confederates in the same secret, they looked ateach other with a mutual intelligence which sank to the depth of theirconsciousness, giving a closer communion, a more intimate relation totheir feelings, and putting them, so to speak, beyond the pale ofordinary life. Did not their near relationship warrant the gentlenessin their tones, the tenderness in their glances? Eugenie took delightin lulling her cousin's pain with the pretty childish joys of a new-born love. Are there no sweet similitudes between the birth of loveand the birth of life? Do we not rock the babe with gentle songs andsoftest glances? Do we not tell it marvellous tales of the goldenfuture? Hope herself, does she not spread her radiant wings above itshead? Does it not shed, with infant fickleness, its tears of sorrowand its tears of joy? Does it not fret for trifles, cry for the prettypebbles with which to build its shifting palaces, for the flowersforgotten as soon as plucked? Is it not eager to grasp the comingtime, to spring forward into life? Love is our second transformation.Childhood and love were one and the same thing to Eugenie and toCharles; it was a first passion, with all its child-like play,--themore caressing to their hearts because they now were wrapped insadness. Struggling at birth against the gloom of mourning, their lovewas only the more in harmony with the provincial plainness of thatgray and ruined house. As they exchanged a few words beside the wellin the silent court, or lingered in the garden for the sunset hour,sitting on a mossy seat saying to each other the infinite nothings oflove, or mused in the silent calm which reigned between the house andthe ramparts like that beneath the arches of a church, Charlescomprehended the sanctity of love; for his great lady, his dearAnnette, had taught him only its stormy troubles. At this moment heleft the worldly passion, coquettish, vain, and showy as it was, andturned to the true, pure love. He loved even the house, whose customsno longer seemed to him ridiculous. He got up early in the morningsthat he might talk with Eugenie for a moment before her father came todole out the provisions; when the steps of the old man sounded on thestaircase he escaped into the garden. The small criminality of thismorning /tete-a-tete/ which Nanon pretended not to see, gave to theirinnocent love the lively charm of a forbidden joy.

°°°°After breakfast, when Grandet had gone to his fields and his otheroccupations, Charles remained with the mother and daughter, finding anunknown pleasure in holding their skeins, in watching them at work, inlistening to their quiet prattle. The simplicity of this half-monasticlife, which revealed to him the beauty of these souls, unknown andunknowing of the world, touched him keenly. He had believed suchmorals impossible in France, and admitted their existence nowhere butin Germany; even so, they seemed to him fabulous, only real in thenovels of Auguste Lafontaine. Soon Eugenie became to him the Margaretof Goethe--before her fall. Day by day his words, his looks enrapturedthe poor girl, who yielded herself up with delicious non-resistance tothe current of love; she caught her happiness as a swimmer seizes theoverhanging branch of a willow to draw himself from the river and lieat rest upon its shore. Did no dread of a coming absence sadden thehappy hours of those fleeting days? Daily some little circumstancereminded them of the parting that was at hand.

°°°°Three days after the departure of des Grassins, Grandet took hisnephew to the Civil courts, with the solemnity which country peopleattach to all legal acts, that he might sign a deed surrendering hisrights in his father's estate. Terrible renunciation! species ofdomestic apostasy! Charles also went before Maitre Cruchot to make twopowers of attorney,--one for des Grassins, the other for the friendwhom he had charged with the sale of his belongings. After that heattended to all the formalities necessary to obtain a passport forforeign countries; and finally, when he received his simple mourningclothes from Paris, he sent for the tailor of Saumur and sold to himhis useless wardrobe. This last act pleased Grandet exceedingly."Ah! now you look like a man prepared to embark and make yourfortune," he said, when Charles appeared in a surtout of plain blackcloth. "Good! very good!"

°°°°"I hope you will believe, monsieur," answered his nephew, "that Ishall always try to conform to my situation."

°°°°"What's that?" said his uncle, his eyes lighting up at a handful ofgold which Charles was carrying.

°°°°"Monsieur, I have collected all my buttons and rings and othersuperfluities which may have some value; but not knowing any one inSaumur, I wanted to ask you to--"

°°°°"To buy them?" said Grandet, interrupting him.

°°°°"No, uncle; only to tell me of an honest man who--"

°°°°"Give me those things, I will go upstairs and estimate their value; Iwill come back and tell you what it is to a fraction. Jeweller'sgold," examining a long chain, "eighteen or nineteen carats."The goodman held out his huge hand and received the mass of gold,which he carried away.

°°°°"Cousin," said Grandet, "may I offer you these two buttons? They canfasten ribbons round your wrists; that sort of bracelet is much thefashion just now."

°°°°"I accept without hesitation," she answered, giving him anunderstanding look.

°°°°"Aunt, here is my mother's thimble; I have always kept it carefully inmy dressing-case," said Charles, presenting a pretty gold thimble toMadame Grandet, who for many years had longed for one.

°°°°"I cannot thank you; no words are possible, my nephew," said the poormother, whose eyes filled with tears. "Night and morning in my prayersI shall add one for you, the most earnest of all--for those whotravel. If I die, Eugenie will keep this treasure for you.""They are worth nine hundred and eighty-nine francs, seventy-fivecentimes," said Grandet, opening the door. "To save you the pain ofselling them, I will advance the money--in /livres/."

°°°°The word /livres/ on the littoral of the Loire signifies that crownprices of six /livres/ are to be accepted as six francs withoutdeduction.

°°°°"I dared not propose it to you," answered Charles; "but it was mostrepugnant to me to sell my jewels to some second-hand dealer in yourown town. People should wash their dirty linen at home, as Napoleonsaid. I thank you for your kindness."

°°°°Grandet scratched his ear, and there was a moment's silence."My dear uncle," resumed Charles, looking at him with an uneasy air,as if he feared to wound his feelings, "my aunt and cousin have beenkind enough to accept a trifling remembrance of me. Will you allow meto give you these sleeve-buttons, which are useless to me now? Theywill remind you of a poor fellow who, far away, will always think ofthose who are henceforth all his family."

°°°°"My lad, my lad, you mustn't rob yourself this way! Let me see, wife,what have you got?" he added, turning eagerly to her. "Ah! a goldthimble. And you, little girl? What! diamond buttons? Yes, I'll acceptyour present, nephew," he answered, shaking Charles by the hand. "But--you must let me--pay--your--yes, your passage to the Indies. Yes, Iwish to pay your passage because--d'ye see, my boy?--in valuing yourjewels I estimated only the weight of the gold; very likely theworkmanship is worth something. So let us settle it that I am to giveyou fifteen hundred francs--in /livres/; Cruchot will lend them to me.I haven't got a copper farthing here,--unless Perrotet, who isbehindhand with his rent, should pay up. By the bye, I'll go and seehim."

°°°°He took his hat, put on his gloves, and went out.

°°°°"Then you are really going?" said Eugenie to her cousin, with a sadlook, mingled with admiration.

°°°°"I must," he said, bowing his head.

°°°°For some days past, Charles's whole bearing, manners, and speech hadbecome those of a man who, in spite of his profound affliction, feelsthe weight of immense obligations and has the strength to gathercourage from misfortune. He no longer repined, he became a man.Eugenie never augured better of her cousin's character than when shesaw him come down in the plain black clothes which suited well withhis pale face and sombre countenance. On that day the two women put ontheir own mourning, and all three assisted at a Requiem celebrated inthe parish church for the soul of the late Guillaume Grandet.At the second breakfast Charles received letters from Paris and beganto read them.

°°°°"Well, cousin, are you satisfied with the management of your affairs?"said Eugenie in a low voice.

°°°°"Never ask such questions, my daughter," said Grandet. "What thedevil! do I tell you my affairs? Why do you poke your nose into yourcousin's? Let the lad alone!"

°°°°"Oh! I haven't any secrets," said Charles.

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, nephew; you'll soon find out that you must hold yourtongue in business."

°°°°When the two lovers were alone in the garden, Charles said to Eugenie,drawing her down on the old bench beneath the walnut-tree,--"I did right to trust Alphonse; he has done famously. He has managedmy affairs with prudence and good faith. I now owe nothing in Paris.All my things have been sold; and he tells me that he has taken theadvice of an old sea-captain and spent three thousand francs on acommercial outfit of European curiosities which will be sure to be indemand in the Indies. He has sent my trunks to Nantes, where a ship isloading for San Domingo. In five days, Eugenie, we must bid each otherfarewell--perhaps forever, at least for years. My outfit and tenthousand francs, which two of my friends send me, are a very smallbeginning. I cannot look to return for many years. My dear cousin, donot weight your life in the scales with mine; I may perish; some goodmarriage may be offered to you--"

°°°°"Do you love me?" she said.

°°°°"Oh, yes! indeed, yes!" he answered, with a depth of tone thatrevealed an equal depth of feeling.

°°°°"I shall wait, Charles--Good heavens! there is my father at hiswindow," she said, repulsing her cousin, who leaned forward to kissher.

°°°°She ran quickly under the archway. Charles followed her. When she sawhim, she retreated to the foot of the staircase and opened the swing-door; then, scarcely knowing where she was going, Eugenie reached thecorner near Nanon's den, in the darkest end of the passage. ThereCharles caught her hand and drew her to his heart. Passing his armabout her waist, he made her lean gently upon him. Eugenie no longerresisted; she received and gave the purest, the sweetest, and yet,withal, the most unreserved of kisses.

°°°°"Dear Eugenie, a cousin is better than a brother, for he can marryyou," said Charles.

°°°°"So be it!" cried Nanon, opening the door of her lair.

°°°°The two lovers, alarmed, fled into the hall, where Eugenie took up herwork and Charles began to read the litanies of the Virgin in MadameGrandet's prayer-book.

°°°°"Mercy!" cried Nanon, "now they're saying their prayers."As soon as Charles announced his immediate departure, Grandetbestirred himself to testify much interest in his nephew. He becamevery liberal of all that cost him nothing; took pains to find apacker; declared the man asked too much for his cases; insisted onmaking them himself out of old planks; got up early in the morning tofit and plane and nail together the strips, out of which he made, tohis own satisfaction, some strong cases, in which he packed allCharles's effects; he also took upon himself to send them by boat downthe Loire, to insure them, and get them to Nantes in proper time.After the kiss taken in the passage, the hours fled for Eugenie withfrightful rapidity. Sometimes she thought of following her cousin.Those who have known that most endearing of all passions,--the onewhose duration is each day shortened by time, by age, by mortalillness, by human chances and fatalities,--they will understand thepoor girl's tortures. She wept as she walked in the garden, now sonarrow to her, as indeed the court, the house, the town all seemed.She launched in thought upon the wide expanse of the ocean he wasabout to traverse. At last the eve of his departure came. Thatmorning, in the absence of Grandet and of Nanon, the precious casewhich contained the two portraits was solemnly installed in the onlydrawer of the old cabinet which could be locked, where the now emptyvelvet purse was lying. This deposit was not made without a goodlynumber of tears and kisses. When Eugenie placed the key within herbosom she had no courage to forbid the kiss with which Charles sealedthe act.

°°°°"It shall never leave that place, my friend," she said.

°°°°"Then my heart will be always there."

°°°°"Ah! Charles, it is not right," she said, as though she blamed him."Are we not married?" he said. "I have thy promise,--then take mine.""Thine; I am thine forever!" they each said, repeating the words twiceover.

°°°°No promise made upon this earth was ever purer. The innocent sincerityof Eugenie had sanctified for a moment the young man's love.On the morrow the breakfast was sad. Nanon herself, in spite of thegold-embroidered robe and the Jeannette cross bestowed by Charles, hadtears in her eyes.

°°°°"The poor dear monsieur who is going on the seas--oh, may God guidehim!"

°°°°At half-past ten the whole family started to escort Charles to thediligence for Nantes. Nanon let loose the dog, locked the door, andinsisted on carrying the young man's carpet-bag. All the tradesmen inthe tortuous old street were on the sill of their shop-doors to watchthe procession, which was joined in the market-place by MaitreCruchot.

°°°°"Eugenie, be sure you don't cry," said her mother.

°°°°"Nephew," said Grandet, in the doorway of the inn from which the coachstarted, kissing Charles on both cheeks, "depart poor, return rich;you will find the honor of your father safe. I answer for that myself,I--Grandet; for it will only depend on you to--"

°°°°"Ah! my uncle, you soften the bitterness of my departure. Is it notthe best gift that you could make me?"

°°°°Not understanding his uncle's words which he had thus interrupted,Charles shed tears of gratitude upon the tanned cheeks of the oldmiser, while Eugenie pressed the hand of her cousin and that of herfather with all her strength. The notary smiled, admiring the slyspeech of the old man, which he alone had understood. The family stoodabout the coach until it started; then as it disappeared upon thebridge, and its rumble grew fainter in the distance, Grandet said:"Good-by to you!"

°°°°Happily no one but Maitre Cruchot heard the exclamation. Eugenie andher mother had gone to a corner of the quay from which they couldstill see the diligence and wave their white handkerchiefs, to whichCharles made answer by displaying his.

°°°°"Ah! mother, would that I had the power of God for a single moment,"said Eugenie, when she could no longer see her lover's handkerchief.*****

°°°°Not to interrupt the current of events which are about to take placein the bosom of the Grandet family, it is necessary to cast aforestalling eye upon the various operations which the goodman carriedon in Paris by means of Monsieur des Grassins. A month after thelatter's departure from Saumur, Grandet, became possessed of acertificate of a hundred thousand francs a year from his investment inthe Funds, bought at eighty francs net. The particulars revealed athis death by the inventory of his property threw no light upon themeans which his suspicious nature took to remit the price of theinvestment and receive the certificate thereof. Maitre Cruchot was ofopinion that Nanon, unknown to herself, was the trusty instrument bywhich the money was transported; for about this time she was absentfive days, under a pretext of putting things to rights at Froidfond,--as if the goodman were capable of leaving anything lying about or outof order!

°°°°In all that concerned the business of the house of Guillaume Grandetthe old cooper's intentions were fulfilled to the letter. The Bank ofFrance, as everybody knows, affords exact information about all thelarge fortunes in Paris and the provinces. The names of des Grassinsand Felix Grandet of Saumur were well known there, and they enjoyedthe esteem bestowed on financial celebrities whose wealth comes fromimmense and unencumbered territorial possessions. The arrival of theSaumur banker for the purpose, it was said, of honorably liquidatingthe affairs of Grandet of Paris, was enough to avert the shame ofprotested notes from the memory of the defunct merchant. The seals onthe property were taken off in presence of the creditors, and thenotary employed by Grandet went to work at once on the inventory ofthe assets. Soon after this, des Grassins called a meeting of thecreditors, who unanimously elected him, conjointly with FrancoisKeller, the head of a rich banking-house and one of those principallyinterested in the affair, as liquidators, with full power to protectboth the honor of the family and the interests of the claimants. Thecredit of Grandet of Saumur, the hopes he diffused by means of desGrassins in the minds of all concerned, facilitated the transactions.Not a single creditor proved recalcitrant; no one thought of passinghis claim to his profit-and-loss account; each and all saidconfidently, "Grandet of Saumur will pay."

°°°°Six months went by. The Parisians had redeemed the notes incirculation as they fell due, and held them under lock and key intheir desks. First result aimed at by the old cooper! Nine monthsafter this preliminary meeting, the two liquidators distributed forty-seven per cent to each creditor on his claim. This amount was obtainedby the sale of the securities, property, and possessions of all kindsbelonging to the late Guillaume Grandet, and was paid over withscrupulous fidelity. Unimpeachable integrity was shown in thetransaction. The creditors gratefully acknowledged the remarkable andincontestable honor displayed by the Grandets. When these praises hadcirculated for a certain length of time, the creditors asked for therest of their money. It became necessary to write a collective letterto Grandet of Saumur.

°°°°"Here it comes!" said the old man as he threw the letter into thefire. "Patience, my good friends!"

°°°°In answer to the proposals contained in the letter, Grandet of Saumurdemanded that all vouchers for claims against the estate of hisbrother should be deposited with a notary, together with aquittancesfor the forty-seven per cent already paid; he made this demand underpretence of sifting the accounts and finding out the exact conditionof the estate. It roused at once a variety of difficulties. Generallyspeaking, the creditor is a species of maniac, ready to agree toanything one day, on the next breathing fire and slaughter; later on,he grows amicable and easy-going. To-day his wife is good-humored, hislast baby has cut its first tooth, all is well at home, and he isdetermined not to lose a sou; on the morrow it rains, he can't go out,he is gloomy, he says yes to any proposal that is made to him, so longas it will put an end to the affair; on the third day he declares hemust have guarantees; by the end of the month he wants his debtor'shead, and becomes at heart an executioner. The creditor is a good deallike the sparrow on whose tail confiding children are invited to putsalt,--with this difference, that he applies the image to his claim,the proceeds of which he is never able to lay hold of. Grandet hadstudied the atmospheric variations of creditors, and the creditors ofhis brother justified all his calculations. Some were angry, andflatly refused to give in their vouchers.

°°°°"Very good; so much the better," said Grandet, rubbing his hands overthe letter in which des Grassins announced the fact.

°°°°Others agreed to the demand, but only on condition that their rightsshould be fully guaranteed; they renounced none, and even reserved thepower of ultimately compelling a failure. On this began a longcorrespondence, which ended in Grandet of Saumur agreeing to allconditions. By means of this concession the placable creditors wereable to bring the dissatisfied creditors to reason. The deposit wasthen made, but not without sundry complaints.

°°°°"Your goodman," they said to des Grassins, "is tricking us."Twenty-three months after the death of Guillaume Grandet many of thecreditors, carried away by more pressing business in the markets ofParis, had forgotten their Grandet claims, or only thought of them tosay:

°°°°"I begin to believe that forty-seven per cent is all I shall ever getout of that affair."

°°°°The old cooper had calculated on the power of time, which, as he usedto say, is a pretty good devil after all. By the end of the third yeardes Grassins wrote to Grandet that he had brought the creditors toagree to give up their claims for ten per cent on the two million fourhundred thousand francs still due by the house of Grandet. Grandetanswered that the notary and the broker whose shameful failures hadcaused the death of his brother were still living, that they might nowhave recovered their credit, and that they ought to be sued, so as toget something out of them towards lessening the total of the deficit.By the end of the fourth year the liabilities were definitelyestimated at a sum of twelve hundred thousand francs. Manynegotiations, lasting over six months, took place between thecreditors and the liquidators, and between the liquidators andGrandet. To make a long story short, Grandet of Saumur, anxious bythis time to get out of the affair, told the liquidators, about theninth month of the fourth year, that his nephew had made a fortune inthe Indies and was disposed to pay his father's debts in full; hetherefore could not take upon himself to make any settlement withoutpreviously consulting him; he had written to him, and was expecting ananswer. The creditors were held in check until the middle of the fifthyear by the words, "payment in full," which the wily old miser threwout from time to time as he laughed in his beard, saying with a smileand an oath, "Those Parisians!"

°°°°But the creditors were reserved for a fate unexampled in the annals ofcommerce. When the events of this history bring them once more intonotice, they will be found still in the position Grandet had resolvedto force them into from the first.

°°°°As soon as the Funds reached a hundred and fifteen, Pere Grandet soldout his interests and withdrew two million four hundred thousandfrancs in gold, to which he added, in his coffers, the six hundredthousand francs compound interest which he had derived from thecapital. Des Grassins now lived in Paris. In the first place he hadbeen made a deputy; then he became infatuated (father of a family ashe was, though horribly bored by the provincial life of Saumur) with apretty actress at the Theatre de Madame, known as Florine, and hepresently relapsed into the old habits of his army life. It is uselessto speak of his conduct; Saumur considered it profoundly immoral. Hiswife was fortunate in the fact of her property being settled uponherself, and in having sufficient ability to keep up the banking-housein Saumur, which was managed in her name and repaired the breach inher fortune caused by the extravagance of her husband. The Cruchotinesmade so much talk about the false position of the quasi-widow that shemarried her daughter very badly, and was forced to give up all hope ofan alliance between Eugenie Grandet and her son. Adolphe joined hisfather in Paris and became, it was said, a worthless fellow. TheCruchots triumphed.

°°°°"Your husband hasn't common sense," said Grandet as he lent Madame desGrassins some money on a note securely endorsed. "I am very sorry foryou, for you are a good little woman."

°°°°"Ah, monsieur," said the poor lady, "who could have believed that whenhe left Saumur to go to Paris on your business he was going to hisruin?"

°°°°"Heaven is my witness, madame, that up to the last moment I did all Icould to prevent him from going. Monsieur le president was mostanxious to take his place; but he was determined to go, and now we allsee why."

°°°°In this way Grandet made it quite plain that he was under noobligation to des Grassins.

°°°°*****

°°°°In all situations women have more cause for suffering than men, andthey suffer more. Man has strength and the power of exercising it; heacts, moves, thinks, occupies himself; he looks ahead, and seesconsolation in the future. It was thus with Charles. But the womanstays at home; she is always face to face with the grief from whichnothing distracts her; she goes down to the depths of the abyss whichyawns before her, measures it, and often fills it with her tears andprayers. Thus did Eugenie. She initiated herself into her destiny. Tofeel, to love, to suffer, to devote herself,--is not this the sum ofwoman's life? Eugenie was to be in all things a woman, except in theone thing that consoles for all. Her happiness, picked up like nailsscattered on a wall--to use the fine simile of Bossuet--would never somuch as fill even the hollow of her hand. Sorrows are never long incoming; for her they came soon. The day after Charles's departure thehouse of Monsieur Grandet resumed its ordinary aspect in the eyes ofall, except in those of Eugenie, to whom it grew suddenly empty. Shewished, if it could be done unknown to her father, that Charles's roommight be kept as he had left it. Madame Grandet and Nanon were willingaccomplices in this /statu quo/.

°°°°"Who knows but he may come back sooner than we think for?" she said."Ah, don't I wish I could see him back!" answered Nanon. "I took tohim! He was such a dear, sweet young man,--pretty too, with his curlyhair." Eugenie looked at Nanon. "Holy Virgin! don't look at me thatway, mademoiselle; your eyes are like those of a lost soul."From that day the beauty of Mademoiselle Grandet took a new character.The solemn thoughts of love which slowly filled her soul, and thedignity of the woman beloved, gave to her features an illuminationsuch as painters render by a halo. Before the coming of her cousin,Eugenie might be compared to the Virgin before the conception; afterhe had gone, she was like the Virgin Mother,--she had given birth tolove. These two Marys so different, so well represented by Spanishart, embody one of those shining symbols with which Christianityabounds.

°°°°Returning from Mass on the morning after Charles's departure,--havingmade a vow to hear it daily,--Eugenie bought a map of the world, whichshe nailed up beside her looking-glass, that she might follow hercousin on his westward way, that she might put herself, were it everso little, day by day into the ship that bore him, and see him and askhim a thousand questions,--"Art thou well? Dost thou suffer? Dost thouthink of me when the star, whose beauty and usefulness thou hasttaught me to know, shines upon thee?" In the mornings she sat pensivebeneath the walnut-tree, on the worm-eaten bench covered with graylichens, where they had said to each other so many precious things, somany trifles, where they had built the pretty castles of their futurehome. She thought of the future now as she looked upward to the bit ofsky which was all the high walls suffered her to see; then she turnedher eyes to the angle where the sun crept on, and to the roof abovethe room in which he had slept. Hers was the solitary love, thepersistent love, which glides into every thought and becomes thesubstance, or, as our fathers might have said, the tissue of life.When the would-be friends of Pere Grandet came in the evening fortheir game at cards, she was gay and dissimulating; but all themorning she talked of Charles with her mother and Nanon. Nanon hadbrought herself to see that she could pity the sufferings of her youngmistress without failing in her duty to the old master, and she wouldsay to Eugenie,--

°°°°"If I had a man for myself I'd--I'd follow him to hell, yes, I'dexterminate myself for him; but I've none. I shall die and never knowwhat life is. Would you believe, mamz'elle, that old Cornoiller (agood fellow all the same) is always round my petticoats for the sakeof my money,--just for all the world like the rats who come smellingafter the master's cheese and paying court to you? I see it all; I'vegot a shrewd eye, though I am as big as a steeple. Well, mamz'elle, itpleases me, but it isn't love."

°°°°X

°°°°Two months went by. This domestic life, once so monotonous, was nowquickened with the intense interest of a secret that bound these womenintimately together. For them Charles lived and moved beneath the grimgray rafters of the hall. Night and morning Eugenie opened thedressing-case and gazed at the portrait of her aunt. One Sundaymorning her mother surprised her as she stood absorbed in finding hercousin's features in his mother's face. Madame Grandet was then forthe first time admitted into the terrible secret of the exchange madeby Charles against her daughter's treasure.

°°°°"You gave him all!" cried the poor mother, terrified. "What will yousay to your father on New Year's Day when he asks to see your gold?"Eugenie's eyes grew fixed, and the two women lived through mortalterror for more than half the morning. They were so troubled in mindthat they missed high Mass, and only went to the military service. Inthree days the year 1819 would come to an end. In three days aterrible drama would begin, a bourgeois tragedy, without poison, ordagger, or the spilling of blood; but--as regards the actors in it--more cruel than all the fabled horrors in the family of the Atrides."What will become of us?" said Madame Grandet to her daughter, lettingher knitting fall upon her knees.

°°°°The poor mother had gone through such anxiety for the past two monthsthat the woollen sleeves which she needed for the coming winter werenot yet finished. This domestic fact, insignificant as it seems, boresad results. For want of those sleeves, a chill seized her in themidst of a sweat caused by a terrible explosion of anger on the partof her husband.

°°°°"I have been thinking, my poor child, that if you had confided yoursecret to me we should have had time to write to Monsieur des Grassinsin Paris. He might have sent us gold pieces like yours; though Grandetknows them all, perhaps--"

°°°°"Where could we have got the money?"

°°°°"I would have pledged my own property. Besides, Monsieur des Grassinswould have--"

°°°°"It is too late," said Eugenie in a broken, hollow voice. "To-morrowmorning we must go and wish him a happy New Year in his chamber.""But, my daughter, why should I not consult the Cruchots?""No, no; it would be delivering me up to them, and putting ourselvesin their power. Besides, I have chosen my course. I have done right, Irepent of nothing. God will protect me. His will be done! Ah! mother,if you had read his letter, you, too, would have thought only of him."The next morning, January 1, 1820, the horrible fear to which motherand daughter were a prey suggested to their minds a natural excuse bywhich to escape the solemn entrance into Grandet's chamber. The winterof 1819-1820 was one of the coldest of that epoch. The snow encumberedthe roofs.

°°°°Madame Grandet called to her husband as soon as she heard him stirringin his chamber, and said,--

°°°°"Grandet, will you let Nanon light a fire here for me? The cold is sosharp that I am freezing under the bedclothes. At my age I need somecomforts. Besides," she added, after a slight pause, "Eugenie shallcome and dress here; the poor child might get an illness from dressingin her cold room in such weather. Then we will go and wish you a happyNew Year beside the fire in the hall."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta, what a tongue! a pretty way to begin the new year,Madame Grandet! You never talked so much before; but you haven't beensopping your bread in wine, I know that."

°°°°There was a moment's silence.

°°°°"Well," resumed the goodman, who no doubt had some reason of his ownfor agreeing to his wife's request, "I'll do what you ask, MadameGrandet. You are a good woman, and I don't want any harm to happen toyou at your time of life,--though as a general thing the Bertellieresare as sound as a roach. Hein! isn't that so?" he added after a pause."Well, I forgive them; we got their property in the end." And hecoughed.

°°°°"You are very gay this morning, monsieur," said the poor womangravely.

°°°°"I'm always gay,--

°°°°"'Gai, gai, gai, le tonnelier,

°°°°Raccommodez votre cuvier!'"

°°°°he answered, entering his wife's room fully dressed. "Yes, on my word,it is cold enough to freeze you solid. We shall have a fine breakfast,wife. Des Grassins has sent me a pate-de-foie-gras truffled! I amgoing now to get it at the coach-office. There'll be a double napoleonfor Eugenie in the package," he whispered in Madame Grandet's ear. "Ihave no gold left, wife. I had a few stray pieces--I don't mindtelling you that--but I had to let them go in business."

°°°°Then, by way of celebrating the new year, he kissed her on theforehead.

°°°°"Eugenie," cried the mother, when Grandet was fairly gone, "I don'tknow which side of the bed your father got out of, but he is good-tempered this morning. Perhaps we shall come out safe after all?""What's happened to the master?" said Nanon, entering her mistress'sroom to light the fire. "First place, he said, 'Good-morning; happyNew Year, you big fool! Go and light my wife's fire, she's cold'; andthen, didn't I feel silly when he held out his hand and gave me a six-franc piece, which isn't worn one bit? Just look at it, madame! Oh,the kind man! He is a good man, that's a fact. There are some peoplewho the older they get the harder they grow; but he,--why he's gettingsoft and improving with time, like your ratafia! He is a good, goodman--"

°°°°The secret of Grandet's joy lay in the complete success of hisspeculation. Monsieur des Grassins, after deducting the amount whichthe old cooper owed him for the discount on a hundred and fiftythousand francs in Dutch notes, and for the surplus which he hadadvanced to make up the sum required for the investment in the Fundswhich was to produce a hundred thousand francs a year, had now senthim, by the diligence, thirty thousand francs in silver coin, theremainder of his first half-year's interest, informing him at the sametime that the Funds had already gone up in value. They were thenquoted at eighty-nine; the shrewdest capitalists bought in, towardsthe last of January, at ninety-three. Grandet had thus gained in twomonths twelve per cent on his capital; he had simplified his accounts,and would in future receive fifty thousand francs interest every sixmonths, without incurring any taxes or costs for repairs. Heunderstood at last what it was to invest money in the publicsecurities,--a system for which provincials have always shown a markedrepugnance,--and at the end of five years he found himself master of acapital of six millions, which increased without much effort of hisown, and which, joined to the value and proceeds of his territorialpossessions, gave him a fortune that was absolutely colossal. The sixfrancs bestowed on Nanon were perhaps the reward of some great servicewhich the poor servant had rendered to her master unawares."Oh! oh! where's Pere Grandet going? He has been scurrying about sincesunrise as if to a fire," said the tradespeople to each other as theyopened their shops for the day.

°°°°When they saw him coming back from the wharf, followed by a porterfrom the coach-office wheeling a barrow which was laden with sacks,they all had their comments to make:--

°°°°"Water flows to the river; the old fellow was running after his gold,"said one.

°°°°"He gets it from Paris and Froidfond and Holland," said another."He'll end by buying up Saumur," cried a third.

°°°°"He doesn't mind the cold, he's so wrapped up in his gains," said awife to her husband.

°°°°"Hey! hey! Monsieur Grandet, if that's too heavy for you," said acloth-dealer, his nearest neighbor, "I'll take it off your hands.""Heavy?" said the cooper, "I should think so; it's all sous!""Silver sous," said the porter in a low voice.

°°°°"If you want me to take care of you, keep your tongue between yourteeth," said the goodman to the porter as they reached the door."The old fox! I thought he was deaf; seems he can hear fast enough infrosty weather."

°°°°"Here's twenty sous for your New Year, and /mum/!" said Grandet. "Beoff with you! Nanon shall take back your barrow. Nanon, are thelinnets at church?"

°°°°"Yes, monsieur."

°°°°"Then lend a hand! go to work!" he cried, piling the sacks upon her.In a few moments all were carried up to his inner room, where he shuthimself in with them. "When breakfast is ready, knock on the wall," hesaid as he disappeared. "Take the barrow back to the coach-office."The family did not breakfast that day until ten o'clock.

°°°°"Your father will not ask to see your gold downstairs," said MadameGrandet as they got back from Mass. "You must pretend to be verychilly. We may have time to replace the treasure before your fete-day."

°°°°Grandet came down the staircase thinking of his splendid speculationin government securities, and wondering how he could metamorphose hisParisian silver into solid gold; he was making up his mind to investin this way everything he could lay hands on until the Funds shouldreach a par value. Fatal reverie for Eugenie! As soon as he came in,the two women wished him a happy New Year,--his daughter by puttingher arms round his neck and caressing him; Madame Grandet gravely andwith dignity.

°°°°"Ha! ha! my child," he said, kissing his daughter on both cheeks. "Iwork for you, don't you see? I think of your happiness. Must havemoney to be happy. Without money there's not a particle of happiness.Here! there's a new napoleon for you. I sent to Paris for it. On myword of honor, it's all the gold I have; you are the only one that hasgot any gold. I want to see your gold, little one."

°°°°"Oh! it is too cold; let us have breakfast," answered Eugenie."Well, after breakfast, then; it will help the digestion. That fatdes Grassins sent me the pate. Eat as much as you like, my children,it costs nothing. Des Grassins is getting along very well. I amsatisfied with him. The old fish is doing Charles a good service, andgratis too. He is making a very good settlement of that poor deceasedGrandet's business. Hoo! hoo!" he muttered, with his mouth full, aftera pause, "how good it is! Eat some, wife; that will feed you for atleast two days."

°°°°"I am not hungry. I am very poorly; you know that."

°°°°"Ah, bah! you can stuff yourself as full as you please without danger,you're a Bertelliere; they are all hearty. You are a bit yellow,that's true; but I like yellow, myself."

°°°°The expectation of ignominious and public death is perhaps lesshorrible to a condemned criminal than the anticipation of what wascoming after breakfast to Madame Grandet and Eugenie. The moregleefully the old man talked and ate, the more their hearts shrankwithin them. The daughter, however, had an inward prop at this crisis,--she gathered strength through love.

°°°°"For him! for him!" she cried within her, "I would die a thousanddeaths."

°°°°At this thought, she shot a glance at her mother which flamed withcourage.

°°°°"Clear away," said Grandet to Nanon when, about eleven o'clock,breakfast was over, "but leave the table. We can spread your littletreasure upon it," he said, looking at Eugenie. "Little? Faith! no; itisn't little. You possess, in actual value, five thousand nine hundredand fifty-nine francs and the forty I gave you just now. That makessix thousand francs, less one. Well, now see here, little one! I'llgive you that one franc to make up the round number. Hey! what are youlistening for, Nanon? Mind your own business; go and do your work."Nanon disappeared.

°°°°"Now listen, Eugenie; you must give me back your gold. You won'trefuse your father, my little girl, hein?"

°°°°The two women were dumb.

°°°°"I have no gold myself. I had some, but it is all gone. I'll give youin return six thousand francs in /livres/, and you are to put themjust where I tell you. You mustn't think anything more about your'dozen.' When I marry you (which will be soon) I shall get you ahusband who can give you the finest 'dozen' ever seen in theprovinces. Now attend to me, little girl. There's a fine chance foryou; you can put your six thousand francs into government funds, andyou will receive every six months nearly two hundred francs interest,without taxes, or repairs, or frost, or hail, or floods, or anythingelse to swallow up the money. Perhaps you don't like to part with yourgold, hey, my girl? Never mind, bring it to me all the same. I'll getyou some more like it,--like those Dutch coins and the /portugaises/,the rupees of Mogul, and the /genovines/,--I'll give you some more onyour fete-days, and in three years you'll have got back half yourlittle treasure. What's that you say? Look up, now. Come, go and getit, the precious metal. You ought to kiss me on the eyelids fortelling you the secrets and the mysteries of the life and death ofmoney. Yes, silver and gold live and swarm like men; they come, andgo, and sweat, and multiply--"

°°°°Eugenie rose; but after making a few steps towards the door she turnedabruptly, looked her father in the face, and said,--

°°°°"I have not got /my/ gold."

°°°°"You have not got your gold!" cried Grandet, starting up erect, like ahorse that hears a cannon fired beside him.

°°°°"No, I have not got it."

°°°°"You are mistaken, Eugenie."

°°°°"No."

°°°°"By the shears of my father!"

°°°°Whenever the old man swore that oath the rafters trembled."Holy Virgin! Madame is turning pale," cried Nanon.

°°°°"Grandet, your anger will kill me," said the poor mother."Ta, ta, ta, ta! nonsense; you never die in your family! Eugenie, whathave you done with your gold?" he cried, rushing upon her."Monsieur," said the daughter, falling at Madame Grandet's knees, "mymother is ill. Look at her; do not kill her."

°°°°Grandet was frightened by the pallor which overspread his wife's face,usually so yellow.

°°°°"Nanon, help me to bed," said the poor woman in a feeble voice; "I amdying--"

°°°°Nanon gave her mistress an arm, Eugenie gave her another; but it wasonly with infinite difficulty that they could get her upstairs, shefell with exhaustion at every step. Grandet remained alone. However,in a few moments he went up six or eight stairs and called out,--"Eugenie, when your mother is in bed, come down."

°°°°"Yes, father."

°°°°She soon came, after reassuring her mother.

°°°°"My daughter," said Grandet, "you will now tell me what you have donewith your gold."

°°°°"My father, if you make me presents of which I am not the solemistress, take them back," she answered coldly, picking up thenapoleon from the chimney-piece and offering it to him.

°°°°Grandet seized the coin and slipped it into his breeches' pocket."I shall certainly never give you anything again. Not so much asthat!" he said, clicking his thumb-nail against a front tooth. "Do youdare to despise your father? have you no confidence in him? Don't youknow what a father is? If he is nothing for you, he is nothing at all.Where is your gold?"

°°°°"Father, I love and respect you, in spite of your anger; but I humblyask you to remember that I am twenty-three years old. You have told meoften that I have attained my majority, and I do not forget it. I haveused my money as I chose to use it, and you may be sure that it wasput to a good use--"

°°°°"What use?"

°°°°"That is an inviolable secret," she answered. "Have you no secrets?""I am the head of the family; I have my own affairs."

°°°°"And this is mine."

°°°°"It must be something bad if you can't tell it to your father,Mademoiselle Grandet."

°°°°"It is good, and I cannot tell it to my father."

°°°°"At least you can tell me when you parted with your gold?"Eugenie made a negative motion with her head.

°°°°"You had it on your birthday, hein?"

°°°°She grew as crafty through love as her father was through avarice, andreiterated the negative sign.

°°°°"Was there ever such obstinacy! It's a theft," cried Grandet, hisvoice going up in a crescendo which gradually echoed through thehouse. "What! here, in my own home, under my very eyes, somebody hastaken your gold!--the only gold we have!--and I'm not to know who hasgot it! Gold is a precious thing. Virtuous girls go wrong sometimes,and give--I don't know what; they do it among the great people, andeven among the bourgeoisie. But give their gold!--for you have givenit to some one, hein?--"

°°°°Eugenie was silent and impassive.

°°°°"Was there ever such a daughter? Is it possible that I am your father?If you have invested it anywhere, you must have a receipt--""Was I free--yes or no--to do what I would with my own? Was it notmine?"

°°°°"You are a child."

°°°°"Of age."

°°°°Dumbfounded by his daughter's logic, Grandet turned pale and stampedand swore. When at last he found words, he cried: "Serpent! Cursedgirl! Ah, deceitful creature! You know I love you, and you takeadvantage of it. She'd cut her father's throat! Good God! you've givenour fortune to that ne'er-do-well,--that dandy with morocco boots! Bythe shears of my father! I can't disinherit you, but I curse you,--youand your cousin and your children! Nothing good will come of it! Doyou hear? If it was to Charles--but, no; it's impossible. What! hasthat wretched fellow robbed me?--"

°°°°He looked at his daughter, who continued cold and silent."She won't stir; she won't flinch! She's more Grandet than I'mGrandet! Ha! you have not given your gold for nothing? Come, speak thetruth!"

°°°°Eugenie looked at her father with a sarcastic expression that stunghim.

°°°°"Eugenie, you are here, in my house,--in your father's house. If youwish to stay here, you must submit yourself to me. The priests tellyou to obey me." Eugenie bowed her head. "You affront me in all I holdmost dear. I will not see you again until you submit. Go to yourchamber. You will stay there till I give you permission to leave it.Nanon will bring you bread and water. You hear me--go!"

°°°°Eugenie burst into tears and fled up to her mother. Grandet, aftermarching two or three times round the garden in the snow withoutheeding the cold, suddenly suspected that his daughter had gone to hermother; only too happy to find her disobedient to his orders, heclimbed the stairs with the agility of a cat and appeared in MadameGrandet's room just as she was stroking Eugenie's hair, while thegirl's face was hidden in her motherly bosom.

°°°°"Be comforted, my poor child," she was saying; "your father will getover it."

°°°°"She has no father!" said the old man. "Can it be you and I, MadameGrandet, who have given birth to such a disobedient child? A fineeducation,--religious, too! Well! why are you not in your chamber?Come, to prison, to prison, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Would you deprive me of my daughter, monsieur?" said Madame Grandet,turning towards him a face that was now red with fever.

°°°°"If you want to keep her, carry her off! Clear out--out of my house,both of you! Thunder! where is the gold? what's become of the gold?"Eugenie rose, looked proudly at her father, and withdrew to her room.Grandet turned the key of the door.

°°°°"Nanon," he cried, "put out the fire in the hall."

°°°°Then he sat down in an armchair beside his wife's fire and said toher,--

°°°°"Undoubtedly she has given the gold to that miserable seducer,Charles, who only wanted our money."

°°°°"I knew nothing about it," she answered, turning to the other side ofthe bed, that she might escape the savage glances of her husband. "Isuffer so much from your violence that I shall never leave this room,if I trust my own presentiments, till I am carried out of it in mycoffin. You ought to have spared me this suffering, monsieur,--you, towhom I have caused no pain; that is, I think so. Your daughter lovesyou. I believe her to be as innocent as the babe unborn. Do not makeher wretched. Revoke your sentence. The cold is very severe; you maygive her some serious illness."

°°°°"I will not see her, neither will I speak to her. She shall stay inher room, on bread and water, until she submits to her father. Whatthe devil! shouldn't a father know where the gold in his house hasgone to? She owned the only rupees in France, perhaps, and the Dutchducats and the /genovines/--"

°°°°"Monsieur, Eugenie is our only child; and even if she had thrown theminto the water--"

°°°°"Into the water!" cried her husband; "into the water! You are crazy,Madame Grandet! What I have said is said; you know that well enough.If you want peace in this household, make your daughter confess, pumpit out of her. Women understand how to do that better than we do.Whatever she has done, I sha'n't eat her. Is she afraid of me? Even ifshe has plastered Charles with gold from head to foot, he is on thehigh seas, and nobody can get at him, hein!"

°°°°"But, monsieur--" Excited by the nervous crisis through which she hadpassed, and by the fate of her daughter, which brought forth all hertenderness and all her powers of mind, Madame Grandet suddenlyobserved a frightful movement of her husband's wen, and, in the veryact of replying, she changed her speech without changing the tones ofher voice,--"But, monsieur, I have not more influence over her thanyou have. She has said nothing to me; she takes after you.""Tut, tut! Your tongue is hung in the middle this morning. Ta, ta, ta,ta! You are setting me at defiance, I do believe. I daresay you are inleague with her."

°°°°He looked fixedly at his wife.

°°°°"Monsieur Grandet, if you wish to kill me, you have only to go on likethis. I tell you, monsieur,--and if it were to cost me my life, Iwould say it,--you do wrong by your daughter; she is more in the rightthan you are. That money belonged to her; she is incapable of makingany but a good use of it, and God alone has the right to know our gooddeeds. Monsieur, I implore you, take Eugenie back into favor; forgiveher. If you will do this you will lessen the injury your anger hasdone me; perhaps you will save my life. My daughter! oh, monsieur,give me back my daughter!"

°°°°"I shall decamp," he said; "the house is not habitable. A mother anddaughter talking and arguing like that! Broooouh! Pouah! A fine NewYear's present you've made me, Eugenie," he called out. "Yes, yes, cryaway! What you've done will bring you remorse, do you hear? What's thegood of taking the sacrament six times every three months, if you giveaway your father's gold secretly to an idle fellow who'll eat yourheart out when you've nothing else to give him? You'll find out someday what your Charles is worth, with his morocco boots andsupercilious airs. He has got neither heart nor soul if he dared tocarry off a young girl's treasure without the consent of her parents."When the street-door was shut, Eugenie came out of her room and wentto her mother.

°°°°"What courage you have had for your daughter's sake!" she said."Ah! my child, see where forbidden things may lead us. You forced meto tell a lie."

°°°°"I will ask God to punish only me."

°°°°"Is it true," cried Nanon, rushing in alarmed, "that mademoiselle isto be kept on bread and water for the rest of her life?"

°°°°"What does that signify, Nanon?" said Eugenie tranquilly."Goodness! do you suppose I'll eat /frippe/ when the daughter of thehouse is eating dry bread? No, no!"

°°°°"Don't say a word about all this, Nanon," said Eugenie.

°°°°"I'll be as mute as a fish; but you'll see!"

°°°°*****

°°°°Grandet dined alone for the first time in twenty-four years."So you're a widower, monsieur," said Nanon; "it must be disagreeableto be a widower with two women in the house."

°°°°"I did not speak to you. Hold your jaw, or I'll turn you off! What isthat I hear boiling in your saucepan on the stove?"

°°°°"It is grease I'm trying out."

°°°°"There will be some company to-night. Light the fire."

°°°°The Cruchots, Madame des Grassins, and her son arrived at the usualhour of eight, and were surprised to see neither Madame Grandet norher daughter.

°°°°"My wife is not very well, and Eugenie is with her," said the oldwine-grower, whose face betrayed no emotion.

°°°°At the end of an hour spent in idle conversation, Madame des Grassins,who had gone up to see Madame Grandet, came down, and every oneinquired,--

°°°°"How is Madame Grandet?"

°°°°"Not at all well," she answered; "her condition seems to me reallyalarming. At her age you ought to take every precaution, PapaGrandet."

°°°°"We'll see about it," said the old man in an absent way.

°°°°They all wished him good-night. When the Cruchots got into the streetMadame des Grassins said to them,--

°°°°"There is something going on at the Grandets. The mother is very illwithout her knowing it. The girl's eyes are red, as if she had beencrying all day. Can they be trying to marry her against her will?"*****

°°°°When Grandet had gone to bed Nanon came softly to Eugenie's room inher stockinged feet and showed her a pate baked in a saucepan."See, mademoiselle," said the good soul, "Cornoiller gave me a hare.You eat so little that this pate will last you full a week; in suchfrosty weather it won't spoil. You sha'n't live on dry bread, I'mdetermined; it isn't wholesome."

°°°°"Poor Nanon!" said Eugenie, pressing her hand.

°°°°"I've made it downright good and dainty, and /he/ never found it out.I bought the lard and the spices out of my six francs: I'm themistress of my own money"; and she disappeared rapidly, fancying sheheard Grandet.

°°°°XI

°°°°For several months the old wine-grower came constantly to his wife'sroom at all hours of the day, without ever uttering his daughter'sname, or seeing her, or making the smallest allusion to her. MadameGrandet did not leave her chamber, and daily grew worse. Nothingsoftened the old man; he remained unmoved, harsh, and cold as agranite rock. He continued to go and come about his business as usual;but ceased to stutter, talked less, and was more obdurate in businesstransactions than ever before. Often he made mistakes in adding up hisfigures.

°°°°"Something is going on at the Grandets," said the Grassinists and theCruchotines.

°°°°"What has happened in the Grandet family?" became a fixed questionwhich everybody asked everybody else at the little evening-parties ofSaumur. Eugenie went to Mass escorted by Nanon. If Madame des Grassinssaid a few words to her on coming out of church, she answered in anevasive manner, without satisfying any curiosity. However, at the endof two months, it became impossible to hide, either from the threeCruchots or from Madame des Grassins, the fact that Eugenie was inconfinement. There came a moment when all pretexts failed to explainher perpetual absence. Then, though it was impossible to discover bywhom the secret had been betrayed, all the town became aware that eversince New Year's day Mademoiselle Grandet had been kept in her roomwithout fire, on bread and water, by her father's orders, and thatNanon cooked little dainties and took them to her secretly at night.It was even known that the young woman was not able to see or takecare of her mother, except at certain times when her father was out ofthe house.

°°°°Grandet's conduct was severely condemned. The whole town outlawed him,so to speak; they remembered his treachery, his hard-heartedness, andthey excommunicated him. When he passed along the streets, peoplepointed him out and muttered at him. When his daughter came down thewinding street, accompanied by Nanon, on her way to Mass or Vespers,the inhabitants ran to the windows and examined with intense curiositythe bearing of the rich heiress and her countenance, which bore theimpress of angelic gentleness and melancholy. Her imprisonment and thecondemnation of her father were as nothing to her. Had she not a mapof the world, the little bench, the garden, the angle of the wall? Didshe not taste upon her lips the honey that love's kisses left there?She was ignorant for a time that the town talked about her, just asGrandet himself was ignorant of it. Pious and pure in heart beforeGod, her conscience and her love helped her to suffer patiently thewrath and vengeance of her father.

°°°°One deep grief silenced all others. Her mother, that gentle, tendercreature, made beautiful by the light which shone from the inner tothe outer as she approached the tomb,--her mother was perishing fromday to day. Eugenie often reproached herself as the innocent cause ofthe slow, cruel malady that was wasting her away. This remorse, thoughher mother soothed it, bound her still closer to her love. Everymorning, as soon as her father left the house, she went to the bedsideof her mother, and there Nanon brought her breakfast. The poor girl,sad, and suffering through the sufferings of her mother, would turnher face to the old servant with a mute gesture, weeping, and yet notdaring to speak of her cousin. It was Madame Grandet who first foundcourage to say,--

°°°°"Where is /he/? Why does /he/ not write?"

°°°°"Let us think about him, mother, but not speak of him. You are ill--you, before all."

°°°°"All" meant "him."

°°°°"My child," said Madame Grandet, "I do not wish to live. God protectsme and enables me to look with joy to the end of my misery."Every utterance of this woman was unfalteringly pious and Christian.Sometimes, during the first months of the year, when her husband cameto breakfast with her and tramped up and down the room, she would sayto him a few religious words, always spoken with angelic sweetness,yet with the firmness of a woman to whom approaching death lends acourage she had lacked in life.

°°°°"Monsieur, I thank you for the interest you take in my health," shewould answer when he made some commonplace inquiry; "but if you reallydesire to render my last moments less bitter and to ease my grief,take back your daughter: be a Christian, a husband, and a father."When he heard these words, Grandet would sit down by the bed with theair of a man who sees the rain coming and quietly gets under theshelter of a gateway till it is over. When these touching, tender, andreligious supplications had all been made, he would say,--"You are rather pale to-day, my poor wife."

°°°°Absolute forgetfulness of his daughter seemed graven on his stonybrow, on his closed lips. He was unmoved by the tears which floweddown the white cheeks of his unhappy wife as she listened to hismeaningless answers.

°°°°"May God pardon you," she said, "even as I pardon you! You will someday stand in need of mercy."

°°°°Since Madame Grandet's illness he had not dared to make use of histerrible "Ta, ta, ta, ta!" Yet, for all that, his despotic nature wasnot disarmed by this angel of gentleness, whose ugliness day by daydecreased, driven out by the ineffable expression of moral qualitieswhich shone upon her face. She was all soul. The spirit of prayerseemed to purify her and refine those homely features and make themluminous. Who has not seen the phenomenon of a like transfiguration onsacred faces where the habits of the soul have triumphed over theplainest features, giving them that spiritual illumination whose lightcomes from the purity and nobility of the inward thought? Thespectacle of this transformation wrought by the struggle whichconsumed the last shreds of the human life of this woman, did somewhataffect the old cooper, though feebly, for his nature was of iron; ifhis language ceased to be contemptuous, an imperturbable silence,which saved his dignity as master of the household, took its place andruled his conduct.

°°°°When the faithful Nanon appeared in the market, many quips and quirksand complaints about the master whistled in her ears; but howeverloudly public opinion condemned Monsieur Grandet, the old servantdefended him, for the honor of the family.

°°°°"Well!" she would say to his detractors, "don't we all get hard as wegrow old? Why shouldn't he get horny too? Stop telling lies.Mademoiselle lives like a queen. She's alone, that's true; but shelikes it. Besides, my masters have good reasons."

°°°°At last, towards the end of spring, Madame Grandet, worn out by griefeven more than by illness, having failed, in spite of her prayers, toreconcile the father and daughter, confided her secret troubles to theCruchots.

°°°°"Keep a girl of twenty-three on bread and water!" cried Monsieur deBonfons; "without any reason, too! Why, that constitutes wrongfulcruelty; she can contest, as much in as upon--"

°°°°"Come, nephew, spare us your legal jargon," said the notary. "Set yourmind at ease, madame; I will put a stop to such treatment to-morrow."Eugenie, hearing herself mentioned, came out of her room."Gentlemen," she said, coming forward with a proud step, "I beg younot to interfere in this matter. My father is master in his own house.As long as I live under his roof I am bound to obey him. His conductis not subject to the approbation or the disapprobation of the world;he is accountable to God only. I appeal to your friendship to keeptotal silence in this affair. To blame my father is to attack ourfamily honor. I am much obliged to you for the interest you have shownin me; you will do me an additional service if you will put a stop tothe offensive rumors which are current in the town, of which I amaccidentally informed."

°°°°"She is right," said Madame Grandet.

°°°°"Mademoiselle, the best way to stop such rumors is to procure yourliberty," answered the old notary respectfully, struck with the beautywhich seclusion, melancholy, and love had stamped upon her face."Well, my daughter, let Monsieur Cruchot manage the matter if he is sosure of success. He understands your father, and how to manage him. Ifyou wish to see me happy for my few remaining days, you must, at anycost, be reconciled to your father."

°°°°On the morrow Grandet, in pursuance of a custom he had begun sinceEugenie's imprisonment, took a certain number of turns up and down thelittle garden; he had chosen the hour when Eugenie brushed andarranged her hair. When the old man reached the walnut-tree he hidbehind its trunk and remained for a few moments watching hisdaughter's movements, hesitating, perhaps, between the course to whichthe obstinacy of his character impelled him and his natural desire toembrace his child. Sometimes he sat down on the rotten old bench whereCharles and Eugenie had vowed eternal love; and then she, too, lookedat her father secretly in the mirror before which she stood. If herose and continued his walk, she sat down obligingly at the window andlooked at the angle of the wall where the pale flowers hung, where theVenus-hair grew from the crevices with the bindweed and the sedum,--awhite or yellow stone-crop very abundant in the vineyards of Saumurand at Tours. Maitre Cruchot came early, and found the old wine-growersitting in the fine June weather on the little bench, his back againstthe division wall of the garden, engaged in watching his daughter."What may you want, Maitre Cruchot?" he said, perceiving the notary."I came to speak to you on business."

°°°°"Ah! ah! have you brought some gold in exchange for my silver?""No, no, I have not come about money; it is about your daughterEugenie. All the town is talking of her and you."

°°°°"What does the town meddle for? A man's house is his castle.""Very true; and a man may kill himself if he likes, or, what is worse,he may fling his money into the gutter."

°°°°"What do you mean?"

°°°°"Why, your wife is very ill, my friend. You ought to consult MonsieurBergerin; she is likely to die. If she does die without receivingproper care, you will not be very easy in mind, I take it.""Ta, ta, ta, ta! you know a deal about my wife! These doctors, if theyonce get their foot in your house, will come five and six times aday."

°°°°"Of course you will do as you think best. We are old friends; there isno one in all Saumur who takes more interest than I in what concernsyou. Therefore, I was bound to tell you this. However, happen whatmay, you have the right to do as you please; you can choose your owncourse. Besides, that is not what brings me here. There is anotherthing which may have serious results for you. After all, you can'twish to kill your wife; her life is too important to you. Think ofyour situation in connection with your daughter if Madame Grandetdies. You must render an account to Eugenie, because you enjoy yourwife's estate only during her lifetime. At her death your daughter canclaim a division of property, and she may force you to sell Froidfond.In short, she is her mother's heir, and you are not."

°°°°These words fell like a thunderbolt on the old man, who was not aswise about law as he was about business. He had never thought of alegal division of the estate.

°°°°"Therefore I advise you to treat her kindly," added Cruchot, inconclusion.

°°°°"But do you know what she has done, Cruchot?"

°°°°"What?" asked the notary, curious to hear the truth and find out thecause of the quarrel.

°°°°"She has given away her gold!"

°°°°"Well, wasn't it hers?" said the notary.

°°°°"They all tell me that!" exclaimed the old man, letting his arms fallto his sides with a movement that was truly tragic.

°°°°"Are you going--for a mere nothing,"--resumed Cruchot, "to putobstacles in the way of the concessions which you will be obliged toask from your daughter as soon as her mother dies?"

°°°°"Do you call six thousand francs a mere nothing?"

°°°°"Hey! my old friend, do you know what the inventory of your wife'sproperty will cost, if Eugenie demands the division?"

°°°°"How much?"

°°°°"Two, three, four thousand francs, perhaps! The property would have tobe put up at auction and sold, to get at its actual value. Instead ofthat, if you are on good terms with--"

°°°°"By the shears of my father!" cried Grandet, turning pale as hesuddenly sat down, "we will see about it, Cruchot."

°°°°After a moment's silence, full of anguish perhaps, the old man lookedat the notary and said,--

°°°°"Life is very hard! It has many griefs! Cruchot," he continuedsolemnly, "you would not deceive me? Swear to me upon your honor thatall you've told me is legally true. Show me the law; I must see thelaw!"

°°°°"My poor friend," said the notary, "don't I know my own business?""Then it is true! I am robbed, betrayed, killed, destroyed by my owndaughter!"

°°°°"It is true that your daughter is her mother's heir."

°°°°"Why do we have children? Ah! my wife, I love her! Luckily she's soundand healthy; she's a Bertelliere."

°°°°"She has not a month to live."

°°°°Grandet struck his forehead, went a few steps, came back, cast adreadful look on Cruchot, and said,--

°°°°"What can be done?"

°°°°"Eugenie can relinquish her claim to her mother's property. Should shedo this you would not disinherit her, I presume?--but if you want tocome to such a settlement, you must not treat her harshly. What I amtelling you, old man, is against my own interests. What do I live by,if it isn't liquidations, inventories, conveyances, divisions ofproperty?--"

°°°°"We'll see, we'll see! Don't let's talk any more about it, Cruchot; itwrings my vitals. Have you received any gold?"

°°°°"No; but I have a few old louis, a dozen or so, which you may have. Mygood friend, make it up with Eugenie. Don't you know all Saumur ispelting you with stones?"

°°°°"The scoundrels!"

°°°°"Come, the Funds are at ninety-nine. Do be satisfied for once in yourlife."

°°°°"At ninety-nine! Are they, Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Hey, hey! Ninety-nine!" repeated the old man, accompanying the notaryto the street-door. Then, too agitated by what he had just heard tostay in the house, he went up to his wife's room and said,--"Come, mother, you may have your daughter to spend the day with you.I'm going to Froidfond. Enjoy yourselves, both of you. This is ourwedding-day, wife. See! here are sixty francs for your altar at theFete-Dieu; you've wanted one for a long time. Come, cheer up, enjoyyourself, and get well! Hurrah for happiness!"

°°°°He threw ten silver pieces of six francs each upon the bed, and tookhis wife's head between his hands and kissed her forehead."My good wife, you are getting well, are not you?"

°°°°"How can you think of receiving the God of mercy in your house whenyou refuse to forgive your daughter?" she said with emotion."Ta, ta, ta, ta!" said Grandet in a coaxing voice. "We'll see aboutthat."

°°°°"Merciful heaven! Eugenie," cried the mother, flushing with joy, "comeand kiss your father; he forgives you!"

°°°°But the old man had disappeared. He was going as fast as his legscould carry him towards his vineyards, trying to get his confusedideas into order. Grandet had entered his seventy-sixth year. Duringthe last two years his avarice had increased upon him, as all thepersistent passions of men increase at a certain age. As if toillustrate an observation which applies equally to misers, ambitiousmen, and others whose lives are controlled by any dominant idea, hisaffections had fastened upon one special symbol of his passion. Thesight of gold, the possession of gold, had become a monomania. Hisdespotic spirit had grown in proportion to his avarice, and to partwith the control of the smallest fraction of his property at the deathof his wife seemed to him a thing "against nature." To declare hisfortune to his daughter, to give an inventory of his property, landedand personal, for the purposes of division--

°°°°"Why," he cried aloud in the midst of a field where he was pretendingto examine a vine, "it would be cutting my throat!"

°°°°He came at last to a decision, and returned to Saumur in time fordinner, resolved to unbend to Eugenie, and pet and coax her, that hemight die regally, holding the reins of his millions in his own handsso long as the breath was in his body. At the moment when the old man,who chanced to have his pass-key in his pocket, opened the door andclimbed with a stealthy step up the stairway to go into his wife'sroom, Eugenie had brought the beautiful dressing-case from the oakcabinet and placed it on her mother's bed. Mother and daughter, inGrandet's absence, allowed themselves the pleasure of looking for alikeness to Charles in the portrait of his mother.

°°°°"It is exactly his forehead and his mouth," Eugenie was saying as theold man opened the door. At the look which her husband cast upon thegold, Madame Grandet cried out,--

°°°°"O God, have pity upon us!"

°°°°The old man sprang upon the box as a famished tiger might spring upona sleeping child.

°°°°"What's this?" he said, snatching the treasure and carrying it to thewindow. "Gold, good gold!" he cried. "All gold,--it weighs two pounds!Ha, ha! Charles gave you that for your money, did he? Hein! Why didn'tyou tell me so? It was a good bargain, little one! Yes, you are mydaughter, I see that--" Eugenie trembled in every limb. "This camefrom Charles, of course, didn't it?" continued the old man."Yes, father; it is not mine. It is a sacred trust."

°°°°"Ta, ta, ta, ta! He took your fortune, and now you can get it back.""Father!"

°°°°Grandet took his knife to pry out some of the gold; to do this, heplaced the dressing-case on a chair. Eugenie sprang forward to recoverit; but her father, who had his eye on her and on the treasure too,pushed her back so violently with a thrust of his arm that she fellupon her mother's bed.

°°°°"Monsieur, monsieur!" cried the mother, lifting herself up.Grandet had opened his knife, and was about to apply it to the gold."Father!" cried Eugenie, falling on her knees and dragging herselfclose to him with clasped hands, "father, in the name of all thesaints and the Virgin! in the name of Christ who died upon the cross!in the name of your eternal salvation, father! for my life's sake,father!--do not touch that! It is neither yours nor mine. It is atrust placed in my hands by an unhappy relation: I must give it backto him uninjured!"

°°°°"If it is a trust, why were you looking at it? To look at it is as badas touching it."

°°°°"Father, don't destroy it, or you will disgrace me! Father, do youhear?"

°°°°"Oh, have pity!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father!" cried Eugenie in so startling a voice that Nanon ranupstairs terrified. Eugenie sprang upon a knife that was close athand.

°°°°"Well, what now?" said Grandet coldly, with a callous smile."Oh, you are killing me!" said the mother.

°°°°"Father, if your knife so much as cuts a fragment of that gold, I willstab myself with this one! You have already driven my mother to herdeath; you will now kill your child! Do as you choose! Wound forwound!"

°°°°Grandet held his knife over the dressing-case and hesitated as helooked at his daughter.

°°°°"Are you capable of doing it, Eugenie?" he said.

°°°°"Yes, yes!" said the mother.

°°°°"She'll do it if she says so!" cried Nanon. "Be reasonable, monsieur,for once in your life."

°°°°The old man looked at the gold and then at his daughter alternatelyfor an instant. Madame Grandet fainted.

°°°°"There! don't you see, monsieur, that madame is dying?" cried Nanon."Come, come, my daughter, we won't quarrel for a box! Here, take it!"he cried hastily, flinging the case upon the bed. "Nanon, go and fetchMonsieur Bergerin! Come, mother," said he, kissing his wife's hand,"it's all over! There! we've made up--haven't we, little one? No moredry bread; you shall have all you want--Ah, she opens her eyes! Well,mother, little mother, come! See, I'm kissing Eugenie! She loves hercousin, and she may marry him if she wants to; she may keep his case.But don't die, mother; live a long time yet, my poor wife! Come, tryto move! Listen! you shall have the finest altar that ever was made inSaumur."

°°°°"Oh, how can you treat your wife and daughter so!" said Madame Grandetin a feeble voice.

°°°°"I won't do so again, never again," cried her husband; "you shall see,my poor wife!" He went to his inner room and returned with a handfulof louis, which he scattered on the bed. "Here, Eugenie! see, wife!all these are for you," he said, fingering the coins. "Come, be happy,wife! feel better, get well; you sha'n't want for anything, norEugenie either. Here's a hundred /louis d'or/ for her. You won't givethese away, will you, Eugenie, hein?"

°°°°Madame Grandet and her daughter looked at each other in astonishment."Take back your money, father; we ask for nothing but your affection.""Well, well, that's right!" he said, pocketing the coins; "let's begood friends! We will all go down to dinner to-day, and we'll playloto every evening for two sous. You shall both be happy. Hey, wife?""Alas! I wish I could, if it would give you pleasure," said the dyingwoman; "but I cannot rise from my bed."

°°°°"Poor mother," said Grandet, "you don't know how I love you! and youtoo, my daughter!" He took her in his arms and kissed her. "Oh, howgood it is to kiss a daughter when we have been angry with her! There,mother, don't you see it's all over now? Go and put that away,Eugenie," he added, pointing to the case. "Go, don't be afraid! Ishall never speak of it again, never!"

°°°°Monsieur Bergerin, the celebrated doctor of Saumur, presently arrived.After an examination, he told Grandet positively that his wife wasvery ill; but that perfect peace of mind, a generous diet, and greatcare might prolong her life until the autumn.

°°°°"Will all that cost much?" said the old man. "Will she needmedicines?"

°°°°"Not much medicine, but a great deal of care," answered the doctor,who could scarcely restrain a smile.

°°°°"Now, Monsieur Bergerin," said Grandet, "you are a man of honor, arenot you? I trust to you! Come and see my wife how and when you thinknecessary. Save my good wife! I love her,--don't you see?--though Inever talk about it; I keep things to myself. I'm full of trouble.Troubles began when my brother died; I have to spend enormous sums onhis affairs in Paris. Why, I'm paying through my nose; there's no endto it. Adieu, monsieur! If you can save my wife, save her. I'll spareno expense, not even if it costs me a hundred or two hundred francs."In spite of Grandet's fervent wishes for the health of his wife, whosedeath threatened more than death to him; in spite of the considerationhe now showed on all occasions for the least wish of his astonishedwife and daughter; in spite of the tender care which Eugenie lavishedupon her mother,--Madame Grandet rapidly approached her end. Every dayshe grew weaker and wasted visibly, as women of her age when attackedby serious illness are wont to do. She was fragile as the foliage inautumn; the radiance of heaven shone through her as the sun strikesathwart the withering leaves and gilds them. It was a death worthy ofher life,--a Christian death; and is not that sublime? In the month ofOctober, 1822, her virtues, her angelic patience, her love for herdaughter, seemed to find special expression; and then she passed awaywithout a murmur. Lamb without spot, she went to heaven, regrettingonly the sweet companion of her cold and dreary life, for whom herlast glance seemed to prophesy a destiny of sorrows. She shrank fromleaving her ewe-lamb, white as herself, alone in the midst of aselfish world that sought to strip her of her fleece and grasp hertreasures.

°°°°"My child," she said as she expired, "there is no happiness except inheaven; you will know it some day."

°°°°XII

°°°°On the morrow of this death Eugenie felt a new motive for attachmentto the house in which she was born, where she had suffered so much,where her mother had just died. She could not see the window and thechair on its castors without weeping. She thought she had mistaken theheart of her old father when she found herself the object of histenderest cares. He came in the morning and gave her his arm to takeher to breakfast; he looked at her for hours together with an eye thatwas almost kind; he brooded over her as though she had been gold. Theold man was so unlike himself, he trembled so often before hisdaughter, that Nanon and the Cruchotines, who witnessed his weakness,attributed it to his great age, and feared that his faculties weregiving away. But the day on which the family put on their mourning,and after dinner, to which meal Maitre Cruchot (the only person whoknew his secret) had been invited, the conduct of the old miser wasexplained.

°°°°"My dear child," he said to Eugenie when the table had been clearedand the doors carefully shut, "you are now your mother's heiress, andwe have a few little matters to settle between us. Isn't that so,Cruchot?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Is it necessary to talk of them to-day, father?"

°°°°"Yes, yes, little one; I can't bear the uncertainty in which I'mplaced. I think you don't want to give me pain?"

°°°°"Oh! father--"

°°°°"Well, then! let us settle it all to-night."

°°°°"What is it you wish me to do?"

°°°°"My little girl, it is not for me to say. Tell her, Cruchot.""Mademoiselle, your father does not wish to divide the property, norsell the estate, nor pay enormous taxes on the ready money which hemay possess. Therefore, to avoid all this, he must be released frommaking the inventory of his whole fortune, part of which you inheritfrom your mother, and which is now undivided between you and yourfather--"

°°°°"Cruchot, are you quite sure of what you are saying before you tell itto a mere child?"

°°°°"Let me tell it my own way, Grandet."

°°°°"Yes, yes, my friend. Neither you nor my daughter wish to rob me,--doyou, little one?"

°°°°"But, Monsieur Cruchot, what am I to do?" said Eugenie impatiently."Well," said the notary, "it is necessary to sign this deed, by whichyou renounce your rights to your mother's estate and leave your fatherthe use and disposition, during his lifetime, of all the propertyundivided between you, of which he guarantees you the capital.""I do not understand a word of what you are saying," returned Eugenie;"give me the deed, and show me where I am to sign it."

°°°°Pere Grandet looked alternately at the deed and at his daughter, athis daughter and at the deed, undergoing as he did so such violentemotion that he wiped the sweat from his brow.

°°°°"My little girl," he said, "if, instead of signing this deed, whichwill cost a great deal to record, you would simply agree to renounceyour rights as heir to your poor dear, deceased mother's property, andwould trust to me for the future, I should like it better. In thatcase I will pay you monthly the good round sum of a hundred francs.See, now, you could pay for as many masses as you want for anybody--Hein! a hundred francs a month--in /livres/?"

°°°°"I will do all you wish, father."

°°°°"Mademoiselle," said the notary, "it is my duty to point out to youthat you are despoiling yourself without guarantee--"

°°°°"Good heavens! what is all that to me?"

°°°°"Hold your tongue, Cruchot! It's settled, all settled," cried Grandet,taking his daughter's hand and striking it with his own. "Eugenie, youwon't go back on your word?--you are an honest girl, hein?""Oh! father!--"

°°°°He kissed her effusively, and pressed her in his arms till he almostchoked her.

°°°°"Go, my good child, you restore your father's life; but you onlyreturn to him that which he gave you: we are quits. This is howbusiness should be done. Life is a business. I bless you! you are avirtuous girl, and you love your father. Do just what you like infuture. To-morrow, Cruchot," he added, looking at the horrifiednotary, "you will see about preparing the deed of relinquishment, andthen enter it on the records of the court."

°°°°The next morning Eugenie signed the papers by which she herselfcompleted her spoliation. At the end of the first year, however, inspite of his bargain, the old man had not given his daughter one souof the hundred francs he had so solemnly pledged to her. When Eugeniepleasantly reminded him of this, he could not help coloring, and wenthastily to his secret hiding-place, from whence he brought down abouta third of the jewels he had taken from his nephew, and gave them toher.

°°°°"There, little one," he said in a sarcastic tone, "do you want thosefor your twelve hundred francs?"

°°°°"Oh! father, truly? will you really give them to me?"

°°°°"I'll give you as many more next year," he said, throwing them intoher apron. "So before long you'll get all his gewgaws," he added,rubbing his hands, delighted to be able to speculate on his daughter'sfeelings.

°°°°Nevertheless, the old man, though still robust, felt the importance ofinitiating his daughter into the secrets of his thrift and itsmanagement. For two consecutive years he made her order the householdmeals in his presence and receive the rents, and he taught her slowlyand successively the names and remunerative capacity of his vineyardsand his farms. About the third year he had so thoroughly accustomedher to his avaricious methods that they had turned into the settledhabits of her own life, and he was able to leave the household keys inher charge without anxiety, and to install her as mistress of thehouse.

°°°°*****

°°°°Five years passed away without a single event to relieve themonotonous existence of Eugenie and her father. The same actions wereperformed daily with the automatic regularity of clockwork. The deepsadness of Mademoiselle Grandet was known to every one; but if otherssurmised the cause, she herself never uttered a word that justifiedthe suspicions which all Saumur entertained about the state of therich heiress's heart. Her only society was made up of the threeCruchots and a few of their particular friends whom they had, littleby little, introduced into the Grandet household. They had taught herto play whist, and they came every night for their game. During theyear 1827 her father, feeling the weight of his infirmities, wasobliged to initiate her still further into the secrets of his landedproperty, and told her that in case of difficulty she was to haverecourse to Maitre Cruchot, whose integrity was well known to him.Towards the end of this year the old man, then eighty-two, was seizedby paralysis, which made rapid progress. Dr. Bergerin gave him up.Eugenie, feeling that she was about to be left alone in the world,came, as it were, nearer to her father, and clasped more tightly thislast living link of affection. To her mind, as in that of all lovingwomen, love was the whole of life. Charles was not there, and shedevoted all her care and attention to the old father, whose facultieshad begun to weaken, though his avarice remained instinctively acute.The death of this man offered no contrast to his life. In the morninghe made them roll him to a spot between the chimney of his chamber andthe door of the secret room, which was filled, no doubt, with gold. Heasked for an explanation of every noise he heard, even the slightest;to the great astonishment of the notary, he even heard the watch-dogyawning in the court-yard. He woke up from his apparent stupor at theday and hour when the rents were due, or when accounts had to besettled with his vine-dressers, and receipts given. At such times heworked his chair forward on its castors until he faced the door of theinner room. He made his daughter open it, and watched while she placedthe bags of money one upon another in his secret receptacles andrelocked the door. Then she returned silently to her seat, aftergiving him the key, which he replaced in his waistcoat pocket andfingered from time to time. His old friend the notary, feeling surethat the rich heiress would inevitably marry his nephew the president,if Charles Grandet did not return, redoubled all his attentions; hecame every day to take Grandet's orders, went on his errands toFroidfond, to the farms and the fields and the vineyards, sold thevintages, and turned everything into gold and silver, which foundtheir way in sacks to the secret hiding-place.

°°°°At length the last struggle came, in which the strong frame of the oldman slowly yielded to destruction. He was determined to sit at thechimney-corner facing the door of the secret room. He drew off androlled up all the coverings which were laid over him, saying to Nanon,"Put them away, lock them up, for fear they should be stolen."So long as he could open his eyes, in which his whole being had nowtaken refuge, he turned them to the door behind which lay histreasures, saying to his daughter, "Are they there? are they there?"in a tone of voice which revealed a sort of panic fear.

°°°°"Yes, my father," she would answer.

°°°°"Take care of the gold--put gold before me."

°°°°Eugenie would then spread coins on a table before him, and he wouldsit for hours together with his eyes fixed upon them, like a childwho, at the moment it first begins to see, gazes in stupidcontemplation at the same object, and like the child, a distressfulsmile would flicker upon his face.

°°°°"It warms me!" he would sometimes say, as an expression of beatitudestole across his features.

°°°°When the cure of the parish came to administer the last sacraments,the old man's eyes, sightless, apparently, for some hours, kindled atthe sight of the cross, the candlesticks, and the holy-water vessel ofsilver; he gazed at them fixedly, and his wen moved for the last time.When the priest put the crucifix of silver-gilt to his lips, that hemight kiss the Christ, he made a frightful gesture, as if to seize it;and that last effort cost him his life. He called Eugenie, whom he didnot see, though she was kneeling beside him bathing with tears hisstiffening hand, which was already cold.

°°°°"My father, bless me!" she entreated.

°°°°"Take care of it all. You will render me an account yonder!" he said,proving by these last words that Christianity must always be thereligion of misers.

°°°°*****

°°°°Eugenie Grandet was now alone in the world in that gray house, withnone but Nanon to whom she could turn with the certainty of beingheard and understood,--Nanon the sole being who loved her for herselfand with whom she could speak of her sorrows. La Grande Nanon was aprovidence for Eugenie. She was not a servant, but a humble friend.After her father's death Eugenie learned from Maitre Cruchot that shepossessed an income of three hundred thousand francs from landed andpersonal property in the arrondissement of Saumur; also six millionsinvested at three per cent in the Funds (bought at sixty, and nowworth seventy-six francs); also two millions in gold coin, and ahundred thousand francs in silver crown-pieces, besides all theinterest which was still to be collected. The sum total of herproperty reached seventeen millions.

°°°°"Where is my cousin?" was her one thought.

°°°°The day on which Maitre Cruchot handed in to his client a clear andexact schedule of the whole inheritance, Eugenie remained alone withNanon, sitting beside the fireplace in the vacant hall, where all wasnow a memory, from the chair on castors which her mother had sat in,to the glass from which her cousin drank.

°°°°"Nanon, we are alone--"

°°°°"Yes, mademoiselle; and if I knew where he was, the darling, I'd go onfoot to find him."

°°°°"The ocean is between us," she said.

°°°°While the poor heiress wept in company of an old servant, in that colddark house, which was to her the universe, the whole province rang,from Nantes to Orleans, with the seventeen millions of MademoiselleGrandet. Among her first acts she had settled an annuity of twelvehundred francs on Nanon, who, already possessed of six hundred more,became a rich and enviable match. In less than a month that good soulpassed from single to wedded life under the protection of AntoineCornoiller, who was appointed keeper of all Mademoiselle Grandet'sestates. Madame Cornoiller possessed one striking advantage over hercontemporaries. Although she was fifty-nine years of age, she did notlook more than forty. Her strong features had resisted the ravages oftime. Thanks to the healthy customs of her semi-conventual life, shelaughed at old age from the vantage-ground of a rosy skin and an ironconstitution. Perhaps she never looked as well in her life as she didon her marriage-day. She had all the benefits of her ugliness, and wasbig and fat and strong, with a look of happiness on her indestructiblefeatures which made a good many people envy Cornoiller.

°°°°"Fast colors!" said the draper.

°°°°"Quite likely to have children," said the salt merchant. "She'spickled in brine, saving your presence."

°°°°"She is rich, and that fellow Cornoiller has done a good thing forhimself," said a third man.

°°°°When she came forth from the old house on her way to the parishchurch, Nanon, who was loved by all the neighborhood, received manycompliments as she walked down the tortuous street. Eugenie had givenher three dozen silver forks and spoons as a wedding present.Cornoiller, amazed at such magnificence, spoke of his mistress withtears in his eyes; he would willingly have been hacked in pieces inher behalf. Madame Cornoiller, appointed housekeeper to MademoiselleGrandet, got as much happiness out of her new position as she did fromthe possession of a husband. She took charge of the weekly accounts;she locked up the provisions and gave them out daily, after the mannerof her defunct master; she ruled over two servants,--a cook, and amaid whose business it was to mend the house-linen and makemademoiselle's dresses. Cornoiller combined the functions of keeperand bailiff. It is unnecessary to say that the women-servants selectedby Nanon were "perfect treasures." Mademoiselle Grandet thus had fourservants, whose devotion was unbounded. The farmers perceived nochange after Monsieur Grandet's death; the usages and customs he hadsternly established were scrupulously carried out by Monsieur andMadame Cornoiller.

°°°°At thirty years of age Eugenie knew none of the joys of life. Herpale, sad childhood had glided on beside a mother whose heart, alwaysmisunderstood and wounded, had known only suffering. Leaving this lifejoyfully, the mother pitied the daughter because she still must live;and she left in her child's soul some fugitive remorse and manylasting regrets. Eugenie's first and only love was a wellspring ofsadness within her. Meeting her lover for a few brief days, she hadgiven him her heart between two kisses furtively exchanged; then hehad left her, and a whole world lay between them. This love, cursed byher father, had cost the life of her mother and brought her onlysorrow, mingled with a few frail hopes. Thus her upward spring towardshappiness had wasted her strength and given her nothing in exchangefor it. In the life of the soul, as in the physical life, there is aninspiration and a respiration; the soul needs to absorb the sentimentsof another soul and assimilate them, that it may render them backenriched. Were it not for this glorious human phenomenon, there wouldbe no life for the heart; air would be wanting; it would suffer, andthen perish. Eugenie had begun to suffer. For her, wealth was neithera power nor a consolation; she could not live except through love,through religion, through faith in the future. Love explained to herthe mysteries of eternity. Her heart and the Gospel taught her to knowtwo worlds; she bathed, night and day, in the depths of two infinitethoughts, which for her may have had but one meaning. She drew backwithin herself, loving, and believing herself beloved. For seven yearsher passion had invaded everything. Her treasuries were not themillions whose revenues were rolling up; they were Charles's dressing-case, the portraits hanging above her bed, the jewels recovered fromher father and proudly spread upon a bed of wool in a drawer of theoaken cabinet, the thimble of her aunt, used for a while by hermother, which she wore religiously as she worked at a piece ofembroidery,--a Penelope's web, begun for the sole purpose of puttingupon her finger that gold so rich in memories.

°°°°It seemed unlikely that Mademoiselle Grandet would marry during theperiod of her mourning. Her genuine piety was well known. Consequentlythe Cruchots, whose policy was sagely guided by the old abbe,contented themselves for the time being with surrounding the greatheiress and paying her the most affectionate attentions. Every eveningthe hall was filled with a party of devoted Cruchotines, who sang thepraises of its mistress in every key. She had her doctor in ordinary,her grand almoner, her chamberlain, her first lady of honor, her primeminister; above all, her chancellor, a chancellor who would fain havesaid much to her. If the heiress had wished for a train-bearer, onewould instantly have been found. She was a queen, obsequiouslyflattered. Flattery never emanates from noble souls; it is the gift oflittle minds, who thus still further belittle themselves to worm theirway into the vital being of the persons around whom they crawl.Flattery means self-interest. So the people who, night after night,assembled in Mademoiselle Grandet's house (they called herMademoiselle de Froidfond) outdid each other in expressions ofadmiration. This concert of praise, never before bestowed uponEugenie, made her blush under its novelty; but insensibly her earbecame habituated to the sound, and however coarse the complimentsmight be, she soon was so accustomed to hear her beauty lauded that ifany new-comer had seemed to think her plain, she would have felt thereproach far more than she might have done eight years earlier. Sheended at last by loving the incense, which she secretly laid at thefeet of her idol. By degrees she grew accustomed to be treated as asovereign and to see her court pressing around her every evening.Monsieur de Bonfons was the hero of the little circle, where his wit,his person, his education, his amiability, were perpetually praised.One or another would remark that in seven years he had largelyincreased his fortune, that Bonfons brought in at least ten thousandfrancs a year, and was surrounded, like the other possessions of theCruchots, by the vast domains of the heiress.

°°°°"Do you know, mademoiselle," said an habitual visitor, "that theCruchots have an income of forty thousand francs among them!""And then, their savings!" exclaimed an elderly female Cruchotine,Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt.

°°°°"A gentleman from Paris has lately offered Monsieur Cruchot twohundred thousand francs for his practice," said another. "He will sellit if he is appointed /juge de paix/."

°°°°"He wants to succeed Monsieur de Bonfons as president of the Civilcourts, and is taking measures," replied Madame d'Orsonval. "Monsieurle president will certainly be made councillor."

°°°°"Yes, he is a very distinguished man," said another,--"don't you thinkso, mademoiselle?"

°°°°Monsieur de Bonfons endeavored to put himself in keeping with the rolehe sought to play. In spite of his forty years, in spite of his duskyand crabbed features, withered like most judicial faces, he dressed inyouthful fashions, toyed with a bamboo cane, never took snuff inMademoiselle de Froidfond's house, and came in a white cravat and ashirt whose pleated frill gave him a family resemblance to the race ofturkeys. He addressed the beautiful heiress familiarly, and spoke ofher as "Our dear Eugenie." In short, except for the number ofvisitors, the change from loto to whist, and the disappearance ofMonsieur and Madame Grandet, the scene was about the same as the onewith which this history opened. The pack were still pursuing Eugenieand her millions; but the hounds, more in number, lay better on thescent, and beset the prey more unitedly. If Charles could have droppedfrom the Indian Isles, he would have found the same people and thesame interests. Madame des Grassins, to whom Eugenie was full ofkindness and courtesy, still persisted in tormenting the Cruchots.Eugenie, as in former days, was the central figure of the picture; andCharles, as heretofore, would still have been the sovereign of all.Yet there had been some progress. The flowers which the presidentformerly presented to Eugenie on her birthdays and fete-days had nowbecome a daily institution. Every evening he brought the rich heiressa huge and magnificent bouquet, which Madame Cornoiller placedconspicuously in a vase, and secretly threw into a corner of thecourt-yard when the visitors had departed.

°°°°Early in the spring, Madame des Grassins attempted to trouble thepeace of the Cruchotines by talking to Eugenie of the Marquis deFroidfond, whose ancient and ruined family might be restored if theheiress would give him back his estates through marriage. Madame desGrassins rang the changes on the peerage and the title of marquise,until, mistaking Eugenie's disdainful smile for acquiescence, she wentabout proclaiming that the marriage with "Monsieur Cruchot" was notnearly as certain as people thought.

°°°°"Though Monsieur de Froidfond is fifty," she said, "he does not lookolder than Monsieur Cruchot. He is a widower, and he has children,that's true. But then he is a marquis; he will be peer of France; andin times like these where you will find a better match? I know it fora fact that Pere Grandet, when he put all his money into Froidfond,intended to graft himself upon that stock; he often told me so. He wasa deep one, that old man!"

°°°°"Ah! Nanon," said Eugenie, one night as she was going to bed, "how isit that in seven years he has never once written to me?"

°°°°XIII

°°°°While these events were happening in Saumur, Charles was making hisfortune in the Indies. His commercial outfit had sold well. He beganby realizing a sum of six thousand dollars. Crossing the line hadbrushed a good many cobwebs out of his brain; he perceived that thebest means of attaining fortune in tropical regions, as well as inEurope, was to buy and sell men. He went to the coast of Africa andbought Negroes, combining his traffic in human flesh with that ofother merchandise equally advantageous to his interests. He carriedinto this business an activity which left him not a moment of leisure.He was governed by the desire of reappearing in Paris with all theprestige of a large fortune, and by the hope of regaining a positioneven more brilliant than the one from which he had fallen.By dint of jostling with men, travelling through many lands, andstudying a variety of conflicting customs, his ideas had been modifiedand had become sceptical. He ceased to have fixed principles of rightand wrong, for he saw what was called a crime in one country lauded asa virtue in another. In the perpetual struggle of selfish interestshis heart grew cold, then contracted, and then dried up. The blood ofthe Grandets did not fail of its destiny; Charles became hard, andeager for prey. He sold Chinamen, Negroes, birds' nests, children,artists; he practised usury on a large scale; the habit of defraudingcustom-houses soon made him less scrupulous about the rights of hisfellow men. He went to the Island of St. Thomas and bought, for a meresong, merchandise that had been captured by pirates, and took it toports where he could sell it at a good price. If the pure and nobleface of Eugenie went with him on his first voyage, like that image ofthe Virgin which Spanish mariners fastened to their masts, if heattributed his first success to the magic influence of the prayers andintercessions of his gentle love, later on women of other kinds,--blacks, mulattoes, whites, and Indian dancing-girls,--orgies andadventures in many lands, completely effaced all recollection of hiscousin, of Saumur, of the house, the bench, the kiss snatched in thedark passage. He remembered only the little garden shut in withcrumbling walls, for it was there he learned the fate that hadovertaken him; but he rejected all connection with his family. Hisuncle was an old dog who had filched his jewels; Eugenie had no placein his heart nor in his thoughts, though she did have a place in hisaccounts as a creditor for the sum of six thousand francs.Such conduct and such ideas explain Charles Grandet's silence. In theIndies, at St. Thomas, on the coast of Africa, at Lisbon, and in theUnited States the adventurer had taken the pseudonym of Shepherd, thathe might not compromise his own name. Charles Shepherd could safely beindefatigable, bold, grasping, and greedy of gain, like a man whoresolves to snatch his fortune /quibus cumque viis/, and makes hasteto have done with villany, that he may spend the rest of his life asan honest man.

°°°°With such methods, prosperity was rapid and brilliant; and in 1827Charles Grandet returned to Bordeaux on the "Marie Caroline," a finebrig belonging to a royalist house of business. He brought with himnineteen hundred thousand francs worth of gold-dust, from which heexpected to derive seven or eight per cent more at the Paris mint. Onthe brig he met a gentleman-in-ordinary to His Majesty Charles X.,Monsieur d'Aubrion, a worthy old man who had committed the folly ofmarrying a woman of fashion with a fortune derived from the West IndiaIslands. To meet the costs of Madame d'Aubrion's extravagance, he hadgone out to the Indies to sell the property, and was now returningwith his family to France.

°°°°Monsieur and Madame d'Aubrion, of the house of d'Aubrion de Buch, afamily of southern France, whose last /captal/, or chief, died before1789, were now reduced to an income of about twenty thousand francs,and they possessed an ugly daughter whom the mother was resolved tomarry without a /dot/,--the family fortune being scarcely sufficientfor the demands of her own life in Paris. This was an enterprise whosesuccess might have seemed problematical to most men of the world, inspite of the cleverness with which such men credit a fashionablewoman; in fact, Madame d'Aubrion herself, when she looked at herdaughter, almost despaired of getting rid of her to any one, even to aman craving connection with nobility. Mademoiselle d'Aubrion was along, spare, spindling demoiselle, like her namesake the insect; hermouth was disdainful; over it hung a nose that was too long, thick atthe end, sallow in its normal condition, but very red after a meal,--asort of vegetable phenomenon which is particularly disagreeable whenit appears in the middle of a pale, dull, and uninteresting face. Inone sense she was all that a worldly mother, thirty-eight years of ageand still a beauty with claims to admiration, could have wished.However, to counterbalance her personal defects, the marquise gave herdaughter a distinguished air, subjected her to hygienic treatmentwhich provisionally kept her nose at a reasonable flesh-tint, taughther the art of dressing well, endowed her with charming manners,showed her the trick of melancholy glances which interest a man andmake him believe that he has found a long-sought angel, taught her themanoeuvre of the foot,--letting it peep beneath the petticoat, to showits tiny size, at the moment when the nose became aggressively red; inshort, Madame d'Aubrion had cleverly made the very best of heroffspring. By means of full sleeves, deceptive pads, puffed dressesamply trimmed, and high-pressure corsets, she had obtained suchcurious feminine developments that she ought, for the instruction ofmothers, to have exhibited them in a museum.

°°°°Charles became very intimate with Madame d'Aubrion precisely becauseshe was desirous of becoming intimate with him. Persons who were onboard the brig declared that the handsome Madame d'Aubrion neglectedno means of capturing so rich a son-in-law. On landing at Bordeaux inJune, 1827, Monsieur, Madame, Mademoiselle d'Aubrion, and Charleslodged at the same hotel and started together for Paris. The hoteld'Aubrion was hampered with mortgages; Charles was destined to freeit. The mother told him how delighted she would be to give up theground-floor to a son-in-law. Not sharing Monsieur d'Aubrion'sprejudices on the score of nobility, she promised Charles Grandet toobtain a royal ordinance from Charles X. which would authorize him,Grandet, to take the name and arms of d'Aubrion and to succeed, bypurchasing the entailed estate for thirty-six thousand francs a year,to the titles of Captal de Buch and Marquis d'Aubrion. By thus unitingtheir fortunes, living on good terms, and profiting by sinecures, thetwo families might occupy the hotel d'Aubrion with an income of over ahundred thousand francs.

°°°°"And when a man has a hundred thousand francs a year, a name, afamily, and a position at court,--for I will get you appointed asgentleman-of-the-bedchamber,--he can do what he likes," she said toCharles. "You can then become anything you choose,--master of therolls in the council of State, prefect, secretary to an embassy, theambassador himself, if you like. Charles X. is fond of d'Aubrion; theyhave known each other from childhood."

°°°°Intoxicated with ambition, Charles toyed with the hopes thus cleverlypresented to him in the guise of confidences poured from heart toheart. Believing his father's affairs to have been settled by hisuncle, he imagined himself suddenly anchored in the Faubourg Saint-Germain,--that social object of all desire, where, under shelter ofMademoiselle Mathilde's purple nose, he was to reappear as the Comted'Aubrion, very much as the Dreux reappeared in Breze. Dazzled by theprosperity of the Restoration, which was tottering when he leftFrance, fascinated by the splendor of aristocratic ideas, hisintoxication, which began on the brig, increased after he reachedParis, and he finally determined to take the course and reach the highposition which the selfish hopes of his would-be mother-in-law pointedout to him. His cousin counted for no more than a speck in thisbrilliant perspective; but he went to see Annette. True woman of theworld, Annette advised her old friend to make the marriage, andpromised him her support in all his ambitious projects. In her heartshe was enchanted to fasten an ugly and uninteresting girl on Charles,whose life in the West Indies had rendered him very attractive. Hiscomplexion had bronzed, his manners had grown decided and bold, likethose of a man accustomed to make sharp decisions, to rule, and tosucceed. Charles breathed more at his ease in Paris, conscious that henow had a part to play.

°°°°Des Grassins, hearing of his return, of his approaching marriage andhis large fortune, came to see him, and inquired about the threehundred thousand francs still required to settle his father's debts.He found Grandet in conference with a goldsmith, from whom he hadordered jewels for Mademoiselle d'Aubrion's /corbeille/, and who wasthen submitting the designs. Charles had brought back magnificentdiamonds, and the value of their setting, together with the plate andjewelry of the new establishment, amounted to more than two hundredthousand francs. He received des Grassins, whom he did not recognize,with the impertinence of a young man of fashion conscious of havingkilled four men in as many duels in the Indies. Monsieur des Grassinshad already called several times. Charles listened to him coldly, andthen replied, without fully understanding what had been said to him,--"My father's affairs are not mine. I am much obliged, monsieur, forthe trouble you have been good enough to take,--by which, however, Ireally cannot profit. I have not earned two millions by the sweat ofmy brow to fling them at the head of my father's creditors.""But suppose that your father's estate were within a few days to bedeclared bankrupt?"

°°°°"Monsieur, in a few days I shall be called the Comte d'Aubrion; youwill understand, therefore, that what you threaten is of noconsequence to me. Besides, you know as well as I do that when a manhas an income of a hundred thousand francs his father has /neverfailed/." So saying, he politely edged Monsieur des Grassins to thedoor.

°°°°*****

°°°°At the beginning of August in the same year, Eugenie was sitting onthe little wooden bench where her cousin had sworn to love hereternally, and where she usually breakfasted if the weather were fine.The poor girl was happy, for the moment, in the fresh and joyoussummer air, letting her memory recall the great and the little eventsof her love and the catastrophes which had followed it. The sun hadjust reached the angle of the ruined wall, so full of chinks, which noone, through a caprice of the mistress, was allowed to touch, thoughCornoiller often remarked to his wife that "it would fall and crushsomebody one of these days." At this moment the postman knocked, andgave a letter to Madame Cornoiller, who ran into the garden, cryingout:

°°°°"Mademoiselle, a letter!" She gave it to her mistress, adding, "Is itthe one you expected?"

°°°°The words rang as loudly in the heart of Eugenie as they echoed insound from wall to wall of the court and garden.

°°°°"Paris--from him--he has returned!"

°°°°Eugenie turned pale and held the letter for a moment. She trembled soviolently that she could not break the seal. La Grande Nanon stoodbefore her, both hands on her hips, her joy puffing as it were likesmoke through the cracks of her brown face.

°°°°"Read it, mademoiselle!"

°°°°"Ah, Nanon, why did he return to Paris? He went from Saumur.""Read it, and you'll find out."

°°°°Eugenie opened the letter with trembling fingers. A cheque on thehouse of "Madame des Grassins and Coret, of Saumur," fluttered down.Nanon picked it up.

°°°°My dear Cousin,--

°°°°"No longer 'Eugenie,'" she thought, and her heart quailed.

°°°°You--

°°°°"He once said 'thou.'" She folded her arms and dared not read anotherword; great tears gathered in her eyes.

°°°°"Is he dead?" asked Nanon.

°°°°"If he were, he could not write," said Eugenie.

°°°°She then read the whole letter, which was as follows:

°°°°My dear Cousin,--You will, I am sure, hear with pleasure of the

°°°°success of my enterprise. You brought me luck; I have come back

°°°°rich, and I have followed the advice of my uncle, whose death,

°°°°together with that of my aunt, I have just learned from Monsieur

°°°°des Grassins. The death of parents is in the course of nature, and

°°°°we must succeed them. I trust you are by this time consoled.

°°°°Nothing can resist time, as I am well aware. Yes, my dear cousin,

°°°°the day of illusions is, unfortunately, gone for me. How could it

°°°°be otherwise? Travelling through many lands, I have reflected upon

°°°°life. I was a child when I went away,--I have come back a man.

°°°°To-day, I think of many I did not dream of then. You are free, my

°°°°dear cousin, and I am free still. Nothing apparently hinders the

°°°°realization of our early hopes; but my nature is too loyal to hide

°°°°from you the situation in which I find myself. I have not

°°°°forgotten our relations; I have always remembered, throughout my

°°°°long wanderings, the little wooden seat--

°°°°Eugenie rose as if she were sitting on live coals, and went away andsat down on the stone steps of the court.

°°°°--the little wooden seat where we vowed to love each other

°°°°forever, the passage, the gray hall, my attic chamber, and the

°°°°night when, by your delicate kindness, you made my future easier

°°°°to me. Yes, these recollections sustained my courage; I said in my

°°°°heart that you were thinking of me at the hour we had agreed upon.

°°°°Have you always looked at the clouds at nine o'clock? Yes, I am

°°°°sure of it. I cannot betray so true a friendship,--no, I must not

°°°°deceive you. An alliance has been proposed to me which satisfies

°°°°all my ideas of matrimony. Love in marriage is a delusion. My

°°°°present experience warns me that in marrying we are bound to obey

°°°°all social laws and meet the conventional demands of the world.

°°°°Now, between you and me there are differences which might affect

°°°°your future, my dear cousin, even more than they would mine. I

°°°°will not here speak of your customs and inclinations, your

°°°°education, nor yet of your habits, none of which are in keeping

°°°°with Parisian life, or with the future which I have marked out for

°°°°myself. My intention is to keep my household on a stately footing,

°°°°to receive much company,--in short, to live in the world; and I

°°°°think I remember that you love a quiet and tranquil life. I will

°°°°be frank, and make you the judge of my situation; you have the

°°°°right to understand it and to judge it.

°°°°I possess at the present moment an income of eighty thousand

°°°°francs. This fortune enables me to marry into the family of

°°°°Aubrion, whose heiress, a young girl nineteen years of age, brings

°°°°me a title, a place of gentleman-of-the-bed-chamber to His

°°°°Majesty, and a very brilliant position. I will admit to you, my

°°°°dear cousin, that I do not love Mademoiselle d'Aubrion; but in

°°°°marrying her I secure to my children a social rank whose

°°°°advantages will one day be incalculable: monarchical principles

°°°°are daily coming more and more into favor. Thus in course of time

°°°°my son, when he becomes Marquis d'Aubrion, having, as he then will

°°°°have, an entailed estate with a rental of forty thousand francs a

°°°°year, can obtain any position in the State which he may think

°°°°proper to select. We owe ourselves to our children.

°°°°You see, my cousin, with what good faith I lay the state of my

°°°°heart, my hopes, and my fortune before you. Possibly, after seven

°°°°years' separation, you have yourself forgotten our youthful loves;

°°°°but I have never forgotten either your kindness or my own words. I

°°°°remember all, even words that were lightly uttered,--words by

°°°°which a man less conscientious than I, with a heart less youthful

°°°°and less upright, would scarcely feel himself bound. In telling

°°°°you that the marriage I propose to make is solely one of

°°°°convenience, that I still remember our childish love, am I not

°°°°putting myself entirely in your hands and making you the mistress

°°°°of my fate? am I not telling you that if I must renounce my social

°°°°ambitions, I shall willingly content myself with the pure and

°°°°simple happiness of which you have shown me so sweet an image?"Tan, ta, ta--tan, ta, ti," sang Charles Grandet to the air of /Nonpiu andrai/, as he signed himself,--

°°°°Your devoted cousin,

°°°°Charles.

°°°°"Thunder! that's doing it handsomely!" he said, as he looked about himfor the cheque; having found it, he added the words:--

°°°°P.S.--I enclose a cheque on the des Grassins bank for eight

°°°°thousand francs to your order, payable in gold, which includes the

°°°°capital and interest of the sum you were kind enough to lend me. I

°°°°am expecting a case from Bordeaux which contains a few things

°°°°which you must allow me to offer you as a mark of my unceasing

°°°°gratitude. You can send my dressing-case by the diligence to the

°°°°hotel d'Aubrion, rue Hillerin-Bertin.

°°°°"By the diligence!" said Eugenie. "A thing for which I would have laiddown my life!"

°°°°Terrible and utter disaster! The ship went down, leaving not a spar,not a plank, on a vast ocean of hope! Some women when they seethemselves abandoned will try to tear their lover from the arms of arival, they will kill her, and rush to the ends of the earth,--to thescaffold, to their tomb. That, no doubt, is fine; the motive of thecrime is a great passion, which awes even human justice. Other womenbow their heads and suffer in silence; they go their way dying,resigned, weeping, forgiving, praying, and recollecting, till theydraw their last breath. This is love,--true love, the love of angels,the proud love which lives upon its anguish and dies of it. Such wasEugenie's love after she had read that dreadful letter. She raised hereyes to heaven, thinking of the last words uttered by her dyingmother, who, with the prescience of death, had looked into the futurewith clear and penetrating eyes: Eugenie, remembering that propheticdeath, that prophetic life, measured with one glance her own destiny.Nothing was left for her; she could only unfold her wings, stretchupward to the skies, and live in prayer until the day of herdeliverance.

°°°°"My mother was right," she said, weeping. "Suffer--and die!"XIV

°°°°Eugenie came slowly back from the garden to the house, and avoidedpassing, as was her custom, through the corridor. But the memory ofher cousin was in the gray old hall and on the chimney-piece, wherestood a certain saucer and the old Sevres sugar-bowl which she usedevery morning at her breakfast.

°°°°This day was destined to be solemn throughout and full of events.Nanon announced the cure of the parish church. He was related to theCruchots, and therefore in the interests of Monsieur de Bonfons. Forsome time past the old abbe had urged him to speak to MademoiselleGrandet, from a purely religious point of view, about the duty ofmarriage for a woman in her position. When she saw her pastor, Eugeniesupposed he had come for the thousand francs which she gave monthly tothe poor, and she told Nanon to go and fetch them; but the cure onlysmiled.

°°°°"To-day, mademoiselle," he said, "I have come to speak to you about apoor girl in whom the whole town of Saumur takes an interest, who,through lack of charity to herself, neglects her Christian duties.""Monsieur le cure, you have come to me at a moment when I cannot thinkof my neighbor, I am filled with thoughts of myself. I am veryunhappy; my only refuge is in the Church; her bosom is large enough tohold all human woe, her love so full that we may draw from its depthsand never drain it dry."

°°°°"Mademoiselle, in speaking of this young girl we shall speak of you.Listen! If you wish to insure your salvation you have only two pathsto take,--either leave the world or obey its laws. Obey either yourearthly destiny or your heavenly destiny."

°°°°"Ah! your voice speaks to me when I need to hear a voice. Yes, God hassent you to me; I will bid farewell to the world and live for Godalone, in silence and seclusion."

°°°°"My daughter, you must think long before you take so violent a step.Marriage is life, the veil is death."

°°°°"Yes, death,--a quick death!" she said, with dreadful eagerness."Death? but you have great obligations to fulfil to society,mademoiselle. Are you not the mother of the poor, to whom you giveclothes and wood in winter and work in summer? Your great fortune is aloan which you must return, and you have sacredly accepted it as such.To bury yourself in a convent would be selfishness; to remain an oldmaid is to fail in duty. In the first place, can you manage your vastproperty alone? May you not lose it? You will have law-suits, you willfind yourself surrounded by inextricable difficulties. Believe yourpastor: a husband is useful; you are bound to preserve what God hasbestowed upon you. I speak to you as a precious lamb of my flock. Youlove God too truly not to find your salvation in the midst of hisworld, of which you are noble ornament and to which you owe yourexample."

°°°°At this moment Madame des Grassins was announced. She came incited byvengeance and the sense of a great despair.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," she said--"Ah! here is monsieur le cure; I am silent.I came to speak to you on business; but I see that you are conferringwith--"

°°°°"Madame," said the cure, "I leave the field to you."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur le cure," said Eugenie, "come back later; your supportis very necessary to me just now."

°°°°"Ah, yes, indeed, my poor child!" said Madame des Grassins."What do you mean?" asked Eugenie and the cure together.

°°°°"Don't I know about your cousin's return, and his marriage withMademoiselle d'Aubrion? A woman doesn't carry her wits in her pocket."Eugenie blushed, and remained silent for a moment. From this day forthshe assumed the impassible countenance for which her father had beenso remarkable.

°°°°"Well, madame," she presently said, ironically, "no doubt I carry mywits in my pocket, for I do not understand you. Speak, say what youmean, before monsieur le cure; you know he is my director.""Well, then, mademoiselle, here is what des Grassins writes me. Readit."

°°°°Eugenie read the following letter:--

°°°°My dear Wife,--Charles Grandet has returned from the Indies and

°°°°has been in Paris about a month--

°°°°"A month!" thought Eugenie, her hand falling to her side. After apause she resumed the letter,--

°°°°I had to dance attendance before I was allowed to see the future

°°°°Vicomte d'Aubrion. Though all Paris is talking of his marriage and

°°°°the banns are published--

°°°°"He wrote to me after that!" thought Eugenie. She did not conclude thethought; she did not cry out, as a Parisian woman would have done,"The villain!" but though she said it not, contempt was none the lesspresent in her mind.

°°°°The marriage, however, will not come off. The Marquis d'Aubrion

°°°°will never give his daughter to the son of a bankrupt. I went to

°°°°tell Grandet of the steps his uncle and I took in his father's

°°°°business, and the clever manoeuvres by which we had managed to

°°°°keep the creditor's quiet until the present time. The insolent

°°°°fellow had the face to say to me--to me, who for five years have

°°°°devoted myself night and day to his interests and his honor!--that

°°°°/his father's affairs were not his/! A solicitor would have had

°°°°the right to demand fees amounting to thirty or forty thousand

°°°°francs, one per cent on the total of the debts. But patience!

°°°°there are twelve hundred thousand francs legitimately owing to the

°°°°creditors, and I shall at once declare his father a bankrupt.

°°°°I went into this business on the word of that old crocodile

°°°°Grandet, and I have made promises in the name of his family. If

°°°°Monsieur de vicomte d'Aubrion does not care for his honor, I care

°°°°for mine. I shall explain my position to the creditors. Still, I

°°°°have too much respect for Mademoiselle Eugenie (to whom under

°°°°happier circumstances we once hoped to be allied) to act in this

°°°°matter before you have spoken to her about it--

°°°°There Eugenie paused, and coldly returned the letter without finishingit.

°°°°"I thank you," she said to Madame des Grassins.

°°°°"Ah! you have the voice and manner of your deceased father," Madamedes Grassins replied.

°°°°"Madame, you have eight thousand francs to pay us," said Nanon,producing Charles's cheque.

°°°°"That's true; have the kindness to come with me now, MadameCornoiller."

°°°°"Monsieur le cure," said Eugenie with a noble composure, inspired bythe thought she was about to express, "would it be a sin to remain avirgin after marriage?"

°°°°"That is a case of conscience whose solution is not within myknowledge. If you wish to know what the celebrated Sanchez says of itin his treatise 'De Matrimonio,' I shall be able to tell youto-morrow."

°°°°The cure went away; Mademoiselle Grandet went up to her father'ssecret room and spent the day there alone, without coming down todinner, in spite of Nanon's entreaties. She appeared in the evening atthe hour when the usual company began to arrive. Never was the oldhall so full as on this occasion. The news of Charles's return and hisfoolish treachery had spread through the whole town. But howeverwatchful the curiosity of the visitors might be, it was leftunsatisfied. Eugenie, who expected scrutiny, allowed none of the cruelemotions that wrung her soul to appear on the calm surface of herface. She was able to show a smiling front in answer to all who triedto testify their interest by mournful looks or melancholy speeches.She hid her misery behind a veil of courtesy. Towards nine o'clock thegames ended and the players left the tables, paying their losses anddiscussing points of the game as they joined the rest of the company.At the moment when the whole party rose to take leave, an unexpectedand striking event occurred, which resounded through the length andbreadth of Saumur, from thence through the arrondissement, and even tothe four surrounding prefectures.

°°°°"Stay, monsieur le president," said Eugenie to Monsieur de Bonfons asshe saw him take his cane.

°°°°There was not a person in that numerous assembly who was unmoved bythese words. The president turned pale, and was forced to sit down."The president gets the millions," said Mademoiselle de Gribeaucourt."It is plain enough; the president marries Mademoiselle Grandet,"cried Madame d'Orsonval.

°°°°"All the trumps in one hand," said the abbe.

°°°°"A love game," said the notary.

°°°°Each and all said his say, made his pun, and looked at the heiressmounted on her millions as on a pedestal. The drama begun nine yearsbefore had reached its conclusion. To tell the president, in face ofall Saumur, to "stay," was surely the same thing as proclaiming himher husband. In provincial towns social conventionalities are sorigidly enforced than an infraction like this constituted a solemnpromise.

°°°°"Monsieur le president," said Eugenie in a voice of some emotion whenthey were left alone, "I know what pleases you in me. Swear to leaveme free during my whole life, to claim none of the rights whichmarriage will give you over me, and my hand is yours. Oh!" she added,seeing him about to kneel at her feet, "I have more to say. I must notdeceive you. In my heart I cherish one inextinguishable feeling.Friendship is the only sentiment which I can give to a husband. I wishneither to affront him nor to violate the laws of my own heart. Butyou can possess my hand and my fortune only at the cost of doing me aninestimable service."

°°°°"I am ready for all things," said the president.

°°°°"Here are fifteen hundred thousand francs," she said, drawing from herbosom a certificate of a hundred shares in the Bank of France. "Go toParis,--not to-morrow, but instantly. Find Monsieur des Grassins,learn the names of my uncle's creditors, call them together, pay themin full all that was owing, with interest at five per cent from theday the debt was incurred to the present time. Be careful to obtain afull and legal receipt, in proper form, before a notary. You are amagistrate, and I can trust this matter in your hands. You are a manof honor; I will put faith in your word, and meet the dangers of lifeunder shelter of your name. Let us have mutual indulgence. We haveknown each other so long that we are almost related; you would notwish to render me unhappy."

°°°°The president fell at the feet of the rich heiress, his heart beatingand wrung with joy.

°°°°"I will be your slave!" he said.

°°°°"When you obtain the receipts, monsieur," she resumed, with a coldglance, "you will take them with all the other papers to my cousinGrandet, and you will give him this letter. On your return I will keepmy word."

°°°°The president understood perfectly that he owed the acquiescence ofMademoiselle Grandet to some bitterness of love, and he made haste toobey her orders, lest time should effect a reconciliation between thepair.

°°°°When Monsieur de Bonfons left her, Eugenie fell back in her chair andburst into tears. All was over.

°°°°The president took the mail-post, and reached Paris the next evening.The morning after his arrival he went to see des Grassins, andtogether they summoned the creditors to meet at the notary's officewhere the vouchers had been deposited. Not a single creditor failed tobe present. Creditors though they were, justice must be done to them,--they were all punctual. Monsieur de Bonfons, in the name ofMademoiselle Grandet, paid them the amount of their claims withinterest. The payment of interest was a remarkable event in theParisian commerce of that day. When the receipts were all legallyregistered, and des Grassins had received for his services the sum offifty thousand francs allowed to him by Eugenie, the president madehis way to the hotel d'Aubrion and found Charles just entering his ownapartment after a serious encounter with his prospective father-in-law. The old marquis had told him plainly that he should not marry hisdaughter until all the creditors of Guillaume Grandet had been paid infull.

°°°°The president gave Charles the following letter:--

°°°°My Cousin,--Monsieur le president de Bonfons has undertaken to

°°°°place in your hands the aquittance for all claims upon my uncle,

°°°°also a receipt by which I acknowledge having received from you the

°°°°sum total of those claims. I have heard of a possible failure, and

°°°°I think that the son of a bankrupt may not be able to marry

°°°°Mademoiselle d'Aubrion. Yes, my cousin, you judged rightly of my

°°°°mind and of my manners. I have, it is true, no part in the world;

°°°°I understand neither its calculations nor its customs; and I could

°°°°not give you the pleasures that you seek in it. Be happy,

°°°°according to the social conventions to which you have sacrificed

°°°°our love. To make your happiness complete I can only offer you

°°°°your father's honor. Adieu! You will always have a faithful friend

°°°°in your cousin

°°°°Eugenie.

°°°°The president smiled at the exclamation which the ambitious young mancould not repress as he received the documents.

°°°°"We shall announce our marriages at the same time," remarked Monsieurde Bonfons.

°°°°"Ah! you marry Eugenie? Well, I am delighted; she is a good girl.But," added Charles, struck with a luminous idea, "she must be rich?""She had," said the president, with a mischievous smile, "aboutnineteen millions four days ago; but she has only seventeen millionsto-day."

°°°°Charles looked at him thunderstruck.

°°°°"Seventeen mil--"

°°°°"Seventeen millions; yes, monsieur. We shall muster, MademoiselleGrandet and I, an income of seven hundred and fifty thousand francswhen we marry."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Charles, recovering a little of his assurance,"we can push each other's fortunes."

°°°°"Agreed," said the president. "Here is also a little case which I amcharged to give into your own hands," he added, placing on the tablethe leather box which contained the dressing-case.

°°°°"Well, my dear friend," said Madame d'Aubrion, entering the roomwithout noticing the president, "don't pay any attention to what poorMonsieur d'Aubrion has just said to you; the Duchesse de Chaulieu hasturned his head. I repeat, nothing shall interfere with themarriage--"

°°°°"Very good, madame. The three millions which my father owed were paidyesterday."

°°°°"In money?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes, in full, capital and interest; and I am about to do honor to hismemory--"

°°°°"What folly!" exclaimed his mother-in-law. "Who is this?" shewhispered in Grandet's ear, perceiving the president.

°°°°"My man of business," he answered in a low voice.

°°°°The marquise bowed superciliously to Monsieur de Bonfons."We are pushing each other's fortunes already," said the president,taking up his hat. "Good-by, cousin."

°°°°"He is laughing at me, the old cockatoo! I'd like to put six inches ofiron into him!" muttered Charles.

°°°°The president was out of hearing. Three days later Monsieur deBonfons, on his return to Saumur, announced his marriage with Eugenie.Six months after the marriage he was appointed councillor in the Courroyale at Angers. Before leaving Saumur Madame de Bonfons had the goldof certain jewels, once so precious to her, melted up, and put,together with the eight thousand francs paid back by her cousin, intoa golden pyx, which she gave to the parish church where she had solong prayed for /him/. She now spent her time between Angers andSaumur. Her husband, who had shown some public spirit on a certainoccasion, became a judge in the superior courts, and finally, after afew years, president of them. He was anxiously awaiting a generalelection, in the hope of being returned to the Chamber of deputies. Hehankered after a peerage; and then--

°°°°"The king will be his cousin, won't he?" said Nanon, la Grande Nanon,Madame Cornoiller, bourgeoise of Saumur, as she listened to hermistress, who was recounting the honors to which she was called.Nevertheless, Monsieur de Bonfons (he had finally abolished hispatronymic of Cruchot) did not realize any of his ambitious ideas. Hedied eight days after his election as deputy of Saumur. God, who seesall and never strikes amiss, punished him, no doubt, for his sordidcalculations and the legal cleverness with which, /accurante Cruchot/,he had drawn up his marriage contract, in which husband and wife gaveto each other, "in case they should have no children, their entireproperty of every kind, landed or otherwise, without exception orreservation, dispensing even with the formality of an inventory;provided that said omission of said inventory shall not injure theirheirs and assigns, it being understood that this deed of gift is,etc., etc." This clause of the contract will explain the profoundrespect which monsieur le president always testified for the wishes,and above all, for the solitude of Madame de Bonfons. Women cited himas the most considerate and delicate of men, pitied him, and even wentso far as to find fault with the passion and grief of Eugenie, blamingher, as women know so well how to blame, with cruel but discreetinsinuation.

°°°°"Madame de Bonfons must be very ill to leave her husband entirelyalone. Poor woman! Is she likely to get well? What is it? Somethinggastric? A cancer?"--"She has grown perfectly yellow. She ought toconsult some celebrated doctor in Paris."--"How can she be happywithout a child? They say she loves her husband; then why not give himan heir?--in his position, too!"--"Do you know, it is really dreadful!If it is the result of mere caprice, it is unpardonable. Poorpresident!"

°°°°Endowed with the delicate perception which a solitary soul acquiresthrough constant meditation, through the exquisite clear-sightednesswith which a mind aloof from life fastens on all that falls within itssphere, Eugenie, taught by suffering and by her later education todivine thought, knew well that the president desired her death that hemight step into possession of their immense fortune, augmented by theproperty of his uncle the notary and his uncle the abbe, whom it hadlately pleased God to call to himself. The poor solitary pitied thepresident. Providence avenged her for the calculations and theindifference of a husband who respected the hopeless passion on whichshe spent her life because it was his surest safeguard. To give lifeto a child would give death to his hopes,--the hopes of selfishness,the joys of ambition, which the president cherished as he looked intothe future.

°°°°God thus flung piles of gold upon this prisoner to whom gold was amatter of indifference, who longed for heaven, who lived, pious andgood, in holy thoughts, succoring the unfortunate in secret, and neverwearying of such deeds. Madame de Bonfons became a widow at thirty-six. She is still beautiful, but with the beauty of a woman who isnearly forty years of age. Her face is white and placid and calm; hervoice gentle and self-possessed; her manners are simple. She has thenoblest qualities of sorrow, the saintliness of one who has neversoiled her soul by contact with the world; but she has also the rigidbearing of an old maid and the petty habits inseparable from thenarrow round of provincial life. In spite of her vast wealth, shelives as the poor Eugenie Grandet once lived. The fire is neverlighted on her hearth until the day when her father allowed it to belighted in the hall, and it is put out in conformity with the ruleswhich governed her youthful years. She dresses as her mother dressed.The house in Saumur, without sun, without warmth, always in shadow,melancholy, is an image of her life. She carefully accumulates herincome, and might seem parsimonious did she not disarm criticism by anoble employment of her wealth. Pious and charitable institutions, ahospital for old age, Christian schools for children, a public libraryrichly endowed, bear testimony against the charge of avarice whichsome persons lay at her door. The churches of Saumur owe much of theirembellishment to her. Madame de Bonfons (sometimes ironically spokenof as mademoiselle) inspires for the most part reverential respect:and yet that noble heart, beating only with tenderest emotions, hasbeen, from first to last, subjected to the calculations of humanselfishness; money has cast its frigid influence upon that hallowedlife and taught distrust of feelings to a woman who is all feeling."I have none but you to love me," she says to Nanon.

°°°°The hand of this woman stanches the secret wounds in many families.She goes on her way to heaven attended by a train of benefactions. Thegrandeur of her soul redeems the narrowness of her education and thepetty habits of her early life.

°°°°Such is the history of Eugenie Grandet, who is in the world but not ofit; who, created to be supremely a wife and mother, has neitherhusband nor children nor family. Lately there has been some questionof her marrying again. The Saumur people talk of her and of theMarquis de Froidfond, whose family are beginning to beset the richwidow just as, in former days, the Cruchots laid siege to the richheiress. Nanon and Cornoiller are, it is said, in the interests of themarquis. Nothing could be more false. Neither la Grande Nanon norCornoiller has sufficient mind to understand the corruptions of theworld.

°°°°End





°°°°Colonel Chabert

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage and Clara Bell

°°°°DEDICATION

°°°°To Madame la Comtesse Ida de Bocarme nee du Chasteler.

°°°°COLONEL CHABERT

°°°°"HULLO! There is that old Box-coat again!"

°°°°This exclamation was made by a lawyer's clerk of the class called in French offices a gutter-jumper--a messenger in fact--who at this moment was eating a piece of dry bread with a hearty appetite. He pulled off a morsel of crumb to make into a bullet, and fired it gleefully through the open pane of the window against which he was leaning. The pellet, well aimed, rebounded almost as high as the window, after hitting the hat of a stranger who was crossing the courtyard of a house in the Rue Vivienne, where dwelt Maitre Derville, attorney-at-law.

°°°°"Come, Simonnin, don't play tricks on people, or I will turn you out of doors. However poor a client may be, he is still a man, hang it all!" said the head clerk, pausing in the addition of a bill of costs.

°°°°The lawyer's messenger is commonly, as was Simonnin, a lad of thirteen or fourteen, who, in every office, is under the special jurisdiction of the managing clerk, whose errands and /billets-doux/ keep him employed on his way to carry writs to the bailiffs and petitions to the Courts. He is akin to the street boy in his habits, and to the pettifogger by fate. The boy is almost always ruthless, unbroken, unmanageable, a ribald rhymester, impudent, greedy, and idle. And yet, almost all these clerklings have an old mother lodging on some fifth floor with whom they share their pittance of thirty or forty francs a month.

°°°°"If he is a man, why do you call him old Box-coat?" asked Simonnin, with the air of a schoolboy who has caught out his master.

°°°°And he went on eating his bread and cheese, leaning his shoulder against the window jamb; for he rested standing like a cab-horse, one of his legs raised and propped against the other, on the toe of his shoe.

°°°°"What trick can we play that cove?" said the third clerk, whose name was Godeschal, in a low voice, pausing in the middle of a discourse he was extemporizing in an appeal engrossed by the fourth clerk, of which copies were being made by two neophytes from the provinces.

°°°°Then he went on improvising:

°°°°"/But, in his noble and beneficent wisdom, his Majesty, Louis the Eighteenth/--(write it at full length, heh! Desroches the learned-- you, as you engross it!)--/when he resumed the reins of Government, understood/--(what did that old nincompoop ever understand?)--/the high mission to which he had been called by Divine Providence!/--(a note of admiration and six stops. They are pious enough at the Courts to let us put six)--/and his first thought, as is proved by the date of the order hereinafter designated, was to repair the misfortunes caused by the terrible and sad disasters of the revolutionary times, by restoring to his numerous and faithful adherents/--('numerous' is flattering, and ought to please the Bench)--/all their unsold estates, whether within our realm, or in conquered or acquired territory, or in the endowments of public institutions, for we are, and proclaim ourselves competent to declare, that this is the spirit and meaning of the famous, truly loyal order given in/--Stop," said Godeschal to the three copying clerks, "that rascally sentence brings me to the end of my page.--Well," he went on, wetting the back fold of the sheet with his tongue, so as to be able to fold back the page of thick stamped paper, "well, if you want to play him a trick, tell him that the master can only see his clients between two and three in the morning; we shall see if he comes, the old ruffian!"

°°°°And Godeschal took up the sentence he was dictating--"/given in/--Are you ready?"

°°°°"Yes," cried the three writers.

°°°°It all went all together, the appeal, the gossip, and the conspiracy.

°°°°"/Given in/--Here, Daddy Boucard, what is the date of the order? We must dot our /i/'s and cross our /t/'s, by Jingo! it helps to fill the pages."

°°°°"By Jingo!" repeated one of the copying clerks before Boucard, the head clerk, could reply.

°°°°"What! have you written /by Jingo/?" cried Godeschal, looking at one of the novices, with an expression at once stern and humorous.

°°°°"Why, yes," said Desroches, the fourth clerk, leaning across his neighbor's copy, "he has written, '/We must dot our i's/' and spelt it /by Gingo/!"

°°°°All the clerks shouted with laughter.

°°°°"Why! Monsieur Hure, you take 'By Jingo' for a law term, and you say you come from Mortagne!" exclaimed Simonnin.

°°°°"Scratch it cleanly out," said the head clerk. "If the judge, whose business it is to tax the bill, were to see such things, he would say you were laughing at the whole boiling. You would hear of it from the chief! Come, no more of this nonsense, Monsieur Hure! A Norman ought not to write out an appeal without thought. It is the 'Shoulder arms!' of the law."

°°°°"/Given in--in/?" asked Godeschal.--"Tell me when, Boucard."

°°°°"June 1814," replied the head clerk, without looking up from his work.

°°°°A knock at the office door interrupted the circumlocutions of the prolix document. Five clerks with rows of hungry teeth, bright, mocking eyes, and curly heads, lifted their noses towards the door, after crying all together in a singing tone, "Come in!"

°°°°Boucard kept his face buried in a pile of papers--/broutilles/ (odds and ends) in French law jargon--and went on drawing out the bill of costs on which he was busy.

°°°°The office was a large room furnished with the traditional stool which is to be seen in all these dens of law-quibbling. The stove-pipe crossed the room diagonally to the chimney of a bricked-up fireplace; on the marble chimney-piece were several chunks of bread, triangles of Brie cheese, pork cutlets, glasses, bottles, and the head clerk's cup of chocolate. The smell of these dainties blended so completely with that of the immoderately overheated stove and the odor peculiar to offices and old papers, that the trail of a fox would not have been perceptible. The floor was covered with mud and snow, brought in by the clerks. Near the window stood the desk with a revolving lid, where the head clerk worked, and against the back of it was the second clerk's table. The second clerk was at this moment in Court. It was between eight and nine in the morning.

°°°°The only decoration of the office consisted in huge yellow posters, announcing seizures of real estate, sales, settlements under trust, final or interim judgments,--all the glory of a lawyer's office. Behind the head clerk was an enormous room, of which each division was crammed with bundles of papers with an infinite number of tickets hanging from them at the ends of red tape, which give a peculiar physiognomy to law papers. The lower rows were filled with cardboard boxes, yellow with use, on which might be read the names of the more important clients whose cases were juicily stewing at this present time. The dirty window-panes admitted but little daylight. Indeed, there are very few offices in Paris where it is possible to write without lamplight before ten in the morning in the month of February, for they are all left to very natural neglect; every one comes and no one stays; no one has any personal interest in a scene of mere routine --neither the attorney, nor the counsel, nor the clerks, trouble themselves about the appearance of a place which, to the youths, is a schoolroom; to the clients, a passage; to the chief, a laboratory. The greasy furniture is handed down to successive owners with such scrupulous care, that in some offices may still be seen boxes of /remainders/, machines for twisting parchment gut, and bags left by the prosecuting parties of the Chatelet (abbreviated to /Chlet/)--a Court which, under the old order of things, represented the present Court of First Instance (or County Court).

°°°°So in this dark office, thick with dust, there was, as in all its fellows, something repulsive to the clients--something which made it one of the most hideous monstrosities of Paris. Nay, were it not for the mouldy sacristies where prayers are weighed out and paid for like groceries, and for the old-clothes shops, where flutter the rags that blight all the illusions of life by showing us the last end of all our festivities--an attorney's office would be, of all social marts, the most loathsome. But we might say the same of the gambling-hell, of the Law Court, of the lottery office, of the brothel.

°°°°But why? In these places, perhaps, the drama being played in a man's soul makes him indifferent to accessories, which would also account for the single-mindedness of great thinkers and men of great ambitions.

°°°°"Where is my penknife?"

°°°°"I am eating my breakfast."

°°°°"You go and be hanged! here is a blot on the copy."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen!"

°°°°These various exclamations were uttered simultaneously at the moment when the old client shut the door with the sort of humility which disfigures the movements of a man down on his luck. The stranger tried to smile, but the muscles of his face relaxed as he vainly looked for some symptoms of amenity on the inexorably indifferent faces of the six clerks. Accustomed, no doubt, to gauge men, he very politely addressed the gutter-jumper, hoping to get a civil answer from this boy of all work.

°°°°"Monsieur, is your master at home?"

°°°°The pert messenger made no reply, but patted his ear with the fingers of his left hand, as much as to say, "I am deaf."

°°°°"What do you want, sir?" asked Godeschal, swallowing as he spoke a mouthful of bread big enough to charge a four-pounder, flourishing his knife and crossing his legs, throwing up one foot in the air to the level of his eyes.

°°°°"This is the fifth time I have called," replied the victim. "I wish to speak to M. Derville."

°°°°"On business?"

°°°°"Yes, but I can explain it to no one but--"

°°°°"M. Derville is in bed; if you wish to consult him on some difficulty, he does no serious work till midnight. But if you will lay the case before us, we could help you just as well as he can to----"

°°°°The stranger was unmoved; he looked timidly about him, like a dog who has got into a strange kitchen and expects a kick. By grace of their profession, lawyers' clerks have no fear of thieves; they did not suspect the owner of the box-coat, and left him to study the place, where he looked in vain for a chair to sit on, for he was evidently tired. Attorneys, on principle, do not have many chairs in their offices. The inferior client, being kept waiting on his feet, goes away grumbling, but then he does not waste time, which, as an old lawyer once said, is not allowed for when the bill is taxed.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the old man, "as I have already told you, I cannot explain my business to any one but M. Derville. I will wait till he is up."

°°°°Boucard had finished his bill. He smelt the fragrance of his chocolate, rose from his cane armchair, went to the chimney-piece, looked the old man from head to foot, stared at his coat, and made an indescribable grimace. He probably reflected that whichever way his client might be wrung, it would be impossible to squeeze out a centime, so he put in a few brief words to rid the office of a bad customer.

°°°°"It is the truth, monsieur. The chief only works at night. If your business is important, I recommend you to return at one in the morning." The stranger looked at the head clerk with a bewildered expression, and remained motionless for a moment. The clerks, accustomed to every change of countenance, and the odd whimsicalities to which indecision or absence of mind gives rise in "parties," went on eating, making as much noise with their jaws as horses over a manger, and paying no further heed to the old man.

°°°°"I will come again to-night," said the stranger at length, with the tenacious desire, peculiar to the unfortunate, to catch humanity at fault.

°°°°The only irony allowed to poverty is to drive Justice and Benevolence to unjust denials. When a poor wretch has convicted Society of falsehood, he throws himself more eagerly on the mercy of God.

°°°°"What do you think of that for a cracked pot?" said Simonnin, without waiting till the old man had shut the door.

°°°°"He looks as if he had been buried and dug up again," said a clerk.

°°°°"He is some colonel who wants his arrears of pay," said the head clerk.

°°°°"No, he is a retired concierge," said Godeschal.

°°°°"I bet you he is a nobleman," cried Boucard.

°°°°"I bet you he has been a porter," retorted Godeschal. "Only porters are gifted by nature with shabby box-coats, as worn and greasy and frayed as that old body's. And did you see his trodden-down boots that let the water in, and his stock which serves for a shirt? He has slept in a dry arch."

°°°°"He may be of noble birth, and yet have pulled the doorlatch," cried Desroches. "It has been known!"

°°°°"No," Boucard insisted, in the midst of laughter, "I maintain that he was a brewer in 1789, and a colonel in the time of the Republic."

°°°°"I bet theatre tickets round that he never was a soldier," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Done with you," answered Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur! Monsieur!" shouted the little messenger, opening the window.

°°°°"What are you at now, Simonnin?" asked Boucard.

°°°°"I am calling him that you may ask him whether he is a colonel or a porter; he must know."

°°°°All the clerks laughed. As to the old man, he was already coming upstairs again.

°°°°"What can we say to him?" cried Godeschal.

°°°°"Leave it to me," replied Boucard.

°°°°The poor man came in nervously, his eyes cast down, perhaps not to betray how hungry he was by looking too greedily at the eatables.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Boucard, "will you have the kindness to leave your name, so that M. Derville may know----"

°°°°"Chabert."

°°°°"The Colonel who was killed at Eylau?" asked Hure, who, having so far said nothing, was jealous of adding a jest to all the others.

°°°°"The same, monsieur," replied the good man, with antique simplicity. And he went away.

°°°°"Whew!"

°°°°"Done brown!"

°°°°"Poof!"

°°°°"Oh!"

°°°°"Ah!"

°°°°"Boum!"

°°°°"The old rogue!"

°°°°"Ting-a-ring-ting!"

°°°°"Sold again!"

°°°°"Monsieur Desroches, you are going to the play without paying," said Hure to the fourth clerk, giving him a slap on the shoulder that might have killed a rhinoceros.

°°°°There was a storm of cat-calls, cries, and exclamations, which all the onomatopeia of the language would fail to represent.

°°°°"Which theatre shall we go to?"

°°°°"To the opera," cried the head clerk.

°°°°"In the first place," said Godeschal, "I never mentioned which theatre. I might, if I chose, take you to see Madame Saqui."

°°°°"Madame Saqui is not the play."

°°°°"What is a play?" replied Godeschal. "First, we must define the point of fact. What did I bet, gentlemen? A play. What is a play? A spectacle. What is a spectacle? Something to be seen--"

°°°°"But on that principle you would pay your bet by taking us to see the water run under the Pont Neuf!" cried Simonnin, interrupting him.

°°°°"To be seen for money," Godeschal added.

°°°°"But a great many things are to be seen for money that are not plays. The definition is defective," said Desroches.

°°°°"But do listen to me!"

°°°°"You are talking nonsense, my dear boy," said Boucard.

°°°°"Is Curtius' a play?" said Godeschal.

°°°°"No," said the head clerk, "it is a collection of figures--but it is a spectacle."

°°°°"I bet you a hundred francs to a sou," Godeschal resumed, "that Curtius' Waxworks forms such a show as might be called a play or theatre. It contains a thing to be seen at various prices, according to the place you choose to occupy."

°°°°"And so on, and so forth!" said Simonnin.

°°°°"You mind I don't box your ears!" said Godeschal.

°°°°The clerk shrugged their shoulders.

°°°°"Besides, it is not proved that that old ape was not making game of us," he said, dropping his argument, which was drowned in the laughter of the other clerks. "On my honor, Colonel Chabert is really and truly dead. His wife is married again to Comte Ferraud, Councillor of State. Madame Ferraud is one of our clients."

°°°°"Come, the case is remanded till to-morrow," said Boucard. "To work, gentlemen. The deuce is in it; we get nothing done here. Finish copying that appeal; it must be handed in before the sitting of the Fourth Chamber, judgment is to be given to-day. Come, on you go!"

°°°°"If he really were Colonel Chabert, would not that impudent rascal Simonnin have felt the leather of his boot in the right place when he pretended to be deaf?" said Desroches, regarding this remark as more conclusive than Godeschal's.

°°°°"Since nothing is settled," said Boucard, "let us all agree to go to the upper boxes of the Francais and see Talma in 'Nero.' Simonnin may go to the pit."

°°°°And thereupon the head clerk sat down at his table, and the others followed his example.

°°°°"/Given in June eighteen hundred and fourteen/ (in words)," said Godeschal. "Ready?"

°°°°"Yes," replied the two copying-clerks and the engrosser, whose pens forthwith began to creak over the stamped paper, making as much noise in the office as a hundred cockchafers imprisoned by schoolboys in paper cages.

°°°°"/And we hope that my lords on the Bench/," the extemporizing clerk went on. "Stop! I must read my sentence through again. I do not understand it myself."

°°°°"Forty-six (that must often happen) and three forty-nines," said Boucard.

°°°°"/We hope/," Godeschal began again, after reading all through the document, "/that my lords on the Bench will not be less magnanimous than the august author of the decree, and that they will do justice against the miserable claims of the acting committee of the chief Board of the Legion of Honor by interpreting the law in the wide sense we have here set forth/----"

°°°°"Monsieur Godeschal, wouldn't you like a glass of water?" said the little messenger.

°°°°"That imp of a boy!" said Boucard. "Here, get on your double-soled shanks-mare, take this packet, and spin off to the Invalides."

°°°°"/Here set forth/," Godeschal went on. "Add /in the interest of Madame la Vicomtesse/ (at full length) /de Grandlieu/."

°°°°"What!" cried the chief, "are you thinking of drawing up an appeal in the case of Vicomtesse de Grandlieu against the Legion of Honor--a case for the office to stand or fall by? You are something like an ass! Have the goodness to put aside your copies and your notes; you may keep all that for the case of Navarreins against the Hospitals. It is late. I will draw up a little petition myself, with a due allowance of 'inasmuch,' and go to the Courts myself."

°°°°This scene is typical of the thousand delights which, when we look back on our youth, make us say, "Those were good times."

°°°°At about one in the morning Colonel Chabert, self-styled, knocked at the door of Maitre Derville, attorney to the Court of First Instance in the Department of the Seine. The porter told him that Monsieur Derville had not yet come in. The old man said he had an appointment, and was shown upstairs to the rooms occupied by the famous lawyer, who, notwithstanding his youth, was considered to have one of the longest heads in Paris.

°°°°Having rung, the distrustful applicant was not a little astonished at finding the head clerk busily arranging in a convenient order on his master's dining-room table the papers relating to the cases to be tried on the morrow. The clerk, not less astonished, bowed to the Colonel and begged him to take a seat, which the client did.

°°°°"On my word, monsieur, I thought you were joking yesterday when you named such an hour for an interview," said the old man, with the forced mirth of a ruined man, who does his best to smile.

°°°°"The clerks were joking, but they were speaking the truth too," replied the man, going on with his work. "M. Derville chooses this hour for studying his cases, taking stock of their possibilities, arranging how to conduct them, deciding on the line of defence. His prodigious intellect is freer at this hour--the only time when he can have the silence and quiet needed for the conception of good ideas. Since he entered the profession, you are the third person to come to him for a consultation at this midnight hour. After coming in the chief will discuss each case, read everything, spend four or five hours perhaps over the business, then he will ring for me and explain to me his intentions. In the morning from ten to two he hears what his clients have to say, then he spends the rest of his day in appointments. In the evening he goes into society to keep up his connections. So he has only the night for undermining his cases, ransacking the arsenal of the code, and laying his plan of battle. He is determined never to lose a case; he loves his art. He will not undertake every case, as his brethren do. That is his life, an exceptionally active one. And he makes a great deal of money."

°°°°As he listened to this explanation, the old man sat silent, and his strange face assumed an expression so bereft of intelligence, that the clerk, after looking at him, thought no more about him.

°°°°A few minutes later Derville came in, in evening dress; his head clerk opened the door to him, and went back to finish arranging the papers. The young lawyer paused for a moment in amazement on seeing in the dim light the strange client who awaited him. Colonel Chabert was as absolutely immovable as one of the wax figures in Curtius' collection to which Godeschal had proposed to treat his fellow-clerks. This quiescence would not have been a subject for astonishment if it had not completed the supernatural aspect of the man's whole person. The old soldier was dry and lean. His forehead, intentionally hidden under a smoothly combed wig, gave him a look of mystery. His eyes seemed shrouded in a transparent film; you would have compared them to dingy mother-of-pearl with a blue iridescence changing in the gleam of the wax lights. His face, pale, livid, and as thin as a knife, if I may use such a vulgar expression, was as the face of the dead. Round his neck was a tight black silk stock.

°°°°Below the dark line of this rag the body was so completely hidden in shadow that a man of imagination might have supposed the old head was due to some chance play of light and shade, or have taken it for a portrait by Rembrandt, without a frame. The brim of the hat which covered the old man's brow cast a black line of shadow on the upper part of the face. This grotesque effect, though natural, threw into relief by contrast the white furrows, the cold wrinkles, the colorless tone of the corpse-like countenance. And the absence of all movement in the figure, of all fire in the eye, were in harmony with a certain look of melancholy madness, and the deteriorating symptoms characteristic of senility, giving the face an indescribably ill- starred look which no human words could render.

°°°°But an observer, especially a lawyer, could also have read in this stricken man the signs of deep sorrow, the traces of grief which had worn into this face, as drops of water from the sky falling on fine marble at last destroy its beauty. A physician, an author, or a judge might have discerned a whole drama at the sight of its sublime horror, while the least charm was its resemblance to the grotesques which artists amuse themselves by sketching on a corner of the lithographic stone while chatting with a friend.

°°°°On seeing the attorney, the stranger started, with the convulsive thrill that comes over a poet when a sudden noise rouses him from a fruitful reverie in silence and at night. The old man hastily removed his hat and rose to bow to the young man; the leather lining of his hat was doubtless very greasy; his wig stuck to it without his noticing it, and left his head bare, showing his skull horribly disfigured by a scar beginning at the nape of the neck and ending over the right eye, a prominent seam all across his head. The sudden removal of the dirty wig which the poor man wore to hide this gash gave the two lawyers no inclination to laugh, so horrible to behold was this riven skull. The first idea suggested by the sight of this old wound was, "His intelligence must have escaped through that cut."

°°°°"If this is not Colonel Chabert, he is some thorough-going trooper!" thought Boucard.

°°°°"Monsieur," said Derville, "to whom have I the honor of speaking?"

°°°°"To Colonel Chabert."

°°°°"Which?"

°°°°"He who was killed at Eylau," replied the old man.

°°°°On hearing this strange speech, the lawyer and his clerk glanced at each other, as much as to say, "He is mad."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Colonel went on, "I wish to confide to you the secret of my position."

°°°°A thing worthy of note is the natural intrepidity of lawyers. Whether from the habit of receiving a great many persons, or from the deep sense of the protection conferred on them by the law, or from confidence in their missions, they enter everywhere, fearing nothing, like priests and physicians. Derville signed to Boucard, who vanished.

°°°°"During the day, sir," said the attorney, "I am not so miserly of my time, but at night every minute is precious. So be brief and concise. Go to the facts without digression. I will ask for any explanations I may consider necessary. Speak."

°°°°Having bid his strange client to be seated, the young man sat down at the table; but while he gave his attention to the deceased Colonel, he turned over the bundles of papers.

°°°°"You know, perhaps," said the dead man, "that I commanded a cavalry regiment at Eylau. I was of important service to the success of Murat's famous charge which decided the victory. Unhappily for me, my death is a historical fact, recorded in /Victoires et Conquetes/, where it is related in full detail. We cut through the three Russian lines, which at once closed up and formed again, so that we had to repeat the movement back again. At the moment when we were nearing the Emperor, after having scattered the Russians, I came against a squadron of the enemy's cavalry. I rushed at the obstinate brutes. Two Russian officers, perfect giants, attacked me both at once. One of them gave me a cut across the head that crashed through everything, even a black silk cap I wore next my head, and cut deep into the skull. I fell from my horse. Murat came up to support me. He rode over my body, he and all his men, fifteen hundred of them--there might have been more! My death was announced to the Emperor, who as a precaution --for he was fond of me, was the master--wished to know if there were no hope of saving the man he had to thank for such a vigorous attack. He sent two surgeons to identify me and bring me into Hospital, saying, perhaps too carelessly, for he was very busy, 'Go and see whether by any chance poor Chabert is still alive.' These rascally saw-bones, who had just seen me lying under the hoofs of the horses of two regiments, no doubt did not trouble themselves to feel my pulse, and reported that I was quite dead. The certificate of death was probably made out in accordance with the rules of military jurisprudence."

°°°°As he heard his visitor express himself with complete lucidity, and relate a story so probable though so strange, the young lawyer ceased fingering the papers, rested his left elbow on the table, and with his head on his hand looked steadily at the Colonel.

°°°°"Do you know, monsieur, that I am lawyer to the Countess Ferraud," he said, interrupting the speaker, "Colonel Chabert's widow?"

°°°°"My wife--yes monsieur. Therefore, after a hundred fruitless attempts to interest lawyers, who have all thought me mad, I made up my mind to come to you. I will tell you of my misfortunes afterwards; for the present, allow me to prove the facts, explaining rather how things must have fallen out rather than how they did occur. Certain circumstances, known, I suppose to no one but the Almighty, compel me to speak of some things as hypothetical. The wounds I had received must presumably have produced tetanus, or have thrown me into a state analogous to that of a disease called, I believe, catalepsy. Otherwise how is it conceivable that I should have been stripped, as is the custom in time of the war, and thrown into the common grave by the men ordered to bury the dead?

°°°°"Allow me here to refer to a detail of which I could know nothing till after the event, which, after all, I must speak of as my death. At Stuttgart, in 1814, I met an old quartermaster of my regiment. This dear fellow, the only man who chose to recognize me, and of whom I will tell you more later, explained the marvel of my preservation, by telling me that my horse was shot in the flank at the moment when I was wounded. Man and beast went down together, like a monk cut out of card-paper. As I fell, to the right or to the left, I was no doubt covered by the body of my horse, which protected me from being trampled to death or hit by a ball.

°°°°"When I came to myself, monsieur, I was in a position and an atmosphere of which I could give you no idea if I talked till to-morrow. the little air there was to breathe was foul. I wanted to move, and found no room. I opened my eyes, and saw nothing. The most alarming circumstance was the lack of air, and this enlightened me as to my situation. I understood that no fresh air could penetrate to me, and that I must die. This thought took off the sense of intolerable pain which had aroused me. There was a violent singing in my ears. I heard--or I thought I heard, I will assert nothing--groans from the world of dead among whom I was lying. Some nights I still think I hear those stifled moans; though the remembrance of that time is very obscure, and my memory very indistinct, in spite of my impressions of far more acute suffering I was fated to go through, and which have confused my ideas.

°°°°"But there was something more awful than cries; there was a silence such as I have never known elsewhere--literally, the silence of the grave. At last, by raising my hands and feeling the dead, I discerned a vacant space between my head and the human carrion above. I could thus measure the space, granted by a chance of which I knew not the cause. It would seem that, thanks to the carelessness and the haste with which we had been pitched into the trench, two dead bodies had leaned across and against each other, forming an angle like that made by two cards when a child is building a card castle. Feeling about me at once, for there was no time for play, I happily felt an arm lying detached, the arm of a Hercules! A stout bone, to which I owed my rescue. But for this unhoped-for help, I must have perished. But with a fury you may imagine, I began to work my way through the bodies which separated me from the layer of earth which had no doubt been thrown over us--I say us, as if there had been others living! I worked with a will, monsieur, for here I am! But to this day I do not know how I succeeded in getting through the pile of flesh which formed a barrier between me and life. You will say I had three arms. This crowbar, which I used cleverly enough, opened out a little air between the bodies I moved, and I economized my breath. At last I saw daylight, but through snow!

°°°°"At that moment I perceived that my head was cut open. Happily my blood, or that of my comrades, or perhaps the torn skin of my horse, who knows, had in coagulating formed a sort of natural plaster. But, in spite of it, I fainted away when my head came into contact with the snow. However, the little warmth left in me melted the snow about me; and when I recovered consciousness, I found myself in the middle of a round hole, where I stood shouting as long as I could. But the sun was rising, so I had very little chance of being heard. Was there any one in the fields yet? I pulled myself up, using my feet as a spring, resting on one of the dead, whose ribs were firm. You may suppose that this was not the moment for saying, 'Respect courage in misfortune!' In short, monsieur, after enduring the anguish, if the word is strong enough for my frenzy, of seeing for a long time, yes, quite a long time, those cursed Germans flying from a voice they heard where they could see no one, I was dug out by a woman, who was brave or curious enough to come close to my head, which must have looked as though it had sprouted from the ground like a mushroom. This woman went to fetch her husband, and between them they got me to their poor hovel.

°°°°"It would seem that I must have again fallen into a catalepsy--allow me to use the word to describe a state of which I have no idea, but which, from the account given by my hosts, I suppose to have been the effect of that malady. I remained for six months between life and death; not speaking, or, if I spoke, talking in delirium. At last, my hosts got me admitted to the hospital at Heilsberg.

°°°°"You will understand, Monsieur, that I came out of the womb of the grave as naked as I came from my mother's; so that six months afterwards, when I remembered, one fine morning, that I had been Colonel Chabert, and when, on recovering my wits, I tried to exact from my nurse rather more respect than she paid to any poor devil, all my companions in the ward began to laugh. Luckily for me, the surgeon, out of professional pride, had answered for my cure, and was naturally interested in his patient. When I told him coherently about my former life, this good man, named Sparchmann, signed a deposition, drawn up in the legal form of his country, giving an account of the miraculous way in which I had escaped from the trench dug for the dead, the day and hour when I had been found by my benefactress and her husband, the nature and exact spot of my injuries, adding to these documents a description of my person.

°°°°"Well, monsieur, I have neither these important pieces of evidence, nor the declaration I made before a notary at Heilsberg, with a view to establishing my identity. From the day when I was turned out of that town by the events of the war, I have wandered about like a vagabond, begging my bread, treated as a madman when I have told my story, without ever having found or earned a sou to enable me to recover the deeds which would prove my statements, and restore me to society. My sufferings have often kept me for six months at a time in some little town, where every care was taken of the invalid Frenchman, but where he was laughed at to his face as soon as he said he was Colonel Chabert. For a long time that laughter, those doubts, used to put me into rages which did me harm, and which even led to my being locked up at Stuttgart as a madman. And indeed, as you may judge from my story, there was ample reason for shutting a man up.

°°°°"At the end of two years' detention, which I was compelled to submit to, after hearing my keepers say a thousand times, 'Here is a poor man who thinks he is Colonel Chabert' to people who would reply, 'Poor fellow!' I became convinced of the impossibility of my own adventure. I grew melancholy, resigned, and quiet, and gave up calling myself Colonel Chabert, in order to get out of my prison, and see France once more. Oh, monsieur! To see Paris again was a delirium which I----"

°°°°Without finishing his sentence, Colonel Chabert fell into a deep study, which Derville respected.

°°°°"One fine day," his visitor resumed, "one spring day, they gave me the key of the fields, as we say, and ten thalers, admitting that I talked quite sensibly on all subjects, and no longer called myself Colonel Chabert. On my honor, at that time, and even to this day, sometimes I hate my name. I wish I were not myself. The sense of my rights kills me. If my illness had but deprived me of all memory of my past life, I could be happy. I should have entered the service again under any name, no matter what, and should, perhaps, have been made Field- Marshal in Austria or Russia. Who knows?"

°°°°"Monsieur," said the attorney, "you have upset all my ideas. I feel as if I heard you in a dream. Pause for a moment, I beg of you."

°°°°"You are the only person," said the Colonel, with a melancholy look, "who ever listened to me so patiently. No lawyer has been willing to lend me ten napoleons to enable me to procure from Germany the necessary documents to begin my lawsuit--"

°°°°"What lawsuit?" said the attorney, who had forgotten his client's painful position in listening to the narrative of his past sufferings.

°°°°"Why, monsieur, is not the Comtesse Ferraud my wife? She has thirty thousand francs a year, which belong to me, and she will not give me a son. When I tell lawyers these things--men of sense; when I propose-- I, a beggar--to bring action against a Count and Countess; when I--a dead man--bring up as against a certificate of death a certificate of marriage and registers of births, they show me out, either with the air of cold politeness, which you all know how to assume to rid yourself of a hapless wretch, or brutally, like men who think they have to deal with a swindler or a madman--it depends on their nature. I have been buried under the dead; but now I am buried under the living, under papers, under facts, under the whole of society, which wants to shove me underground again!"

°°°°"Pray resume your narrative," said Derville.

°°°°" 'Pray resume it!' " cried the hapless old man, taking the young lawyer's hand. "That is the first polite word I have heard since----"

°°°°The Colonel wept. Gratitude choked his voice. The appealing and unutterable eloquence that lies in the eyes, in a gesture, even in silence, entirely convinced Derville, and touched him deeply.

°°°°"Listen, monsieur," said he; "I have this evening won three hundred francs at cards. I may very well lay out half that sum in making a man happy. I will begin the inquiries and researches necessary to obtain the documents of which you speak, and until they arrive I will give you five francs a day. If you are Colonel Chabert, you will pardon the smallness of the loan as it is coming from a young man who has his fortune to make. Proceed."

°°°°The Colonel, as he called himself, sat for a moment motionless and bewildered; the depth of his woes had no doubt destroyed his powers of belief. Though he was eager in pursuit of his military distinction, of his fortune, of himself, perhaps it was in obedience to the inexplicable feeling, the latent germ in every man's heart, to which we owe the experiments of alchemists, the passion for glory, the discoveries of astronomy and of physics, everything which prompts man to expand his being by multiplying himself through deeds or ideas. In his mind the /Ego/ was now but a secondary object, just as the vanity of success or the pleasures of winning become dearer to the gambler than the object he has at stake. The young lawyer's words were as a miracle to this man, for ten years repudiated by his wife, by justice, by the whole social creation. To find in a lawyer's office the ten gold pieces which had so long been refused him by so many people, and in so many ways! The colonel was like the lady who, having been ill of a fever for fifteen years, fancied she had some fresh complaint when she was cured. There are joys in which we have ceased to believe; they fall on us, it is like a thunderbolt; they burn us. The poor man's gratitude was too great to find utterance. To superficial observers he seemed cold, but Derville saw complete honesty under this amazement. A swindler would have found his voice.

°°°°"Where was I?" said the Colonel, with the simplicity of a child or of a soldier, for there is often something of the child in a true soldier, and almost always something of the soldier in a child, especially in France.

°°°°"At Stuttgart. You were out of prison," said Derville.

°°°°"You know my wife?" asked the Colonel.

°°°°"Yes," said Derville, with a bow.

°°°°"What is she like?"

°°°°"Still quite charming."

°°°°The old man held up his hand, and seemed to be swallowing down some secret anguish with the grave and solemn resignation that is characteristic of men who have stood the ordeal of blood and fire on the battlefield.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, with a sort of cheerfulness--for he breathed again, the poor Colonel; he had again risen from the grave; he had just melted a covering of snow less easily thawed than that which had once before frozen his head; and he drew a deep breath, as if he had just escaped from a dungeon--"Monsieur, if I had been a handsome young fellow, none of my misfortunes would have befallen me. Women believe in men when they flavor their speeches with the word Love. They hurry then, they come, they go, they are everywhere at once; they intrigue, they assert facts, they play the very devil for a man who takes their fancy. But how could I interest a woman? I had a face like a Requiem. I was dressed like a /sans-culotte/. I was more like an Esquimaux than a Frenchman--I, who had formerly been considered one of the smartest of fops in 1799!--I, Chabert, Count of the Empire.

°°°°"Well, on the very day when I was turned out into the streets like a dog, I met the quartermaster of whom I just now spoke. This old soldier's name was Boutin. The poor devil and I made the queerest pair of broken-down hacks I ever set eyes on. I met him out walking; but though I recognized him, he could not possibly guess who I was. We went into a tavern together. In there, when I told him my name, Boutin's mouth opened from ear to ear in a roar of laughter, like the bursting of a mortar. That mirth, monsieur, was one of the keenest pangs I have known. It told me without disguise how great were the changes in me! I was, then, unrecognizable even to the humblest and most grateful of my former friends!

°°°°"I had once saved Boutin's life, but it was only the repayment of a debt I owed him. I need not tell you how he did me this service; it was at Ravenna, in Italy. The house where Boutin prevented my being stabbed was not extremely respectable. At that time I was not a colonel, but, like Boutin himself, a common trooper. Happily there were certain details of this adventure which could be known only to us two, and when I recalled them to his mind his incredulity diminished. I then told him the story of my singular experiences. Although my eyes and my voice, he told me, were strangely altered, although I had neither hair, teeth, nor eyebrows, and was as colorless as an Albino, he at last recognized his Colonel in the beggar, after a thousand questions, which I answered triumphantly.

°°°°"He related his adventures; they were not less extraordinary than my own; he had lately come back from the frontiers of China, which he had tried to cross after escaping from Siberia. He told me of the catastrophe of the Russian campaign, and of Napoleon's first abdication. That news was one of the things which caused me most anguish!

°°°°"We were two curious derelicts, having been rolled over the globe as pebbles are rolled by the ocean when storms bear them from shore to shore. Between us we had seen Egypt, Syria, Spain, Russia, Holland, Germany, Italy and Dalmatia, England, China, Tartary, Siberia; the only thing wanting was that neither of us had been to America or the Indies. Finally, Boutin, who still was more locomotive than I, undertook to go to Paris as quickly as might be to inform my wife of the predicament in which I was. I wrote a long letter full of details to Madame Chabert. That, monsieur, was the fourth! If I had had any relations, perhaps nothing of all this might have happened; but, to be frank with you, I am but a workhouse child, a soldier, whose sole fortune was his courage, whose sole family is mankind at large, whose country is France, whose only protector is the Almighty.--Nay, I am wrong! I had a father--the Emperor! Ah! if he were but here, the dear man! If he could see /his Chabert/, as he used to call me, in the state in which I am now, he would be in a rage! What is to be done? Our sun is set, and we are all out in the cold now. After all, political events might account for my wife's silence!

°°°°"Boutin set out. He was a lucky fellow! He had two bears, admirably trained, which brought him in a living. I could not go with him; the pain I suffered forbade my walking long stages. I wept, monsieur, when we parted, after I had gone as far as my state allowed in company with him and his bears. At Carlsruhe I had an attack of neuralgia in the head, and lay for six weeks on straw in an inn. I should never have ended if I were to tell you all the distresses of my life as a beggar. Moral suffering, before which physical suffering pales, nevertheless excites less pity, because it is not seen. I remember shedding tears, as I stood in front of a fine house in Strassburg where once I had given an entertainment, and where nothing was given me, not even a piece of bread. Having agreed with Boutin on the road I was to take, I went to every post-office to ask if there were a letter or some money for me. I arrived at Paris without having found either. What despair I had been forced to endure! 'Boutin must be dead! I told myself, and in fact the poor fellow was killed at Waterloo. I heard of his death later, and by mere chance. His errand to my wife had, of course, been fruitless.

°°°°"At last I entered Paris--with the Cossacks. To me this was grief on grief. On seeing the Russians in France, I quite forgot that I had no shoes on my feet nor money in my pocket. Yes, monsieur, my clothes were in tatters. The evening before I reached Paris I was obliged to bivouac in the woods of Claye. The chill of the night air no doubt brought on an attack of some nameless complaint which seized me as I was crossing the Faubourg Saint-Martin. I dropped almost senseless at the door of an ironmonger's shop. When I recovered I was in a bed in the Hotel-Dieu. There I stayed very contentedly for about a month. I was then turned out; I had no money, but I was well, and my feet were on the good stones of Paris. With what delight and haste did I make my way to the Rue du Mont-Blanc, where my wife should be living in a house belonging to me! Bah! the Rue du Mont-Blanc was now the Rue de la Chausee d'Antin; I could not find my house; it had been sold and pulled down. Speculators had built several houses over my gardens. Not knowing that my wife had married M. Ferraud, I could obtain no information.

°°°°"At last I went to the house of an old lawyer who had been in charge of my affairs. This worthy man was dead, after selling his connection to a younger man. This gentleman informed me, to my great surprise, of the administration of my estate, the settlement of the moneys, of my wife's marriage, and the birth of her two children. When I told him that I was Colonel Chabert, he laughed so heartily that I left him without saying another word. My detention at Stuttgart had suggested possibilities of Charenton, and I determined to act with caution. Then, monsieur, knowing where my wife lived, I went to her house, my heart high with hope.--Well," said the Colonel, with a gesture of concentrated fury, "when I called under an assumed name I was not admitted, and on the day when I used my own I was turned out of doors.

°°°°"To see the Countess come home from a ball or the play in the early morning, I have sat whole nights through, crouching close to the wall of her gateway. My eyes pierced the depths of the carriage, which flashed past me with the swiftness of lightning, and I caught a glimpse of the woman who is my wife and no longer mine. Oh, from that day I have lived for vengeance!" cried the old man in a hollow voice, and suddenly standing up in front of Derville. "She knows that I am alive; since my return she has had two letters written with my own hand. She loves me no more!--I--I know not whether I love or hate her. I long for her and curse her by turns. To me she owes all her fortune, all her happiness; well, she has not sent me the very smallest pittance. Sometimes I do not know what will become of me!"

°°°°With these words the veteran dropped on to his chair again and remained motionless. Derville sat in silence, studying his client.

°°°°"It is a serious business," he said at length, mechanically. "Even granting the genuineness of the documents to be procured from Heilsberg, it is not proved to me that we can at once win our case. It must go before three tribunals in succession. I must think such a matter over with a clear head; it is quite exceptional."

°°°°"Oh," said the Colonel, coldly, with a haughty jerk of his head, "if I fail, I can die--but not alone."

°°°°The feeble old man had vanished. The eyes were those of a man of energy, lighted up with the spark of desire and revenge.

°°°°"We must perhaps compromise," said the lawyer.

°°°°"Compromise!" echoed Colonel Chabert. "Am I dead, or am I alive?"

°°°°"I hope, monsieur," the attorney went on, "that you will follow my advice. Your cause is mine. You will soon perceive the interest I take in your situation, almost unexampled in judicial records. For the moment I will give you a letter to my notary, who will pay to your order fifty francs every ten days. It would be unbecoming for you to come here to receive alms. If you are Colonel Chabert, you ought to be at no man's mercy. I shall record these advances as a loan; you have estates to recover; you are rich."

°°°°This delicate compassion brought tears to the old man's eyes. Derville rose hastily, for it was perhaps not correct for a lawyer to show emotion; he went into the adjoining room, and came back with an unsealed letter, which he gave to the Colonel. When the poor man held it in his hand, he felt through the paper two gold pieces.

°°°°"Will you be good enough to describe the documents, and tell me the name of the town, and in what kingdom?" said the lawyer.

°°°°The Colonel dictated the information, and verified the spelling of the names of places; then he took his hat in one hand, looked at Derville, and held out the other--a horny hand, saying with much simplicity:

°°°°"On my honor, sir, after the Emperor, you are the man to whom I shall owe most. You are a splendid fellow!"

°°°°The attorney clapped his hand into the Colonel's, saw him to the stairs, and held a light for him.

°°°°"Boucard," said Derville to his head clerk, "I have just listened to a tale that may cost me five and twenty louis. If I am robbed, I shall not regret the money, for I shall have seen the most consummate actor of the day."

°°°°When the Colonel was in the street and close to a lamp, he took the two twenty-franc pieces out of the letter and looked at them for a moment under the light. It was the first gold he had seen for nine years.

°°°°"I may smoke cigars!" he said to himself.

°°°°About three months after this interview, at night, in Derville's room, the notary commissioned to advance the half-pay on Derville's account to his eccentric client, came to consult the attorney on a serious matter, and began by begging him to refund the six hundred francs that the old soldier had received.

°°°°"Are you amusing yourself with pensioning the old army?" said the notary, laughing--a young man named Crottat, who had just bought up the office in which he had been head clerk, his chief having fled in consequence of a disastrous bankruptcy.

°°°°"I have to thank you, my dear sir, for reminding me of that affair," replied Derville. "My philanthropy will not carry me beyond twenty- five louis; I have, I fear, already been the dupe of my patriotism."

°°°°As Derville finished the sentence, he saw on his desk the papers his head clerk had laid out for him. His eye was struck by the appearance of the stamps--long, square, and triangular, in red and blue ink, which distinguished a letter that had come through the Prussian, Austrian, Bavarian, and French post-offices.

°°°°"Ah ha!" said he with a laugh, "here is the last act of the comedy; now we shall see if I have been taken in!"

°°°°He took up the letter and opened it; but he could not read it; it was written in German.

°°°°"Boucard, go yourself and have this letter translated, and bring it back immediately," said Derville, half opening his study door, and giving the letter to the head clerk.

°°°°The notary at Berlin, to whom the lawyer had written, informed him that the documents he had been requested to forward would arrive within a few days of this note announcing them. They were, he said, all perfectly regular and duly witnessed, and legally stamped to serve as evidence in law. He also informed him that almost all the witnesses to the facts recorded under these affidavits were still to be found at Eylau, in Prussia, and that the woman to whom M. le Comte Chabert owed his life was still living in a suburb of Heilsberg.

°°°°"This looks like business," cried Derville, when Boucard had given him the substance of the letter. "But look here, my boy," he went on, addressing the notary, "I shall want some information which ought to exist in your office. Was it not that old rascal Roguin--?"

°°°°"We will say that unfortunate, that ill-used Roguin," interrupted Alexandre Crottat with a laugh.

°°°°"Well, was it not that ill-used man who has just carried off eight hundred thousand francs of his clients' money, and reduced several families to despair, who effected the settlement of Chabert's estate? I fancy I have seen that in the documents in our case of Ferraud."

°°°°"Yes," said Crottat. "It was when I was third clerk; I copied the papers and studied them thoroughly. Rose Chapotel, wife and widow of Hyacinthe, called Chabert, Count of the Empire, grand officer of the Legion of Honor. They had married without settlement; thus, they held all the property in common. To the best of my recollections, the personalty was about six hundred thousand francs. Before his marriage, Colonel Chabert had made a will in favor of the hospitals of Paris, by which he left them one-quarter of the fortune he might possess at the time of his decease, the State to take the other quarter. The will was contested, there was a forced sale, and then a division, for the attorneys went at a pace. At the time of the settlement the monster who was then governing France handed over to the widow, by special decree, the portion bequeathed to the treasury."

°°°°"So that Comte Chabert's personal fortune was no more than three hundred thousand francs?"

°°°°"Consequently so it was, old fellow!" said Crottat. "You lawyers sometimes are very clear-headed, though you are accused of false practices in pleading for one side or the other."

°°°°Colonel Chabert, whose address was written at the bottom of the first receipt he had given the notary, was lodging in the Faubourg Saint- Marceau, Rue du Petit-Banquier, with an old quartermaster of the Imperial Guard, now a cowkeeper, named Vergniaud. Having reached the spot, Derville was obliged to go on foot in search of his client, for his coachman declined to drive along an unpaved street, where the ruts were rather too deep for cab wheels. Looking about him on all sides, the lawyer at last discovered at the end of the street nearest to the boulevard, between two walls built of bones and mud, two shabby stone gate-posts, much knocked about by carts, in spite of two wooden stumps that served as blocks. These posts supported a cross beam with a penthouse coping of tiles, and on the beam, in red letters, were the words, "Vergniaud, dairyman." To the right of this inscription were some eggs, to the left a cow, all painted in white. The gate was open, and no doubt remained open all day. Beyond a good-sized yard there was a house facing the gate, if indeed the name of house may be applied to one of the hovels built in the neighborhood of Paris, which are like nothing else, not even the most wretched dwellings in the country, of which they have all the poverty without their poetry.

°°°°Indeed, in the midst of the fields, even a hovel may have a certain grace derived from the pure air, the verdure, the open country--a hill, a serpentine road, vineyards, quickset hedges, moss-grown thatch and rural implements; but poverty in Paris gains dignity only by horror. Though recently built, this house seemed ready to fall into ruins. None of its materials had found a legitimate use; they had been collected from the various demolitions which are going on every day in Paris. On a shutter made of the boards of a shop-sign Derville read the words, "Fancy Goods." The windows were all mismatched and grotesquely placed. The ground floor, which seemed to be the habitable part, was on one side raised above the soil, and on the other sunk in the rising ground. Between the gate and the house lay a puddle full of stable litter, into which flowed the rain-water and house waste. The back wall of this frail construction, which seemed rather more solidly built than the rest, supported a row of barred hutches, where rabbits bred their numerous families. To the right of the gate was the cowhouse, with a loft above for fodder; it communicated with the house through the dairy. To the left was a poultry yard, with a stable and pig-styes, the roofs finished, like that of the house, with rough deal boards nailed so as to overlap, and shabbily thatched with rushes.

°°°°Like most of the places where the elements of the huge meal daily devoured by Paris are every day prepared, the yard Derville now entered showed traces of the hurry that comes of the necessity for being ready at a fixed hour. The large pot-bellied tin cans in which milk is carried, and the little pots for cream, were flung pell-mell at the dairy door, with their linen-covered stoppers. The rags that were used to clean them, fluttered in the sunshine, riddled with holes, hanging to strings fastened to poles. The placid horse, of a breed known only to milk-women, had gone a few steps from the cart, and was standing in front of the stable, the door being shut. A goat was munching the shoots of a starved and dusty vine that clung to the cracked yellow wall of the house. A cat, squatting on the cream jars, was licking them over. The fowls, scared by Derville's approach, scuttered away screaming, and the watch-dog barked.

°°°°"And the man who decided the victory at Eylau is to be found here!" said Derville to himself, as his eyes took in at a glance the general effect of the squalid scene.

°°°°The house had been left in charge of three little boys. One, who had climbed to the top of the cart loaded with hay, was pitching stones into the chimney of a neighboring house, in the hope that they might fall into a saucepan; another was trying to get a pig into a cart, to hoist it by making the whole thing tilt. When Derville asked them if M. Chabert lived there, neither of them replied, but all three looked at him with a sort of bright stupidity, if I may combine those two words. Derville repeated his questions, but without success. Provoked by the saucy cunning of these three imps, he abused them with the sort of pleasantry which young men think they have the right to address to little boys, and they broke the silence with a horse-laugh. Then Derville was angry.

°°°°The Colonel, hearing him, now came out of the little low room, close to the dairy, and stood on the threshold of his doorway with indescribable military coolness. He had in his mouth a very finely- colored pipe--a technical phrase to a smoker--a humble, short clay pipe of the kind called "/brule-queule/." He lifted the peak of a dreadfully greasy cloth cap, saw Derville, and came straight across the midden to join his benefactor the sooner, calling out in friendly tones to the boys:

°°°°"Silence in the ranks!"

°°°°The children at once kept a respectful silence, which showed the power the old soldier had over them.

°°°°"Why did you not write to me?" he said to Derville. "Go along by the cowhouse! There--the path is paved there," he exclaimed, seeing the lawyer's hesitancy, for he did not wish to wet his feet in the manure heap.

°°°°Jumping from one dry spot to another, Derville reached the door by which the Colonel had come out. Chabert seemed but ill pleased at having to receive him in the bed-room he occupied; and, in fact, Derville found but one chair there. The Colonel's bed consisted of some trusses of straw, over which his hostess had spread two or three of those old fragments of carpet, picked up heaven knows where, which milk-women use to cover the seats of their carts. The floor was simply the trodden earth. The walls, sweating salt-petre, green with mould, and full of cracks, were so excessively damp that on the side where the Colonel's bed was a reed mat had been nailed. The famous box-coat hung on a nail. Two pairs of old boots lay in a corner. There was not a sign of linen. On the worm-eaten table the /Bulletins de la Grande Armee/, reprinted by Plancher, lay open, and seemed to be the Colonel's reading; his countenance was calm and serene in the midst of this squalor. His visit to Derville seemed to have altered his features; the lawyer perceived in them traces of a happy feeling, a particular gleam set there by hope.

°°°°"Does the smell of the pipe annoy you?" he said, placing the dilapidated straw-bottomed chair for his lawyer.

°°°°"But, Colonel, you are dreadfully uncomfortable here!"

°°°°The speech was wrung from Derville by the distrust natural to lawyers, and the deplorable experience which they derive early in life from the appalling and obscure tragedies at which they look on.

°°°°"Here," said he to himself, "is a man who has of course spent my money in satisfying a trooper's three theological virtues--play, wine, and women!"

°°°°"To be sure, monsieur, we are not distinguished for luxury here. It is a camp lodging, tempered by friendship, but----" And the soldier shot a deep glance at the man of law--"I have done no one wrong, I have never turned my back on anybody, and I sleep in peace."

°°°°Derville reflected that there would be some want of delicacy in asking his client to account for the sums of money he had advanced, so he merely said:

°°°°"But why would you not come to Paris, where you might have lived as cheaply as you do here, but where you would have been better lodged?"

°°°°"Why," replied the Colonel, "the good folks with whom I am living had taken me in and fed me /gratis/ for a year. How could I leave them just when I had a little money? Besides, the father of those three pickles is an old /Egyptian/--"

°°°°"An Egyptian!"

°°°°"We give that name to the troopers who came back from the expedition into Egypt, of which I was one. Not merely are all who get back brothers; Vergniaud was in my regiment. We have shared a draught of water in the desert; and besides, I have not yet finished teaching his brats to read."

°°°°"He might have lodged you better for your money," said Derville.

°°°°"Bah!" said the Colonel, "his children sleep on the straw as I do. He and his wife have no better bed; they are very poor you see. They have taken a bigger business than they can manage. But if I recover my fortune . . . However, it does very well."

°°°°"Colonel, to-morrow or the next day, I shall receive your papers from Heilsberg. The woman who dug you out is still alive!"

°°°°"Curse the money! To think I haven't got any!" he cried, flinging his pipe on the ground.

°°°°Now, a well-colored pipe is to a smoker a precious possession; but the impulse was so natural, the emotion so generous, that every smoker, and the excise office itself, would have pardoned this crime of treason to tobacco. Perhaps the angels may have picked up the pieces.

°°°°"Colonel, it is an exceedingly complicated business," said Derville as they left the room to walk up and down in the sunshine.

°°°°"To me," said the soldier, "it appears exceedingly simple. I was thought to be dead, and here I am! Give me back my wife and my fortune; give me the rank of General, to which I have a right, for I was made Colonel of the Imperial Guard the day before the battle of Eylau."

°°°°"Things are not done so in the legal world," said Derville. "Listen to me. You are Colonel Chabert, I am glad to think it; but it has to be proved judicially to persons whose interest it will be to deny it. Hence, your papers will be disputed. That contention will give rise to ten or twelve preliminary inquiries. Every question will be sent under contradiction up to the supreme court, and give rise to so many costly suits, which will hang on for a long time, however eagerly I may push them. Your opponents will demand an inquiry, which we cannot refuse, and which may necessitate the sending of a commission of investigation to Prussia. But even if we hope for the best; supposing that justice should at once recognize you as Colonel Chabert--can we know how the questions will be settled that will arise out of the very innocent bigamy committed by the Comtesse Ferraud?

°°°°"In your case, the point of law is unknown to the Code, and can only be decided as a point in equity, as a jury decides in the delicate cases presented by the social eccentricities of some criminal prosecutions. Now, you had no children by your marriage; M. le Comte Ferraud has two. The judges might pronounce against the marriage where the family ties are weakest, to the confirmation of that where they are stronger, since it was contracted in perfect good faith. Would you be in a very becoming moral position if you insisted, at your age, and in your present circumstances, in resuming your rights over a woman who no longer loves you? You will have both your wife and her husband against you, two important persons who might influence the Bench. Thus, there are many elements which would prolong the case; you will have time to grow old in the bitterest regrets."

°°°°"And my fortune?"

°°°°"Do you suppose you had a fine fortune?"

°°°°"Had I not thirty thousand francs a year?"

°°°°"My dear Colonel, in 1799 you made a will before your marriage, leaving one-quarter of your property to hospitals."

°°°°"That is true."

°°°°"Well, when you were reported dead, it was necessary to make a valuation, and have a sale, to give this quarter away. Your wife was not particular about honesty as to the poor. The valuation, in which she no doubt took care not to include the ready money or jewelry, or too much of the plate, and in which the furniture would be estimated at two-thirds of its actual cost, either to benefit her, or to lighten the succession duty, and also because a valuer can be held responsible for the declared value--the valuation thus made stood at six hundred thousand francs. Your wife had a right of half for her share. Everything was sold and bought in by her; she got something out of it all, and the hospitals got their seventy-five thousand francs. Then, as the remainder went to the State, since you had made no mention of your wife in your will, the Emperor restored to your widow by decree the residue which would have reverted to the Exchequer. So, now, what can you claim? Three hundred thousand francs, no more, and minus the costs."

°°°°"And you call that justice!" said the Colonel, in dismay.

°°°°"Why, certainly--"

°°°°"A pretty kind of justice!"

°°°°"So it is, my dear Colonel. You see, that what you thought so easy is not so. Madame Ferraud might even choose to keep the sum given to her by the Emperor."

°°°°"But she was not a widow. The decree is utterly void----"

°°°°"I agree with you. But every case can get a hearing. Listen to me. I think that under these circumstances a compromise would be both for her and for you the best solution of the question. You will gain by it a more considerable sum than you can prove a right to."

°°°°"That would be to sell my wife!"

°°°°"With twenty-four thousand francs a year you could find a woman who, in the position in which you are, would suit you better than your own wife, and make you happier. I propose going this very day to see the Comtesse Ferraud and sounding the ground; but I would not take such a step without giving you due notice."

°°°°"Let us go together."

°°°°"What, just as you are?" said the lawyer. "No, my dear Colonel, no. You might lose your case on the spot."

°°°°"Can I possibly gain it?"

°°°°"On every count," replied Derville. "But, my dear Colonel Chabert, you overlook one thing. I am not rich; the price of my connection is not wholly paid up. If the bench should allow you a maintenance, that is to say, a sum advanced on your prospects, they will not do so till you have proved that you are Comte Chabert, grand officer of the Legion of Honor."

°°°°"To be sure, I am a grand officer of the Legion of Honor; I had forgotten that," said he simply.

°°°°"Well, until then," Derville went on, "will you not have to engage pleaders, to have documents copied, to keep the underlings of the law going, and to support yourself? The expenses of the preliminary inquiries will, at a rough guess, amount to ten or twelve thousand francs. I have not so much to lend you--I am crushed as it is by the enormous interest I have to pay on the money I borrowed to buy my business; and you?--Where can you find it."

°°°°Large tears gathered in the poor veteran's faded eyes, and rolled down his withered cheeks. This outlook of difficulties discouraged him. The social and the legal world weighed on his breast like a nightmare.

°°°°"I will go to the foot of the Vendome column!" he cried. "I will call out: 'I am Colonel Chabert who rode through the Russian square at Eylau!'--The statue--he--he will know me."

°°°°"And you will find yourself in Charenton."

°°°°At this terrible name the soldier's transports collapsed.

°°°°"And will there be no hope for me at the Ministry of War?"

°°°°"The war office!" said Derville. "Well, go there; but take a formal legal opinion with you, nullifying the certificate of your death. The government offices would be only too glad if they could annihilate the men of the Empire."

°°°°The Colonel stood for a while, speechless, motionless, his eyes fixed, but seeing nothing, sunk in bottomless despair. Military justice is ready and swift; it decides with Turk-like finality, and almost always rightly. This was the only justice known to Chabert. As he saw the labyrinth of difficulties into which he must plunge, and how much money would be required for the journey, the poor old soldier was mortally hit in that power peculiar to man, and called the Will. He thought it would be impossible to live as party to a lawsuit; it seemed a thousand times simpler to remain poor and a beggar, or to enlist as a trooper if any regiment would pass him.

°°°°His physical and mental sufferings had already impaired his bodily health in some of the most important organs. He was on the verge of one of those maladies for which medicine has no name, and of which the seat is in some degree variable, like the nervous system itself, the part most frequently attacked of the whole human machine, a malady which may be designated as the heart-sickness of the unfortunate. However serious this invisible but real disorder might already be, it could still be cured by a happy issue. But a fresh obstacle, an unexpected incident, would be enough to wreck this vigorous constitution, to break the weakened springs, and produce the hesitancy, the aimless, unfinished movements, which physiologists know well in men undermined by grief.

°°°°Derville, detecting in his client the symptoms of extreme dejection, said to him:

°°°°"Take courage; the end of the business cannot fail to be in your favor. Only, consider whether you can give me your whole confidence and blindly accept the result I may think best for your interests."

°°°°"Do what you will," said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but you surrender yourself to me like a man marching to his death."

°°°°"Must I not be left to live without a position, without a name? Is that endurable?"

°°°°"That is not my view of it," said the lawyer. "We will try a friendly suit, to annul both your death certificate and your marriage, so as to put you in possession of your rights. You may even, by Comte Ferraud's intervention, have your name replaced on the army list as general, and no doubt you will get a pension."

°°°°"Well, proceed then," said Chabert. "I put myself entirely in your hands."

°°°°"I will send you a power of attorney to sign," said Derville. "Good- bye. Keep up your courage. If you want money, rely on me."

°°°°Chabert warmly wrung the lawyer's hand, and remained standing with his back against the wall, not having the energy to follow him excepting with his eyes. Like all men who know but little of legal matters, he was frightened by this unforeseen struggle.

°°°°During their interview, several times, the figure of a man posted in the street had come forward from behind one of the gate-pillars, watching for Derville to depart, and he now accosted the lawyer. He was an old man, wearing a blue waistcoat and a white-pleated kilt, like a brewer's; on his head was an otter-skin cap. His face was tanned, hollow-cheeked, and wrinkled, but ruddy on the cheek-bones by hard work and exposure to the open air.

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir," said he, taking Derville by the arm, "if I take the liberty of speaking to you. But I fancied, from the look of you, that you were a friend of our General's."

°°°°"And what then?" replied Derville. "What concern have you with him?-- But who are you?" said the cautious lawyer.

°°°°"I am Louis Vergniaud," he replied at once. "I have a few words to say to you."

°°°°"So you are the man who has lodged Comte Chabert as I have found him?"

°°°°"Asking your pardon, sir, he has the best room. I would have given him mine if I had had but one; I could have slept in the stable. A man who has suffered as he has, who teaches my kids to read, a general, an Egyptian, the first lieutenant I ever served under--What do you think? --Of us all, he is best served. I shared what I had with him. Unfortunately, it is not much to boast of--bread, milk, eggs. Well, well; it's neighbors' fare, sir. And he is heartily welcome.--But he has hurt our feelings."

°°°°"He?"

°°°°"Yes, sir, hurt our feelings. To be plain with you, I have taken a larger business than I can manage, and he saw it. Well, it worried him; he must needs mind the horse! I says to him, 'Really, General----' 'Bah!' says he, 'I am not going to eat my head off doing nothing. I learned to rub a horse down many a year ago.'--I had some bills out for the purchase money of my dairy--a fellow named Grados-- Do you know him, sir?"

°°°°"But, my good man, I have not time to listen to your story. Only tell me how the Colonel offended you."

°°°°"He hurt our feelings, sir, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, and my wife cried about it. He heard from our neighbors that we had not a sou to begin to meet the bills with. The old soldier, as he is, he saved up all you gave him, he watched for the bill to come in, and he paid it. Such a trick! While my wife and me, we knew he had no tobacco, poor old boy, and went without.--Oh! now--yes, he has his cigar every morning! I would sell my soul for it--No, we are hurt. Well, so I wanted to ask you--for he said you were a good sort--to lend us a hundred crowns on the stock, so that we may get him some clothes, and furnish his room. He thought he was getting us out of debt, you see? Well, it's just the other way; the old man is running us into debt--and hurt our feelings!--He ought not to have stolen a march on us like that. And we his friends, too!--On my word as an honest man, as sure as my name is Louis Vergniaud, I would sooner sell up and enlist than fail to pay you back your money----"

°°°°Derville looked at the dairyman, and stepped back a few paces to glance at the house, the yard, the manure-pool, the cowhouse, the rabbits, the children.

°°°°"On my honor, I believe it is characteristic of virtue to have nothing to do with riches!" thought he.

°°°°"All right, you shall have your hundred crowns, and more. But I shall not give them to you; the Colonel will be rich enough to help, and I will not deprive him of the pleasure."

°°°°"And will that be soon?"

°°°°"Why, yes."

°°°°"Ah, dear God! how glad my wife will be!" and the cowkeeper's tanned face seemed to expand.

°°°°"Now," said Derville to himself, as he got into his cab again, "let us call on our opponent. We must not show our hand, but try to see hers, and win the game at one stroke. She must be frightened. She is a woman. Now, what frightens women most? A woman is afraid of nothing but . . ."

°°°°And he set to work to study the Countess' position, falling into one of those brown studies to which great politicians give themselves up when concocting their own plans and trying to guess the secrets of a hostile Cabinet. Are not attorneys, in a way, statesmen in charge of private affairs?

°°°°But a brief survey of the situation in which the Comte Ferraud and his wife now found themselves is necessary for a comprehension of the lawyer's cleverness.

°°°°Monsieur le Comte Ferraud was the only son of a former Councillor in the old /Parlement/ of Paris, who had emigrated during the Reign of Terror, and so, though he saved his head, lost his fortune. He came back under the Consulate, and remained persistently faithful to the cause of Louis XVIII., in whose circle his father had moved before the Revolution. He thus was one of the party in the Faubourg Saint-Germain which nobly stood out against Napoleon's blandishments. The reputation for capacity gained by the young Count--then simply called Monsieur Ferraud--made him the object of the Emperor's advances, for he was often as well pleased at his conquests among the aristocracy as at gaining a battle. The Count was promised the restitution of his title, of such of his estates as had not been sold, and he was shown in perspective a place in the ministry or as senator.

°°°°The Emperor fell.

°°°°At the time of Comte Chabert's death, M. Ferraud was a young man of six-and-twenty, without a fortune, of pleasing appearance, who had had his successes, and whom the Faubourg Saint-Germain had adopted as doing it credit; but Madame la Comtesse Chabert had managed to turn her share of her husband's fortune to such good account that, after eighteen months of widowhood, she had about forty thousand francs a year. Her marriage to the young Count was not regarded as news in the circles of the Faubourg Saint-Germain. Napoleon, approving of this union, which carried out his idea of fusion, restored to Madame Chabert the money falling to the Exchequer under her husband's will; but Napoleon's hopes were again disappointed. Madame Ferraud was not only in love with her lover; she had also been fascinated by the notion of getting into the haughty society which, in spite of its humiliation, was still predominant at the Imperial Court. By this marriage all her vanities were as much gratified as her passions. She was to become a real fine lady. When the Faubourg Saint-Germain understood that the young Count's marriage did not mean desertion, its drawing-rooms were thrown open to his wife.

°°°°Then came the Restoration. The Count's political advancement was not rapid. He understood the exigencies of the situation in which Louis XVIII. found himself; he was one of the inner circle who waited till the "Gulf of Revolution should be closed"--for this phrase of the King's, at which the Liberals laughed so heartily, had a political sense. The order quoted in the long lawyer's preamble at the beginning of this story had, however, put him in possession of two tracts of forest, and of an estate which had considerably increased in value during its sequestration. At the present moment, though Comte Ferraud was a Councillor of State, and a Director-General, he regarded his position as merely the first step of his political career.

°°°°Wholly occupied as he was by the anxieties of consuming ambition, he had attached to himself, as secretary, a ruined attorney named Delbecq, a more than clever man, versed in all the resources of the law, to whom he left the conduct of his private affairs. This shrewd practitioner had so well understood his position with the Count as to be honest in his own interest. He hoped to get some place by his master's influence, and he made the Count's fortune his first care. His conduct so effectually gave the lie to his former life, that he was regarded as a slandered man. The Countess, with the tact and shrewdness of which most women have a share more or less, understood the man's motives, watched him quietly, and managed him so well, that she had made good use of him for the augmentation of her private fortune. She had contrived to make Delbecq believe that she ruled her husband, and had promised to get him appointed President of an inferior court in some important provincial town, if he devoted himself entirely to her interests.

°°°°The promise of a place, not dependent on changes of ministry, which would allow of his marrying advantageously, and rising subsequently to a high political position, by being chosen Depute, made Delbecq the Countess' abject slave. He had never allowed her to miss one of those favorable chances which the fluctuations of the Bourse and the increased value of property afforded to clever financiers in Paris during the first three years after the Restoration. He had trebled his protectress' capital, and all the more easily because the Countess had no scruples as to the means which might make her an enormous fortune as quickly as possible. The emoluments derived by the Count from the places he held she spent on the housekeeping, so as to reinvest her dividends; and Delbecq lent himself to these calculations of avarice without trying to account for her motives. People of that sort never trouble themselves about any secrets of which the discovery is not necessary to their own interests. And, indeed, he naturally found the reason in the thirst for money, which taints almost every Parisian woman; and as a fine fortune was needed to support the pretensions of Comte Ferraud, the secretary sometimes fancied that he saw in the Countess' greed a consequence of her devotion to a husband with whom she still was in love. The Countess buried the secrets of her conduct at the bottom of her heart. There lay the secrets of life and death to her, there lay the turning-point of this history.

°°°°At the beginning of the year 1818 the Restoration was settled on an apparently immovable foundation; its doctrines of government, as understood by lofty minds, seemed calculated to bring to France an era of renewed prosperity, and Parisian society changed its aspect. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud found that by chance she had achieved for love a marriage that had brought her fortune and gratified ambition. Still young and handsome, Madame Ferraud played the part of a woman of fashion, and lived in the atmosphere of the Court. Rich herself, with a rich husband who was cried up as one of the ablest men of the royalist party, and, as a friend of the King, certain to be made Minister, she belonged to the aristocracy, and shared its magnificence. In the midst of this triumph she was attacked by a moral canker. There are feelings which women guess in spite of the care men take to bury them. On the first return of the King, Comte Ferraud had begun to regret his marriage. Colonel Chabert's widow had not been the means of allying him to anybody; he was alone and unsupported in steering his way in a course full of shoals and beset by enemies. Also, perhaps, when he came to judge his wife coolly, he may have discerned in her certain vices of education which made her unfit to second him in his schemes.

°°°°A speech he made, /a propos/ of Talleyrand's marriage, enlightened the Countess, to whom it proved that if he had still been a free man she would never have been Madame Ferraud. What woman could forgive this repentance? Does it not include the germs of every insult, every crime, every form of repudiation? But what a wound must it have left in the Countess' heart, supposing that she lived in the dread of her first husband's return? She had known that he still lived, and she had ignored him. Then during the time when she had heard no more of him, she had chosen to believe that he had fallen at Waterloo with the Imperial Eagle, at the same time as Boutin. She resolved, nevertheless, to bind the Count to her by the strongest of all ties, by a chain of gold, and vowed to be so rich that her fortune might make her second marriage dissoluble, if by chance Colonel Chabert should ever reappear. And he had reappeared; and she could not explain to herself why the struggle she had dreaded had not already begun. Suffering, sickness, had perhaps delivered her from that man. Perhaps he was half mad, and Charenton might yet do her justice. She had not chosen to take either Delbecq or the police into her confidence, for fear of putting herself in their power, or of hastening the catastrophe. There are in Paris many women who, like the Countess Ferraud, live with an unknown moral monster, or on the brink of an abyss; a callus forms over the spot that tortures them, and they can still laugh and enjoy themselves.

°°°°"There is something very strange in Comte Ferraud's position," said Derville to himself, on emerging from his long reverie, as his cab stopped at the door of the Hotel Ferraud in the Rue de Varennes. "How is it that he, so rich as he is, and such a favorite with the King, is not yet a peer of France? It may, to be sure, be true that the King, as Mme. de Grandlieu was telling me, desires to keep up the value of the /pairie/ by not bestowing it right and left. And, after all, the son of a Councillor of the /Parlement/ is not a Crillon nor a Rohan. A Comte Ferraud can only get into the Upper Chamber surreptitiously. But if his marriage were annulled, could he not get the dignity of some old peer who has only daughters transferred to himself, to the King's great satisfaction? At any rate this will be a good bogey to put forward and frighten the Countess," thought he as he went up the steps.

°°°°Derville had without knowing it laid his finger on the hidden wound, put his hand on the canker that consumed Madame Ferraud.

°°°°She received him in a pretty winter dining-room, where she was at breakfast, while playing with a monkey tethered by a chain to a little pole with climbing bars of iron. The Countess was in an elegant wrapper; the curls of her hair, carelessly pinned up, escaped from a cap, giving her an arch look. She was fresh and smiling. Silver, gilding, and mother-of-pearl shone on the table, and all about the room were rare plants growing in magnificent china jars. As he saw Colonel Chabert's wife, rich with his spoil, in the lap of luxury and the height of fashion, while he, poor wretch, was living with a poor dairyman among the beasts, the lawyer said to himself:

°°°°"The moral of all this is that a pretty woman will never acknowledge as her husband, nor even as a lover, a man in an old box-coat, a tow wig, and boots with holes in them."

°°°°A mischievous and bitter smile expressed the feelings, half philosophical and half satirical, which such a man was certain to experience--a man well situated to know the truth of things in spite of the lies behind which most families in Paris hide their mode of life.

°°°°"Good-morning, Monsieur Derville," said she, giving the monkey some coffee to drink.

°°°°"Madame," said he, a little sharply, for the light tone in which she spoke jarred on him. "I have come to speak with you on a very serious matter."

°°°°"I am so /grieved/, M. le Comte is away--"

°°°°"I, madame, am delighted. It would be grievous if he could be present at our interview. Besides, I am informed through M. Delbecq that you like to manage your own business without troubling the Count."

°°°°"Then I will send for Delbecq," said she.

°°°°"He would be of no use to you, clever as he is," replied Derville. "Listen to me, madame; one word will be enough to make you grave. Colonel Chabert is alive!"

°°°°"Is it by telling me such nonsense as that that you think you can make me grave?" said she with a shout of laughter. But she was suddenly quelled by the singular penetration of the fixed gaze which Derville turned on her, seeming to read to the bottom of her soul.

°°°°"Madame," he said with cold and piercing solemnity, "you know not the extent of the danger that threatens you. I need say nothing of the indisputable authenticity of the evidence nor of the fulness of proof which testifies to the identity of Comte Chabert. I am not, as you know, the man to take up a bad cause. If you resist our proceedings to show that the certificate of death was false, you will lose that first case, and that matter once settled, we shall gain every point."

°°°°"What, then, do you wish to discuss with me?"

°°°°"Neither the Colonel nor yourself. Nor need I allude to the briefs which clever advocates may draw up when armed with the curious facts of this case, or the advantage they may derive from the letters you received from your first husband before your marriage to your second."

°°°°"It is false," she cried, with the violence of a spoilt woman. "I never had a letter from Comte Chabert; and if some one is pretending to be the Colonel, it is some swindler, some returned convict, like Coignard perhaps. It makes me shudder only to think of it. Can the Colonel rise from the dead, monsieur? Bonaparte sent an aide-de-camp to inquire for me on his death, and to this day I draw the pension of three thousand francs granted to this widow by the Government. I have been perfectly in the right to turn away all the Chaberts who have ever come, as I shall all who may come."

°°°°"Happily we are alone, madame. We can tell lies at our ease," said he coolly, and finding it amusing to lash up the Countess' rage so as to lead her to betray herself, by tactics familiar to lawyers, who are accustomed to keep cool when their opponents or their clients are in a passion. "Well, then, we must fight it out," thought he, instantly hitting on a plan to entrap her and show her her weakness.

°°°°"The proof that you received the first letter, madame, is that it contained some securities--"

°°°°"Oh, as to securities--that it certainly did not."

°°°°"Then you received the letter," said Derville, smiling. "You are caught, madame, in the first snare laid for you by an attorney, and you fancy you could fight against Justice----"

°°°°The Countess colored, and then turned pale, hiding her face in her hands. Then she shook off her shame, and retorted with the natural impertinence of such women, "Since you are the so-called Chabert's attorney, be so good as to--"

°°°°"Madame," said Derville, "I am at this moment as much your lawyer as I am Colonel Chabert's. Do you suppose I want to lose so valuable a client as you are?--But you are not listening."

°°°°"Nay, speak on, monsieur," said she graciously.

°°°°"Your fortune came to you from M. le Comte Chabert, and you cast him off. Your fortune is immense, and you leave him to beg. An advocate can be very eloquent when a cause is eloquent in itself; there are here circumstances which might turn public opinion strongly against you."

°°°°"But, monsieur," said the Comtesse, provoked by the way in which Derville turned and laid her on the gridiron, "even if I grant that your M. Chabert is living, the law will uphold my second marriage on account of the children, and I shall get off with the restitution of two hundred and twenty-five thousand francs to M. Chabert."

°°°°"It is impossible to foresee what view the Bench may take of the question. If on one side we have a mother and children, on the other we have an old man crushed by sorrows, made old by your refusals to know him. Where is he to find a wife? Can the judges contravene the law? Your marriage with Colonel Chabert has priority on its side and every legal right. But if you appear under disgraceful colors, you might have an unlooked-for adversary. That, madame, is the danger against which I would warn you."

°°°°"And who is he?"

°°°°"Comte Ferraud."

°°°°"Monsieur Ferraud has too great an affection for me, too much respect for the mother of his children--"

°°°°"Do not talk of such absurd things," interrupted Derville, "to lawyers, who are accustomed to read hearts to the bottom. At this instant Monsieur Ferraud has not the slightest wish to annual your union, and I am quite sure that he adores you; but if some one were to tell him that his marriage is void, that his wife will be called before the bar of public opinion as a criminal--"

°°°°"He would defend me, monsieur."

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°"What reason could he have for deserting me, monsieur?"

°°°°"That he would be free to marry the only daughter of a peer of France, whose title would be conferred on him by patent from the King."

°°°°The Countess turned pale.

°°°°"A hit!" said Derville to himself. "I have you on the hip; the poor Colonel's case is won."--"Besides, madame," he went on aloud, "he would feel all the less remorse because a man covered with glory--a General, Count, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor--is not such a bad alternative; and if that man insisted on his wife's returning to him--"

°°°°"Enough, enough, monsieur!" she exclaimed. "I will never have any lawyer but you. What is to be done?"

°°°°"Compromise!" said Derville.

°°°°"Does he still love me?" she said.

°°°°"Well, I do not think he can do otherwise."

°°°°The Countess raised her head at these words. A flash of hope shone in her eyes; she thought perhaps that she could speculate on her first husband's affection to gain her cause by some feminine cunning.

°°°°"I shall await your orders, madame, to know whether I am to report our proceedings to you, or if you will come to my office to agree to the terms of a compromise," said Derville, taking leave.

°°°°A week after Derville had paid these two visits, on a fine morning in June, the husband and wife, who had been separated by an almost supernatural chance, started from the opposite ends of Paris to meet in the office of the lawyer who was engaged by both. The supplies liberally advanced by Derville to Colonel Chabert had enabled him to dress as suited his position in life, and the dead man arrived in a very decent cab. He wore a wig suited to his face, was dressed in blue cloth with white linen, and wore under his waistcoat the broad red ribbon of the higher grade of the Legion of Honor. In resuming the habits of wealth he had recovered his soldierly style. He held himself up; his face, grave and mysterious-looking, reflected his happiness and all his hopes, and seemed to have acquired youth and /impasto/, to borrow a picturesque word from the painter's art. He was no more like the Chabert of the old box-coat than a cartwheel double sou is like a newly coined forty-franc piece. The passer-by, only to see him, would have recognized at once one of the noble wrecks of our old army, one of the heroic men on whom our national glory is reflected, as a splinter of ice on which the sun shines seems to reflect every beam. These veterans are at once a picture and a book.

°°°°When the Count jumped out of his carriage to go into Derville's office, he did it as lightly as a young man. Hardly had his cab moved off, when a smart brougham drove up, splendid with coats-of-arms. Madame la Comtesse Ferraud stepped out in a dress which, though simple, was cleverly designed to show how youthful her figure was. She wore a pretty drawn bonnet lined with pink, which framed her face to perfection, softening its outlines and making it look younger.

°°°°If the clients were rejuvenescent, the office was unaltered, and presented the same picture as that described at the beginning of this story. Simonnin was eating his breakfast, his shoulder leaning against the window, which was then open, and he was staring up at the blue sky in the opening of the courtyard enclosed by four gloomy houses.

°°°°"Ah, ha!" cried the little clerk, "who will bet an evening at the play that Colonel Chabert is a General, and wears a red ribbon?"

°°°°"The chief is a great magician," said Godeschal.

°°°°"Then there is no trick to play on him this time?" asked Desroches.

°°°°"His wife has taken that in hand, the Comtesse Ferraud," said Boucard.

°°°°"What next?" said Godeschal. "Is Comtesse Ferraud required to belong to two men?"

°°°°"Here she is," answered Simonnin.

°°°°"So you are not deaf, you young rogue!" said Chabert, taking the gutter-jumper by the ear and twisting it, to the delight of the other clerks, who began to laugh, looking at the Colonel with the curious attention due to so singular a personage.

°°°°Comte Chabert was in Derville's private room at the moment when his wife came in by the door of the office.

°°°°"I say, Boucard, there is going to be a queer scene in the chief's room! There is a woman who can spend her days alternately, the odd with Comte Ferraud, and the even with Comte Chabert."

°°°°"And in leap year," said Godeschal, "they must settle the /count/ between them."

°°°°"Silence, gentlemen, you can be heard!" said Boucard severely. "I never was in an office where there was so much jesting as there is here over the clients."

°°°°Derville had made the Colonel retire to the bedroom when the Countess was admitted.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "not knowing whether it would be agreeable to you to meet M. le Comte Chabert, I have placed you apart. If, however, you should wish it--"

°°°°"It is an attention for which I am obliged to you."

°°°°"I have drawn up the memorandum of an agreement of which you and M. Chabert can discuss the conditions, here, and now. I will go alternately to him and to you, and explain your views respectively."

°°°°"Let me see, monsieur," said the Countess impatiently.

°°°°Derville read aloud:

°°°°" 'Between the undersigned:

°°°°" 'M. Hyacinthe Chabert, Count, Marechal de Camp, and Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor, living in Paris, Rue du Petit-Banquier, on the one part;

°°°°" 'And Madame Rose Chapotel, wife of the aforesaid M. le Comte Chabert, /nee/--' "

°°°°"Pass over the preliminaries," said she. "Come to the conditions."

°°°°"Madame," said the lawyer, "the preamble briefly sets forth the position in which you stand to each other. Then, by the first clause, you acknowledge, in the presence of three witnesses, of whom two shall be notaries, and one the dairyman with whom your husband has been lodging, to all of whom your secret is known, and who will be absolutely silent--you acknowledge, I say, that the individual designated in the documents subjoined to the deed, and whose identity is to be further proved by an act of recognition prepared by your notary, Alexandre Crottat, is your first husband, Comte Chabert. By the second clause Comte Chabert, to secure your happiness, will undertake to assert his rights only under certain circumstances set forth in the deed.--And these," said Derville, in a parenthesis, "are none other than a failure to carry out the conditions of this secret agreement.--M. Chabert, on his part, agrees to accept judgment on a friendly suit, by which his certificate of death shall be annulled, and his marriage dissolved."

°°°°"That will not suit me in the least," said the Countess with surprise. "I will be a party to no suit; you know why."

°°°°"By the third clause," Derville went on, with imperturbable coolness, "you pledge yourself to secure to Hyacinthe Comte Chabert an income of twenty-four thousand francs on government stock held in his name, to revert to you at his death--"

°°°°"But it is much too dear!" exclaimed the Countess.

°°°°"Can you compromise the matter cheaper?"

°°°°"Possibly."

°°°°"But what do you want, madame?"

°°°°"I want--I will not have a lawsuit. I want--"

°°°°"You want him to remain dead?" said Derville, interrupting her hastily.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, "if twenty-four thousand francs a year are necessary, we will go to law--"

°°°°"Yes, we will go to law," said the Colonel in a deep voice, as he opened the door and stood before his wife, with one hand in his waistcoat and the other hanging by his side--an attitude to which the recollection of his adventure gave horrible significance.

°°°°"It is he," said the Countess to herself.

°°°°"Too dear!" the old soldier exclaimed. "I have given you near on a million, and you are cheapening my misfortunes. Very well; now I will have you--you and your fortune. Our goods are in common, our marriage is not dissolved--"

°°°°"But monsieur is not Colonel Chabert!" cried the Countess, in feigned amazement.

°°°°"Indeed!" said the old man, in a tone of intense irony. "Do you want proofs? I found you in the Palais Royal----"

°°°°The Countess turned pale. Seeing her grow white under her rouge, the old soldier paused, touched by the acute suffering he was inflicting on the woman he had once so ardently loved; but she shot such a venomous glance at him that he abruptly went on:

°°°°"You were with La--"

°°°°"Allow me, Monsieur Derville," said the Countess to the lawyer. "You must give me leave to retire. I did not come here to listen to such dreadful things."

°°°°She rose and went out. Derville rushed after her; but the Countess had taken wings, and seemed to have flown from the place.

°°°°On returning to his private room, he found the Colonel in a towering rage, striding up and down.

°°°°"In those times a man took his wife where he chose," said he. "But I was foolish and chose badly; I trusted to appearances. She has no heart."

°°°°"Well, Colonel, was I not right to beg you not to come?--I am now positive of your identity; when you came in, the Countess gave a little start, of which the meaning was unequivocal. But you have lost your chances. Your wife knows that you are unrecognizable."

°°°°"I will kill her!"

°°°°"Madness! you will be caught and executed like any common wretch. Besides you might miss! That would be unpardonable. A man must not miss his shot when he wants to kill his wife.--Let me set things straight; you are only a big child. Go now. Take care of yourself; she is capable of setting some trap for you and shutting you up in Charenton. I will notify her of our proceedings to protect you against a surprise."

°°°°The unhappy Colonel obeyed his young benefactor, and went away, stammering apologies. He slowly went down the dark staircase, lost in gloomy thoughts, and crushed perhaps by the blow just dealt him--the most cruel he could feel, the thrust that could most deeply pierce his heart--when he heard the rustle of a woman's dress on the lowest landing, and his wife stood before him.

°°°°"Come, monsieur," said she, taking his arm with a gesture like those familiar to him of old. Her action and the accent of her voice, which had recovered its graciousness, were enough to allay the Colonel's wrath, and he allowed himself to be led to the carriage.

°°°°"Well, get in!" said she, when the footman had let down the step.

°°°°And as if by magic, he found himself sitting by his wife in the brougham.

°°°°"Where to?" asked the servant.

°°°°"To Groslay," said she.

°°°°The horses started at once, and carried them all across Paris.

°°°°"Monsieur," said the Countess, in a tone of voice which betrayed one of those emotions which are rare in our lives, and which agitate every part of our being. At such moments the heart, fibres, nerves, countenance, soul, and body, everything, every pore even, feels a thrill. Life no longer seems to be within us; it flows out, springs forth, is communicated as if by contagion, transmitted by a look, a tone of voice, a gesture, impressing our will on others. The old soldier started on hearing this single word, this first, terrible "monsieur!" But still it was at once a reproach and a pardon, a hope and a despair, a question and an answer. This word included them all; none but an actress could have thrown so much eloquence, so many feelings into a single word. Truth is less complete in its utterance; it does not put everything on the outside; it allows us to see what is within. The Colonel was filled with remorse for his suspicions, his demands, and his anger; he looked down not to betray his agitation.

°°°°"Monsieur," repeated she, after an imperceptible pause, "I knew you at once."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old soldier, "those words contain the only balm that can help me to forget my misfortunes."

°°°°Two large tears rolled hot on to his wife's hands, which he pressed to show his paternal affection.

°°°°"Monsieur," she went on, "could you not have guessed what it cost me to appear before a stranger in a position so false as mine now is? If I have to blush for it, at least let it be in the privacy of my family. Ought not such a secret to remain buried in our hearts? You will forgive me, I hope, for my apparent indifference to the woes of a Chabert in whose existence I could not possibly believe. I received your letters," she hastily added, seeing in his face the objection it expressed, "but they did not reach me till thirteen months after the battle of Eylau. They were opened, dirty, the writing was unrecognizable; and after obtaining Napoleon's signature to my second marriage contract, I could not help believing that some clever swindler wanted to make a fool of me. Therefore, to avoid disturbing Monsieur Ferraud's peace of mind, and disturbing family ties, I was obliged to take precautions against a pretended Chabert. Was I not right, I ask you?"

°°°°"Yes, you were right. It was I who was the idiot, the owl, the dolt, not to have calculated better what the consequences of such a position might be.--But where are we going?" he asked, seeing that they had reached the barrier of La Chapelle.

°°°°"To my country house near Groslay, in the valley of Montmorency. There, monsieur, we will consider the steps to be taken. I know my duties. Though I am yours by right, I am no longer yours in fact. Can you wish that we should become the talk of Paris? We need not inform the public of a situation, which for me has its ridiculous side, and let us preserve our dignity. You still love me," she said, with a sad, sweet gaze at the Colonel, "but have not I been authorized to form other ties? In so strange a position, a secret voice bids me trust to your kindness, which is so well known to me. Can I be wrong in taking you as the sole arbiter of my fate? Be at once judge and party to the suit. I trust in your noble character; you will be generous enough to forgive me for the consequences of faults committed in innocence. I may then confess to you: I love M. Ferraud. I believed that I had a right to love him. I do not blush to make this confession to you; even if it offends you, it does not disgrace us. I cannot conceal the facts. When fate made me a widow, I was not a mother."

°°°°The Colonel with a wave of his hand bid his wife be silent, and for a mile and a half they sat without speaking a single word. Chabert could fancy he saw the two little ones before him.

°°°°"Rosine."

°°°°"Monsieur?"

°°°°"The dead are very wrong to come to life again."

°°°°"Oh, monsieur, no, no! Do not think me ungrateful. Only, you find me a lover, a mother, while you left me merely a wife. Though it is no longer in my power to love, I know how much I owe you, and I can still offer you all the affection of a daughter."

°°°°"Rosine," said the old man in a softened tone, "I no longer feel any resentment against you. We will forget anything," he added, with one of those smiles which always reflect a noble soul; "I have not so little delicacy as to demand the mockery of love from a wife who no longer loves me."

°°°°The Countess gave him a flashing look full of such deep gratitude that poor Chabert would have been glad to sink again into his grave at Eylau. Some men have a soul strong enough for such self-devotion, of which the whole reward consists in the assurance that they have made the person they love happy.

°°°°"My dear friend, we will talk all this over later when our hearts have rested," said the Countess.

°°°°The conversation turned to other subjects, for it was impossible to dwell very long on this one. Though the couple came back again and again to their singular position, either by some allusion or of serious purpose, they had a delightful drive, recalling the events of their former life together and the times of the Empire. The Countess knew how to lend peculiar charm to her reminiscences, and gave the conversation the tinge of melancholy that was needed to keep it serious. She revived his love without awakening his desires, and allowed her first husband to discern the mental wealth she had acquired while trying to accustom him to moderate his pleasure to that which a father may feel in the society of a favorite daughter.

°°°°The Colonel had known the Countess of the Empire; he found her a Countess of the Restoration.

°°°°At last, by a cross-road, they arrived at the entrance to a large park lying in the little valley which divides the heights of Margency from the pretty village of Groslay. The Countess had there a delightful house, where the Colonel on arriving found everything in readiness for his stay there, as well as for his wife's. Misfortune is a kind of talisman whose virtue consists in its power to confirm our original nature; in some men it increases their distrust and malignancy, just as it improves the goodness of those who have a kind heart.

°°°°Sorrow had made the Colonel even more helpful and good than he had always been, and he could understand some secrets of womanly distress which are unrevealed to most men. Nevertheless, in spite of his loyal trustfulness, he could not help saying to his wife:

°°°°"Then you felt quite sure you would bring me here?"

°°°°"Yes," replied she, "if I found Colonel Chabert in Derville's client."

°°°°The appearance of truth she contrived to give to this answer dissipated the slight suspicions which the Colonel was ashamed to have felt. For three days the Countess was quite charming to her first husband. By tender attentions and unfailing sweetness she seemed anxious to wipe out the memory of the sufferings he had endured, and to earn forgiveness for the woes which, as she confessed, she had innocently caused him. She delighted in displaying for him the charms she knew he took pleasure in, while at the same time she assumed a kind of melancholy; for men are more especially accessible to certain ways, certain graces of the heart or of the mind which they cannot resist. She aimed at interesting him in her position, and appealing to his feelings so far as to take possession of his mind and control him despotically.

°°°°Ready for anything to attain her ends, she did not yet know what she was to do with this man; but at any rate she meant to annihilate him socially. On the evening of the third day she felt that in spite of her efforts she could not conceal her uneasiness as to the results of her manoeuvres. To give herself a minute's reprieve she went up to her room, sat down before her writing-table, and laid aside the mask of composure which she wore in Chabert's presence, like an actress who, returning to her dressing-room after a fatiguing fifth act, drops half dead, leaving with the audience an image of herself which she no longer resembles. She proceeded to finish a letter she had begun to Delbecq, whom she desired to go in her name and demand of Derville the deeds relating to Colonel Chabert, to copy them, and to come to her at once to Groslay. She had hardly finished when she heard the Colonel's step in the passage; uneasy at her absence, he had come to look for her.

°°°°"Alas!" she exclaimed, "I wish I were dead! My position is intolerable . . ."

°°°°"Why, what is the matter?" asked the good man.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing!" she replied.

°°°°She rose, left the Colonel, and went down to speak privately to her maid, whom she sent off to Paris, impressing on her that she was herself to deliver to Delbecq the letter just written, and to bring it back to the writer as soon as he had read it. Then the Countess went out to sit on a bench sufficiently in sight for the Colonel to join her as soon as he might choose. The Colonel, who was looking for her, hastened up and sat down by her.

°°°°"Rosine," said he, "what is the matter with you?"

°°°°She did not answer.

°°°°It was one of those glorious, calm evenings in the month of June, whose secret harmonies infuse such sweetness into the sunset. The air was clear, the stillness perfect, so that far away in the park they could hear the voices of some children, which added a kind of melody to the sublimity of the scene.

°°°°"You do not answer me?" the Colonel said to his wife.

°°°°"My husband----" said the Countess, who broke off, started a little, and with a blush stopped to ask him, "What am I to say when I speak of M. Ferraud?"

°°°°"Call him your husband, my poor child," replied the Colonel, in a kind voice. "Is he not the father of your children?"

°°°°"Well, then," she said, "if he should ask what I came here for, if he finds out that I came here, alone, with a stranger, what am I to say to him? Listen, monsieur," she went on, assuming a dignified attitude, "decide my fate, I am resigned to anything--"

°°°°"My dear," said the Colonel, taking possession of his wife's hands, "I have made up my mind to sacrifice myself entirely for your happiness--"

°°°°"That is impossible!" she exclaimed, with a sudden spasmodic movement. "Remember that you would have to renounce your identity, and in an authenticated form."

°°°°"What?" said the Colonel. "Is not my word enough for you?"

°°°°The word "authenticated" fell on the old man's heart, and roused involuntary distrust. He looked at his wife in a way that made her color, she cast down her eyes, and he feared that he might find himself compelled to despise her. The Countess was afraid lest she had scared the shy modesty, the stern honesty, of a man whose generous temper and primitive virtues were known to her. Though these feelings had brought the clouds to her brow, they immediately recovered their harmony. This was the way of it. A child's cry was heard in the distance.

°°°°"Jules, leave your sister in peace," the Countess called out.

°°°°"What, are your children here?" said Chabert.

°°°°"Yes, but I told them not to trouble you."

°°°°The old soldier understood the delicacy, the womanly tact of so gracious a precaution, and took the Countess' hand to kiss it.

°°°°"But let them come," said he.

°°°°The little girl ran up to complain of her brother.

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"Mamma!"

°°°°"It was Jules--"

°°°°"It was her--"

°°°°Their little hands were held out to their mother, and the two childish voices mingled; it was an unexpected and charming picture.

°°°°"Poor little things!" cried the Countess, no longer restraining her tears, "I shall have to leave them. To whom will the law assign them? A mother's heart cannot be divided; I want them, I want them."

°°°°"Are you making mamma cry?" said Jules, looking fiercely at the Colonel.

°°°°"Silence, Jules!" said the mother in a decided tone.

°°°°The two children stood speechless, examining their mother and the stranger with a curiosity which it is impossible to express in words.

°°°°"Oh yes!" she cried. "If I am separated from the Count, only leave me my children, and I will submit to anything . . ."

°°°°This was the decisive speech which gained all that she had hoped from it.

°°°°"Yes," exclaimed the Colonel, as if he were ending a sentence already begun in his mind, "I must return underground again. I had told myself so already."

°°°°"Can I accept such a sacrifice?" replied his wife. "If some men have died to save a mistress' honor, they gave their life but once. But in this case you would be giving your life every day. No, no. It is impossible. If it were only your life, it would be nothing; but to sign a declaration that you are not Colonel Chabert, to acknowledge yourself an imposter, to sacrifice your honor, and live a lie every hour of the day! Human devotion cannot go so far. Only think!--No. But for my poor children I would have fled with you by this time to the other end of the world."

°°°°"But," said Chabert, "cannot I live here in your little lodge as one of your relations? I am as worn out as a cracked cannon; I want nothing but a little tobacco and the /Constitutionnel/."

°°°°The Countess melted into tears. There was a contest of generosity between the Comtesse Ferraud and Colonel Chabert, and the soldier came out victorious. One evening, seeing this mother with her children, the soldier was bewitched by the touching grace of a family picture in the country, in the shade and the silence; he made a resolution to remain dead, and, frightened no longer at the authentication of a deed, he asked what he could do to secure beyond all risk the happiness of this family.

°°°°"Do exactly as you like," said the Countess. "I declare to you that I will have nothing to do with this affair. I ought not."

°°°°Delbecq had arrived some days before, and in obedience to the Countess' verbal instructions, the intendant had succeeded in gaining the old soldier's confidence. So on the following morning Colonel Chabert went with the erewhile attorney to Saint-Leu-Taverny, where Delbecq had caused the notary to draw up an affidavit in such terms that, after hearing it read, the Colonel started up and walked out of the office.

°°°°"Turf and thunder! What a fool you must think me! Why, I should make myself out a swindler!" he exclaimed.

°°°°"Indeed, monsieur," said Delbecq, "I should advise you not to sign in haste. In your place I would get at least thirty thousand francs a year out of the bargain. Madame would pay them."

°°°°After annihilating this scoundrel /emeritus/ by the lightning look of an honest man insulted, the Colonel rushed off, carried away by a thousand contrary emotions. He was suspicious, indignant, and calm again by turns.

°°°°Finally he made his way back into the park of Groslay by a gap in a fence, and slowly walked on to sit down and rest, and meditate at his ease, in a little room under a gazebo, from which the road to Saint- Leu could be seen. The path being strewn with the yellowish sand which is used instead of river-gravel, the Countess, who was sitting in the upper room of this little summer-house, did not hear the Colonel's approach, for she was too much preoccupied with the success of her business to pay the smallest attention to the slight noise made by her husband. Nor did the old man notice that his wife was in the room over him.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur Delbecq, has he signed?" the Countess asked her secretary, whom she saw alone on the road beyond the hedge of a haha.

°°°°"No, madame. I do not even know what has become of our man. The old horse reared."

°°°°"Then we shall be obliged to put him into Charenton," said she, "since we have got him."

°°°°The Colonel, who recovered the elasticity of youth to leap the haha, in the twinkling of an eye was standing in front of Delbecq, on whom he bestowed the two finest slaps that ever a scoundrel's cheeks received.

°°°°"And you may add that old horses can kick!" said he.

°°°°His rage spent, the Colonel no longer felt vigorous enough to leap the ditch. He had seen the truth in all its nakedness. The Countess' speech and Delbecq's reply had revealed the conspiracy of which he was to be the victim. The care taken of him was but a bait to entrap him in a snare. That speech was like a drop of subtle poison, bringing on in the old soldier a return of all his sufferings, physical and moral. He came back to the summer-house through the park gate, walking slowly like a broken man.

°°°°Then for him there was to be neither peace nor truce. From this moment he must begin the odious warfare with this woman of which Derville had spoken, enter on a life of litigation, feed on gall, drink every morning of the cup of bitterness. And then--fearful thought!--where was he to find the money needful to pay the cost of the first proceedings? He felt such disgust of life, that if there had been any water at hand he would have thrown himself into it; that if he had had a pistol, he would have blown out his brains. Then he relapsed into the indecision of mind which, since his conversation with Derville at the dairyman's had changed his character.

°°°°At last, having reached the kiosque, he went up to the gazebo, where little rose-windows afforded a view over each lovely landscape of the valley, and where he found his wife seated on a chair. The Countess was gazing at the distance, and preserved a calm countenance, showing that impenetrable face which women can assume when resolved to do their worst. She wiped her eyes as if she had been weeping, and played absently with the pink ribbons of her sash. Nevertheless, in spite of her apparent assurance, she could not help shuddering slightly when she saw before her her venerable benefactor, standing with folded arms, his face pale, his brow stern.

°°°°"Madame," he said, after gazing at her fixedly for a moment and compelling her to blush, "Madame, I do not curse you--I scorn you. I can now thank the chance that has divided us. I do not feel even a desire for revenge; I no longer love you. I want nothing from you. Live in peace on the strength of my word; it is worth more than the scrawl of all the notaries in Paris. I will never assert my claim to the name I perhaps have made illustrious. I am henceforth but a poor devil named Hyacinthe, who asks no more than his share of the sunshine.--Farewell!"

°°°°The Countess threw herself at his feet; she would have detained him by taking his hands, but he pushed her away with disgust, saying:

°°°°"Do not touch me!"

°°°°The Countess' expression when she heard her husband's retreating steps is quite indescribable. Then, with the deep perspicacity given only by utter villainy, or by fierce worldly selfishness, she knew that she might live in peace on the word and the contempt of this loyal veteran.

°°°°Chabert, in fact, disappeared. The dairyman failed in business, and became a hackney-cab driver. The Colonel, perhaps, took up some similar industry for a time. Perhaps, like a stone flung into a chasm, he went falling from ledge to ledge, to be lost in the mire of rags that seethes through the streets of Paris.

°°°°Six months after this event, Derville, hearing no more of Colonel Chabert or the Comtesse Ferraud, supposed that they had no doubt come to a compromise, which the Countess, out of revenge, had had arranged by some other lawyer. So one morning he added up the sums he had advanced to the said Chabert with the costs, and begged the Comtesse Ferraud to claim from M. le Comte Chabert the amount of the bill, assuming that she would know where to find her first husband.

°°°°The very next day Comte Ferraud's man of business, lately appointed President of the County Court in a town of some importance, wrote this distressing note to Derville:

°°°°"MONSIEUR,--

°°°°"Madame la Comtesse Ferraud desires me to inform you that your   client took complete advantage of your confidence, and that the   individual calling himself Comte Chabert has acknowledged that he   came forward under false pretences. "Yours, etc.,                DELBECQ."

°°°°"One comes across people who are, on my honor, too stupid by half," cried Derville. "They don't deserve to be Christians! Be humane, generous, philanthropical, and a lawyer, and you are bound to be cheated! There is a piece of business that will cost me two thousand- franc notes!"

°°°°Some time after receiving this letter, Derville went to the Palais de Justice in search of a pleader to whom he wished to speak, and who was employed in the Police Court. As chance would have it, Derville went into Court Number 6 at the moment when the Presiding Magistrate was sentencing one Hyacinthe to two months' imprisonment as a vagabond, and subsequently to be taken to the Mendicity House of Detention, a sentence which, by magistrates' law, is equivalent to perpetual imprisonment. On hearing the name of Hyacinthe, Derville looked at the deliquent, sitting between two /gendarmes/ on the bench for the accused, and recognized in the condemned man his false Colonel Chabert.

°°°°The old soldier was placid, motionless, almost absentminded. In spite of his rags, in spite of the misery stamped on his countenance, it gave evidence of noble pride. His eye had a stoical expression which no magistrate ought to have misunderstood; but as soon as a man has fallen into the hands of justice, he is no more than a moral entity, a matter of law or of fact, just as to statists he has become a zero.

°°°°When the veteran was taken back to the lock-up, to be removed later with the batch of vagabonds at that moment at the bar, Derville availed himself of the privilege accorded to lawyers of going wherever they please in the Courts, and followed him to the lock-up, where he stood scrutinizing him for some minutes, as well as the curious crew of beggars among whom he found himself. The passage to the lock-up at that moment afforded one of those spectacles which, unfortunately, neither legislators, nor philanthropists, nor painters, nor writers come to study. Like all the laboratories of the law, this ante-room is a dark and malodorous place; along the walls runs a wooden seat, blackened by the constant presence there of the wretches who come to this meeting-place of every form of social squalor, where not one of them is missing.

°°°°A poet might say that the day was ashamed to light up this dreadful sewer through which so much misery flows! There is not a spot on that plank where some crime has not sat, in embryo or matured; not a corner where a man has never stood who, driven to despair by the blight which justice has set upon him after his first fault, has not there begun a career, at the end of which looms the guillotine or the pistol-snap of the suicide. All who fall on the pavement of Paris rebound against these yellow-gray walls, on which a philanthropist who was not a speculator might read a justification of the numerous suicides complained of by hypocritical writers who are incapable of taking a step to prevent them--for that justification is written in that ante- room, like a preface to the dramas of the Morgue, or to those enacted on the Place de la Greve.

°°°°At this moment Colonel Chabert was sitting among these men--men with coarse faces, clothed in the horrible livery of misery, and silent at intervals, or talking in a low tone, for three gendarmes on duty paced to and fro, their sabres clattering on the floor.

°°°°"Do you recognize me?" said Derville to the old man, standing in front of him.

°°°°"Yes, sir," said Chabert, rising.

°°°°"If you are an honest man," Derville went on in an undertone, "how could you remain in my debt?"

°°°°The old soldier blushed as a young girl might when accused by her mother of a clandestine love affair.

°°°°"What! Madame Ferraud has not paid you?" cried he in a loud voice.

°°°°"Paid me?" said Derville. "She wrote to me that you were a swindler."

°°°°The Colonel cast up his eyes in a sublime impulse of horror and imprecation, as if to call heaven to witness to this fresh subterfuge.

°°°°"Monsieur," said he, in a voice that was calm by sheer huskiness, "get the gendarmes to allow me to go into the lock-up, and I will sign an order which will certainly be honored."

°°°°At a word from Derville to the sergeant he was allowed to take his client into the room, where Hyacinthe wrote a few lines, and addressed them to the Comtesse Ferraud.

°°°°"Send her that," said the soldier, "and you will be paid your costs and the money you advanced. Believe me, monsieur, if I have not shown you the gratitude I owe you for your kind offices, it is not the less there," and he laid his hand on his heart. "Yes, it is there, deep and sincere. But what can the unfortunate do? They live, and that is all."

°°°°"What!" said Derville. "Did you not stipulate for an allowance?"

°°°°"Do not speak of it!" cried the old man. "You cannot conceive how deep my contempt is for the outside life to which most men cling. I was suddenly attacked by a sickness--disgust of humanity. When I think that Napoleon is at Saint-Helena, everything on earth is a matter of indifference to me. I can no longer be a soldier; that is my only real grief. After all," he added with a gesture of childish simplicity, "it is better to enjoy luxury of feeling than of dress. For my part, I fear nobody's contempt."

°°°°And the Colonel sat down on his bench again.

°°°°Derville went away. On returning to his office, he sent Godeschal, at that time his second clerk, to the Comtesse Ferraud, who, on reading the note, at once paid the sum due to Comte Chabert's lawyer.

°°°°In 1840, towards the end of June, Godeschal, now himself an attorney, went to Ris with Derville, to whom he had succeeded. When they reached the avenue leading from the highroad to Bicetre, they saw, under one of the elm-trees by the wayside, one of those old, broken, and hoary paupers who have earned the Marshal's staff among beggars by living on at Bicetre as poor women live on at la Salpetriere. This man, one of the two thousand poor creatures who are lodged in the infirmary for the aged, was seated on a corner-stone, and seemed to have concentrated all his intelligence on an operation well known to these pensioners, which consists in drying their snuffy pocket-handkerchiefs in the sun, perhaps to save washing them. This old man had an attractive countenance. He was dressed in a reddish cloth wrapper-coat which the work-house affords to its inmates, a sort of horrible livery.

°°°°"I say, Derville," said Godeschal to his traveling companion, "look at that old fellow. Isn't he like those grotesque carved figures we get from Germany? And it is alive, perhaps it is happy."

°°°°Derville looked at the poor man through his eyeglass, and with a little exclamation of surprise he said:

°°°°"That old man, my dear fellow, is a whole poem, or, as the romantics say, a drama.--Did you ever meet the Comtesse Ferraud?"

°°°°"Yes; she is a clever woman, and agreeable; but rather too pious," said Godeschal.

°°°°"That old Bicetre pauper is her lawful husband, Comte Chabert, the old Colonel. She has had him sent here, no doubt. And if he is in this workhouse instead of living in a mansion, it is solely because he reminded the pretty Countess that he had taken her, like a hackney cab, on the street. I can remember now the tiger's glare she shot at him at that moment."

°°°°This opening having excited Godeschal's curiosity, Derville related the story here told.

°°°°Two days later, on Monday morning, as they returned to Paris, the two friends looked again at Bicetre, and Derville proposed that they should call on Colonel Chabert. Halfway up the avenue they found the old man sitting on the trunk of a felled tree. With his stick in one hand, he was amusing himself with drawing lines in the sand. On looking at him narrowly, they perceived that he had been breakfasting elsewhere than at Bicetre.

°°°°"Good-morning, Colonel Chabert," said Derville.

°°°°"Not Chabert! not Chabert! My name is Hyacinthe," replied the veteran. "I am no longer a man, I am No. 164, Room 7," he added, looking at Derville with timid anxiety, the fear of an old man and a child.--"Are you going to visit the man condemned to death?" he asked after a moment's silence. "He is not married! He is very lucky!"

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Godeschal. "Would you like something to buy snuff?"

°°°°With all the simplicity of a street Arab, the Colonel eagerly held out his hand to the two strangers, who each gave him a twenty-franc piece; he thanked them with a puzzled look, saying:

°°°°"Brave troopers!"

°°°°He ported arms, pretended to take aim at them, and shouted with a smile:

°°°°"Fire! both arms! /Vive Napoleon/!" And he drew a flourish in the air with his stick.

°°°°"The nature of his wound has no doubt made him childish," said Derville.

°°°°"Childish! he?" said another old pauper, who was looking on. "Why, there are days when you had better not tread on his corns. He is an old rogue, full of philosophy and imagination. But to-day, what can you expect! He has had his Monday treat.--He was here, monsieur, so long ago as 1820. At that time a Prussian officer, whose chaise was crawling up the hill of Villejuif, came by on foot. We two were together, Hyacinthe and I, by the roadside. The officer, as he walked, was talking to another, a Russian, or some animal of the same species, and when the Prussian saw the old boy, just to make fun, he said to him, 'Here is an old cavalry man who must have been at Rossbach.'--'I was too young to be there,' said Hyacinthe. 'But I was at Jena.' And the Prussian made off pretty quick, without asking any more questions."

°°°°"What a destiny!" exclaimed Derville. "Taken out of the Foundling Hospital to die in the Infirmary for the Aged, after helping Napoleon between whiles to conquer Egypt and Europe.--Do you know, my dear fellow," Derville went on after a pause, "there are in modern society three men who can never think well of the world--the priest, the doctor, and the man of law? And they wear black robes, perhaps because they are in mourning for every virtue and every illusion. The most hapless of the three is the lawyer. When a man comes in search of the priest, he is prompted by repentance, by remorse, by beliefs which make him interesting, which elevate him and comfort the soul of the intercessor whose task will bring him a sort of gladness; he purifies, repairs and reconciles. But we lawyers, we see the same evil feelings repeated again and again, nothing can correct them; our offices are sewers which can never be cleansed.

°°°°"How many things have I learned in the exercise of my profession! I have seen a father die in a garret, deserted by two daughters, to whom he had given forty thousand francs a year! I have known wills burned; I have seen mothers robbing their children, wives killing their husbands, and working on the love they could inspire to make the men idiotic or mad, that they might live in peace with a lover. I have seen women teaching the child of their marriage such tastes as must bring it to the grave in order to benefit the child of an illicit affection. I could not tell you all I have seen, for I have seen crimes against which justice is impotent. In short, all the horrors that romancers suppose they have invented are still below the truth. You will know something of these pretty things; as for me, I am going to live in the country with my wife. I have a horror of Paris."

°°°°"I have seen plenty of them already in Desroches' office," replied Godeschal.

°°°°PARIS, February-March 1832.

°°°°End



°°°°Father Goriot

°°°°by Honore de Balzac

°°°°Translated by Ellen Marriage

°°°°To the great and illustrious Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, a token of admiration for his works and genius. DE BALZAC.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans) is an elderly person, who for the past forty years has kept a lodging-house in the Rue Nueve- Sainte-Genevieve, in the district that lies between the Latin Quarter and the Faubourg Saint-Marcel. Her house (known in the neighborhood as the Maison Vauquer) receives men and women, old and young, and no word has ever been breathed against her respectable establishment; but, at the same time, it must be said that as a matter of fact no young woman has been under her roof for thirty years, and that if a young man stays there for any length of time it is a sure sign that his allowance must be of the slenderest. In 1819, however, the time when this drama opens, there was an almost penniless young girl among Mme. Vauquer's boarders.

°°°°That word drama has been somewhat discredited of late; it has been overworked and twisted to strange uses in these days of dolorous literature; but it must do service again here, not because this story is dramatic in the restricted sense of the word, but because some tears may perhaps be shed intra et extra muros before it is over.

°°°°Will any one without the walls of Paris understand it? It is open to doubt. The only audience who could appreciate the results of close observation, the careful reproduction of minute detail and local color, are dwellers between the heights of Montrouge and Montmartre, in a vale of crumbling stucco watered by streams of black mud, a vale of sorrows which are real and joys too often hollow; but this audience is so accustomed to terrible sensations, that only some unimaginable and well-neigh impossible woe could produce any lasting impression there. Now and again there are tragedies so awful and so grand by reason of the complication of virtues and vices that bring them about, that egotism and selfishness are forced to pause and are moved to pity; but the impression that they receive is like a luscious fruit, soon consumed. Civilization, like the car of Juggernaut, is scarcely stayed perceptibly in its progress by a heart less easy to break than the others that lie in its course; this also is broken, and Civilization continues on her course triumphant. And you, too, will do the like; you who with this book in your white hand will sink back among the cushions of your armchair, and say to yourself, "Perhaps this may amuse me." You will read the story of Father Goriot's secret woes, and, dining thereafter with an unspoiled appetite, will lay the blame of your insensibility upon the writer, and accuse him of exaggeration, of writing romances. Ah! once for all, this drama is neither a fiction nor a romance! ALL IS TRUE,--so true, that every one can discern the elements of the tragedy in his own house, perhaps in his own heart.

°°°°The lodging-house is Mme. Vauquer's own property. It is still standing in the lower end of the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, just where the road slopes so sharply down to the Rue de l'Arbalete, that wheeled traffic seldom passes that way, because it is so stony and steep. This position is sufficient to account for the silence prevalent in the streets shut in between the dome of the Pantheon and the dome of the Val-de-Grace, two conspicuous public buildings which give a yellowish tone to the landscape and darken the whole district that lies beneath the shadow of their leaden- hued cupolas.

°°°°In that district the pavements are clean and dry, there is neither mud nor water in the gutters, grass grows in the chinks of the walls. The most heedless passer-by feels the depressing influences of a place where the sound of wheels creates a sensation; there is a grim look about the houses, a suggestion of a jail about those high garden walls. A Parisian straying into a suburb apparently composed of lodging-houses and public institutions would see poverty and dullness, old age lying down to die, and joyous youth condemned to drudgery. It is the ugliest quarter of Paris, and, it may be added, the least known. But, before all things, the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve is like a bronze frame for a picture for which the mind cannot be too well prepared by the contemplation of sad hues and sober images. Even so, step by step the daylight decreases, and the cicerone's droning voice grows hollower as the traveler descends into the Catacombs. The comparison holds good! Who shall say which is more ghastly, the sight of the bleached skulls or of dried-up human hearts?

°°°°The front of the lodging-house is at right angles to the road, and looks out upon a little garden, so that you see the side of the house in section, as it were, from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. Beneath the wall of the house front there lies a channel, a fathom wide, paved with cobble-stones, and beside it runs a graveled walk bordered by geraniums and oleanders and pomegranates set in great blue and white glazed earthenware pots. Access into the graveled walk is afforded by a door, above which the words MAISON VAUQUER may be read, and beneath, in rather smaller letters, "Lodgings for both sexes, etc."

°°°°During the day a glimpse into the garden is easily obtained through a wicket to which a bell is attached. On the opposite wall, at the further end of the graveled walk, a green marble arch was painted once upon a time by a local artist, and in this semblance of a shrine a statue representing Cupid is installed; a Parisian Cupid, so blistered and disfigured that he looks like a candidate for one of the adjacent hospitals, and might suggest an allegory to lovers of symbolism. The half-obliterated inscription on the pedestal beneath determines the date of this work of art, for it bears witness to the widespread enthusiasm felt for Voltaire on his return to Paris in 1777:

°°°°"Whoe'er thou art, thy master see;   He is, or was, or ought to be."

°°°°At night the wicket gate is replaced by a solid door. The little garden is no wider than the front of the house; it is shut in between the wall of the street and the partition wall of the neighboring house. A mantle of ivy conceals the bricks and attracts the eyes of passers-by to an effect which is picturesque in Paris, for each of the walls is covered with trellised vines that yield a scanty dusty crop of fruit, and furnish besides a subject of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her lodgers; every year the widow trembles for her vintage.

°°°°A straight path beneath the walls on either side of the garden leads to a clump of lime-trees at the further end of it; LINE- trees, as Mme. Vauquer persists in calling them, in spite of the fact that she was a de Conflans, and regardless of repeated corrections from her lodgers.

°°°°The central space between the walls is filled with artichokes and rows of pyramid fruit-trees, and surrounded by a border of lettuce, pot-herbs, and parsley. Under the lime-trees there are a few green-painted garden seats and a wooden table, and hither, during the dog-days, such of the lodgers as are rich enough to indulge in a cup of coffee come to take their pleasure, though it is hot enough to roast eggs even in the shade.

°°°°The house itself is three stories high, without counting the attics under the roof. It is built of rough stone, and covered with the yellowish stucco that gives a mean appearance to almost every house in Paris. There are five windows in each story in the front of the house; all the blinds visible through the small square panes are drawn up awry, so that the lines are all at cross purposes. At the side of the house there are but two windows on each floor, and the lowest of all are adorned with a heavy iron grating.

°°°°Behind the house a yard extends for some twenty feet, a space inhabited by a happy family of pigs, poultry, and rabbits; the wood-shed is situated on the further side, and on the wall between the wood-shed and the kitchen window hangs the meat-safe, just above the place where the sink discharges its greasy streams. The cook sweeps all the refuse out through a little door into the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve, and frequently cleanses the yard with copious supplies of water, under pain of pestilence.

°°°°The house might have been built on purpose for its present uses. Access is given by a French window to the first room on the ground floor, a sitting-room which looks out upon the street through the two barred windows already mentioned. Another door opens out of it into the dining-room, which is separated from the kitchen by the well of the staircase, the steps being constructed partly of wood, partly of tiles, which are colored and beeswaxed. Nothing can be more depressing than the sight of that sitting- room. The furniture is covered with horse hair woven in alternate dull and glossy stripes. There is a round table in the middle, with a purplish-red marble top, on which there stands, by way of ornament, the inevitable white china tea-service, covered with a half-effaced gilt network. The floor is sufficiently uneven, the wainscot rises to elbow height, and the rest of the wall space is decorated with a varnished paper, on which the principal scenes from Telemaque are depicted, the various classical personages being colored. The subject between the two windows is the banquet given by Calypso to the son of Ulysses, displayed thereon for the admiration of the boarders, and has furnished jokes these forty years to the young men who show themselves superior to their position by making fun of the dinners to which poverty condemns them. The hearth is always so clean and neat that it is evident that a fire is only kindled there on great occasions; the stone chimney-piece is adorned by a couple of vases filled with faded artificial flowers imprisoned under glass shades, on either side of a bluish marble clock in the very worst taste.

°°°°The first room exhales an odor for which there is no name in the language, and which should be called the odeur de pension. The damp atmosphere sends a chill through you as you breathe it; it has a stuffy, musty, and rancid quality; it permeates your clothing; after-dinner scents seem to be mingled in it with smells from the kitchen and scullery and the reek of a hospital. It might be possible to describe it if some one should discover a process by which to distil from the atmosphere all the nauseating elements with which it is charged by the catarrhal exhalations of every individual lodger, young or old. Yet, in spite of these stale horrors, the sitting-room is as charming and as delicately perfumed as a boudoir, when compared with the adjoining dining- room.

°°°°The paneled walls of that apartment were once painted some color, now a matter of conjecture, for the surface is incrusted with accumulated layers of grimy deposit, which cover it with fantastic outlines. A collection of dim-ribbed glass decanters, metal discs with a satin sheen on them, and piles of blue-edged earthenware plates of Touraine ware cover the sticky surfaces of the sideboards that line the room. In a corner stands a box containing a set of numbered pigeon-holes, in which the lodgers' table napkins, more or less soiled and stained with wine, are kept. Here you see that indestructible furniture never met with elsewhere, which finds its way into lodging-houses much as the wrecks of our civilization drift into hospitals for incurables. You expect in such places as these to find the weather-house whence a Capuchin issues on wet days; you look to find the execrable engravings which spoil your appetite, framed every one in a black varnished frame, with a gilt beading round it; you know the sort of tortoise-shell clock-case, inlaid with brass; the green stove, the Argand lamps, covered with oil and dust, have met your eyes before. The oilcloth which covers the long table is so greasy that a waggish externe will write his name on the surface, using his thumb-nail as a style. The chairs are broken-down invalids; the wretched little hempen mats slip away from under your feet without slipping away for good; and finally, the foot-warmers are miserable wrecks, hingeless, charred, broken away about the holes. It would be impossible to give an idea of the old, rotten, shaky, cranky, worm-eaten, halt, maimed, one- eyed, rickety, and ramshackle condition of the furniture without an exhaustive description, which would delay the progress of the story to an extent that impatient people would not pardon. The red tiles of the floor are full of depressions brought about by scouring and periodical renewings of color. In short, there is no illusory grace left to the poverty that reigns here; it is dire, parsimonious, concentrated, threadbare poverty; as yet it has not sunk into the mire, it is only splashed by it, and though not in rags as yet, its clothing is ready to drop to pieces.

°°°°This apartment is in all its glory at seven o'clock in the morning, when Mme. Vauquer's cat appears, announcing the near approach of his mistress, and jumps upon the sideboards to sniff at the milk in the bowls, each protected by a plate, while he purrs his morning greeting to the world. A moment later the widow shows her face; she is tricked out in a net cap attached to a false front set on awry, and shuffles into the room in her slipshod fashion. She is an oldish woman, with a bloated countenance, and a nose like a parrot's beak set in the middle of it; her fat little hands (she is as sleek as a church rat) and her shapeless, slouching figure are in keeping with the room that reeks of misfortune, where hope is reduced to speculate for the meanest stakes. Mme. Vauquer alone can breathe that tainted air without being disheartened by it. Her face is as fresh as a frosty morning in autumn; there are wrinkles about the eyes that vary in their expression from the set smile of a ballet-dancer to the dark, suspicious scowl of a discounter of bills; in short, she is at once the embodiment and interpretation of her lodging- house, as surely as her lodging-house implies the existence of its mistress. You can no more imagine the one without the other, than you can think of a jail without a turnkey. The unwholesome corpulence of the little woman is produced by the life she leads, just as typhus fever is bred in the tainted air of a hospital. The very knitted woolen petticoat that she wears beneath a skirt made of an old gown, with the wadding protruding through the rents in the material, is a sort of epitome of the sitting-room, the dining-room, and the little garden; it discovers the cook, it foreshadows the lodgers--the picture of the house is completed by the portrait of its mistress.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer at the age of fifty is like all women who "have seen a deal of trouble." She has the glassy eyes and innocent air of a trafficker in flesh and blood, who will wax virtuously indignant to obtain a higher price for her services, but who is quite ready to betray a Georges or a Pichegru, if a Georges or a Pichegru were in hiding and still to be betrayed, or for any other expedient that may alleviate her lot. Still, "she is a good woman at bottom," said the lodgers who believed that the widow was wholly dependent upon the money that they paid her, and sympathized when they heard her cough and groan like one of themselves.

°°°°What had M. Vauquer been? The lady was never very explicit on this head. How had she lost her money? "Through trouble," was her answer. He had treated her badly, had left her nothing but her eyes to cry over his cruelty, the house she lived in, and the privilege of pitying nobody, because, so she was wont to say, she herself had been through every possible misfortune.

°°°°Sylvie, the stout cook, hearing her mistress' shuffling footsteps, hastened to serve the lodgers' breakfasts. Beside those who lived in the house, Mme. Vauquer took boarders who came for their meals; but these externes usually only came to dinner, for which they paid thirty francs a month.

°°°°At the time when this story begins, the lodging-house contained seven inmates. The best rooms in the house were on the first story, Mme. Vauquer herself occupying the least important, while the rest were let to a Mme. Couture, the widow of a commissary- general in the service of the Republic. With her lived Victorine Taillefer, a schoolgirl, to whom she filled the place of mother. These two ladies paid eighteen hundred francs a year.

°°°°The two sets of rooms on the second floor were respectively occupied by an old man named Poiret and a man of forty or thereabouts, the wearer of a black wig and dyed whiskers, who gave out that he was a retired merchant, and was addressed as M. Vautrin. Two of the four rooms on the third floor were also let-- one to an elderly spinster, a Mlle. Michonneau, and the other to a retired manufacturer of vermicelli, Italian paste and starch, who allowed the others to address him as "Father Goriot." The remaining rooms were allotted to various birds of passage, to impecunious students, who like "Father Goriot" and Mlle. Michonneau, could only muster forty-five francs a month to pay for their board and lodging. Mme. Vauquer had little desire for lodgers of this sort; they ate too much bread, and she only took them in default of better.

°°°°At that time one of the rooms was tenanted by a law student, a young man from the neighborhood of Angouleme, one of a large family who pinched and starved themselves to spare twelve hundred francs a year for him. Misfortune had accustomed Eugene de Rastignac, for that was his name, to work. He belonged to the number of young men who know as children that their parents' hopes are centered on them, and deliberately prepare themselves for a great career, subordinating their studies from the first to this end, carefully watching the indications of the course of events, calculating the probable turn that affairs will take, that they may be the first to profit by them. But for his observant curiosity, and the skill with which he managed to introduce himself into the salons of Paris, this story would not have been colored by the tones of truth which it certainly owes to him, for they are entirely due to his penetrating sagacity and desire to fathom the mysteries of an appalling condition of things, which was concealed as carefully by the victim as by those who had brought it to pass.

°°°°Above the third story there was a garret where the linen was hung to dry, and a couple of attics. Christophe, the man-of-all-work, slept in one, and Sylvie, the stout cook, in the other. Beside the seven inmates thus enumerated, taking one year with another, some eight law or medical students dined in the house, as well as two or three regular comers who lived in the neighborhood. There were usually eighteen people at dinner, and there was room, if need be, for twenty at Mme. Vauquer's table; at breakfast, however, only the seven lodgers appeared. It was almost like a family party. Every one came down in dressing-gown and slippers, and the conversation usually turned on anything that had happened the evening before; comments on the dress or appearance of the dinner contingent were exchanged in friendly confidence.

°°°°These seven lodgers were Mme. Vauquer's spoiled children. Among them she distributed, with astronomical precision, the exact proportion of respect and attention due to the varying amounts they paid for their board. One single consideration influenced all these human beings thrown together by chance. The two second- floor lodgers only paid seventy-two francs a month. Such prices as these are confined to the Faubourg Saint-Marcel and the district between La Bourbe and the Salpetriere; and, as might be expected, poverty, more or less apparent, weighed upon them all, Mme. Couture being the sole exception to the rule.

°°°°The dreary surroundings were reflected in the costumes of the inmates of the house; all were alike threadbare. The color of the men's coats were problematical; such shoes, in more fashionable quarters, are only to be seen lying in the gutter; the cuffs and collars were worn and frayed at the edges; every limp article of clothing looked like the ghost of its former self. The women's dresses were faded, old-fashioned, dyed and re-dyed; they wore gloves that were glazed with hard wear, much-mended lace, dingy ruffles, crumpled muslin fichus. So much for their clothing; but, for the most part, their frames were solid enough; their constitutions had weathered the storms of life; their cold, hard faces were worn like coins that have been withdrawn from circulation, but there were greedy teeth behind the withered lips. Dramas brought to a close or still in progress are foreshadowed by the sight of such actors as these, not the dramas that are played before the footlights and against a background of painted canvas, but dumb dramas of life, frost-bound dramas that sere hearts like fire, dramas that do not end with the actors' lives.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau, that elderly young lady, screened her weak eyes from the daylight by a soiled green silk shade with a rim of brass, an object fit to scare away the Angel of Pity himself. Her shawl, with its scanty, draggled fringe, might have covered a skeleton, so meagre and angular was the form beneath it. Yet she must have been pretty and shapely once. What corrosive had destroyed the feminine outlines? Was it trouble, or vice, or greed? Had she loved too well? Had she been a second-hand clothes dealer, a frequenter of the backstairs of great houses, or had she been merely a courtesan? Was she expiating the flaunting triumphs of a youth overcrowded with pleasures by an old age in which she was shunned by every passer-by? Her vacant gaze sent a chill through you; her shriveled face seemed like a menace. Her voice was like the shrill, thin note of the grasshopper sounding from the thicket when winter is at hand. She said that she had nursed an old gentleman, ill of catarrh of the bladder, and left to die by his children, who thought that he had nothing left. His bequest to her, a life annuity of a thousand francs, was periodically disputed by his heirs, who mingled slander with their persecutions. In spite of the ravages of conflicting passions, her face retained some traces of its former fairness and fineness of tissue, some vestiges of the physical charms of her youth still survived.

°°°°M. Poiret was a sort of automaton. He might be seen any day sailing like a gray shadow along the walks of the Jardin des Plantes, on his head a shabby cap, a cane with an old yellow ivory handle in the tips of his thin fingers; the outspread skirts of his threadbare overcoat failed to conceal his meagre figure; his breeches hung loosely on his shrunken limbs; the thin, blue-stockinged legs trembled like those of a drunken man; there was a notable breach of continuity between the dingy white waistcoat and crumpled shirt frills and the cravat twisted about a throat like a turkey gobbler's; altogether, his appearance set people wondering whether this outlandish ghost belonged to the audacious race of the sons of Japhet who flutter about on the Boulevard Italien. What devouring kind of toil could have so shriveled him? What devouring passions had darkened that bulbous countenance, which would have seemed outrageous as a caricature? What had he been? Well, perhaps he had been part of the machinery of justice, a clerk in the office to which the executioner sends in his accounts,--so much for providing black veils for parricides, so much for sawdust, so much for pulleys and cord for the knife. Or he might have been a receiver at the door of a public slaughter-house, or a sub-inspector of nuisances. Indeed, the man appeared to have been one of the beasts of burden in our great social mill; one of those Parisian Ratons whom their Bertrands do not even know by sight; a pivot in the obscure machinery that disposes of misery and things unclean; one of those men, in short, at sight of whom we are prompted to remark that, "After all, we cannot do without them."

°°°°Stately Paris ignores the existence of these faces bleached by moral or physical suffering; but, then, Paris is in truth an ocean that no line can plumb. You may survey its surface and describe it; but no matter how numerous and painstaking the toilers in this sea, there will always be lonely and unexplored regions in its depths, caverns unknown, flowers and pearls and monsters of the deep overlooked or forgotten by the divers of literature. The Maison Vauquer is one of these curious monstrosities.

°°°°Two, however, of Mme. Vauquer's boarders formed a striking contrast to the rest. There was a sickly pallor, such as is often seen in anaemic girls, in Mlle. Victorine Taillefer's face; and her unvarying expression of sadness, like her embarrassed manner and pinched look, was in keeping with the general wretchedness of the establishment in the Rue Nueve-Saint-Genevieve, which forms a background to this picture; but her face was young, there was youthfulness in her voice and elasticity in her movements. This young misfortune was not unlike a shrub, newly planted in an uncongenial soil, where its leaves have already begun to wither. The outlines of her figure, revealed by her dress of the simplest and cheapest materials, were also youthful. There was the same kind of charm about her too slender form, her faintly colored face and light-brown hair, that modern poets find in mediaeval statuettes; and a sweet expression, a look of Christian resignation in the dark gray eyes. She was pretty by force of contrast; if she had been happy, she would have been charming. Happiness is the poetry of woman, as the toilette is her tinsel. If the delightful excitement of a ball had made the pale face glow with color; if the delights of a luxurious life had brought the color to the wan cheeks that were slightly hollowed already; if love had put light into the sad eyes, then Victorine might have ranked among the fairest; but she lacked the two things which create woman a second time--pretty dresses and love- letters.

°°°°A book might have been made of her story. Her father was persuaded that he had sufficient reason for declining to acknowledge her, and allowed her a bare six hundred francs a year; he had further taken measures to disinherit his daughter, and had converted all his real estate into personalty, that he might leave it undivided to his son. Victorine's mother had died broken-hearted in Mme. Couture's house; and the latter, who was a near relation, had taken charge of the little orphan. Unluckily, the widow of the commissary-general to the armies of the Republic had nothing in the world but her jointure and her widow's pension, and some day she might be obliged to leave the helpless, inexperienced girl to the mercy of the world. The good soul, therefore, took Victorine to mass every Sunday, and to confession once a fortnight, thinking that, in any case, she would bring up her ward to be devout. She was right; religion offered a solution of the problem of the young girl's future. The poor child loved the father who refused to acknowledge her. Once every year she tried to see him to deliver her mother's message of forgiveness, but every year hitherto she had knocked at that door in vain; her father was inexorable. Her brother, her only means of communication, had not come to see her for four years, and had sent her no assistance; yet she prayed to God to unseal her father's eyes and to soften her brother's heart, and no accusations mingled with her prayers. Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exhausted the vocabulary of abuse, and failed to find words that did justice to the banker's iniquitous conduct; but while they heaped execrations on the millionaire, Victorine's words were as gentle as the moan of the wounded dove, and affection found expression even in the cry drawn from her by pain.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac was a thoroughly southern type; he had a fair complexion, blue eyes, black hair. In his figure, manner, and his whole bearing it was easy to see that he had either come of a noble family, or that, from his earliest childhood, he had been gently bred. If he was careful of his wardrobe, only taking last year's clothes into daily wear, still upon occasion he could issue forth as a young man of fashion. Ordinarily he wore a shabby coat and waistcoat, the limp black cravat, untidily knotted, that students affect, trousers that matched the rest of his costume, and boots that had been resoled.

°°°°Vautrin (the man of forty with the dyed whiskers) marked a transition stage between these two young people and the others. He was the kind of man that calls forth the remark: "He looks a jovial sort!" He had broad shoulders, a well-developed chest, muscular arms, and strong square-fisted hands; the joints of his fingers were covered with tufts of fiery red hair. His face was furrowed by premature wrinkles; there was a certain hardness about it in spite of his bland and insinuating manner. His bass voice was by no means unpleasant, and was in keeping with his boisterous laughter. He was always obliging, always in good spirits; if anything went wrong with one of the locks, he would soon unscrew it, take it to pieces, file it, oil and clean and set it in order, and put it back in its place again; "I am an old hand at it," he used to say. Not only so, he knew all about ships, the sea, France, foreign countries, men, business, law, great houses and prisons,--there was nothing that he did not know. If any one complained rather more than usual, he would offer his services at once. He had several times lent money to Mme. Vauquer, or to the boarders; but, somehow, those whom he obliged felt that they would sooner face death than fail to repay him; a certain resolute look, sometimes seen on his face, inspired fear of him, for all his appearance of easy good-nature. In the way he spat there was an imperturbable coolness which seemed to indicate that this was a man who would not stick at a crime to extricate himself from a false position. His eyes, like those of a pitiless judge, seemed to go to the very bottom of all questions, to read all natures, all feelings and thoughts. His habit of life was very regular; he usually went out after breakfast, returning in time for dinner, and disappeared for the rest of the evening, letting himself in about midnight with a latch key, a privilege that Mme. Vauquer accorded to no other boarder. But then he was on very good terms with the widow; he used to call her "mamma," and put his arm round her waist, a piece of flattery perhaps not appreciated to the full! The worthy woman might imagine this to be an easy feat; but, as a matter of fact, no arm but Vautrin's was long enough to encircle her.

°°°°It was a characteristic trait of his generously to pay fifteen francs a month for the cup of coffee with a dash of brandy in it, which he took after dinner. Less superficial observers than young men engulfed by the whirlpool of Parisian life, or old men, who took no interest in anything that did not directly concern them, would not have stopped short at the vaguely unsatisfactory impression that Vautrin made upon them. He knew or guessed the concerns of every one about him; but none of them had been able to penetrate his thoughts, or to discover his occupation. He had deliberately made his apparent good-nature, his unfailing readiness to oblige, and his high spirits into a barrier between himself and the rest of them, but not seldom he gave glimpses of appalling depths of character. He seemed to delight in scourging the upper classes of society with the lash of his tongue, to take pleasure in convicting it of inconsistency, in mocking at law and order with some grim jest worthy of Juvenal, as if some grudge against the social system rankled in him, as if there were some mystery carefully hidden away in his life.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer felt attracted, perhaps unconsciously, by the strength of the one man, and the good looks of the other; her stolen glances and secret thoughts were divided between them; but neither of them seemed to take any notice of her, although some day a chance might alter her position, and she would be a wealthy heiress. For that matter, there was not a soul in the house who took any trouble to investigate the various chronicles of misfortunes, real or imaginary, related by the rest. Each one regarded the others with indifference, tempered by suspicion; it was a natural result of their relative positions. Practical assistance not one could give, this they all knew, and they had long since exhausted their stock of condolence over previous discussions of their grievances. They were in something the same position as an elderly couple who have nothing left to say to each other. The routine of existence kept them in contact, but they were parts of a mechanism which wanted oil. There was not one of them but would have passed a blind man begging in the street, not one that felt moved to pity by a tale of misfortune, not one who did not see in death the solution of the all- absorbing problem of misery which left them cold to the most terrible anguish in others.

°°°°The happiest of these hapless beings was certainly Mme. Vauquer, who reigned supreme over this hospital supported by voluntary contributions. For her, the little garden, which silence, and cold, and rain, and drought combined to make as dreary as an Asian steppe, was a pleasant shaded nook; the gaunt yellow house, the musty odors of a back shop had charms for her, and for her alone. Those cells belonged to her. She fed those convicts condemned to penal servitude for life, and her authority was recognized among them. Where else in Paris would they have found wholesome food in sufficient quantity at the prices she charged them, and rooms which they were at liberty to make, if not exactly elegant or comfortable, at any rate clean and healthy? If she had committed some flagrant act of injustice, the victim would have borne it in silence.

°°°°Such a gathering contained, as might have been expected, the elements out of which a complete society might be constructed. And, as in a school, as in the world itself, there was among the eighteen men and women who met round the dinner table a poor creature, despised by all the others, condemned to be the butt of all their jokes. At the beginning of Eugene de Rastignac's second twelvemonth, this figure suddenly started out into bold relief against the background of human forms and faces among which the law student was yet to live for another two years to come. This laughing-stock was the retired vermicelli-merchant, Father Goriot, upon whose face a painter, like the historian, would have concentrated all the light in his picture.

°°°°How had it come about that the boarders regarded him with a half- malignant contempt? Why did they subject the oldest among their number to a kind of persecution, in which there was mingled some pity, but no respect for his misfortunes? Had he brought it on himself by some eccentricity or absurdity, which is less easily forgiven or forgotten than more serious defects? The question strikes at the root of many a social injustice. Perhaps it is only human nature to inflict suffering on anything that will endure suffering, whether by reason of its genuine humility, or indifference, or sheer helplessness. Do we not, one and all, like to feel our strength even at the expense of some one or of something? The poorest sample of humanity, the street arab, will pull the bell handle at every street door in bitter weather, and scramble up to write his name on the unsullied marble of a monument.

°°°°In the year 1813, at the age of sixty-nine or thereabouts, "Father Goriot" had sold his business and retired--to Mme. Vauquer's boarding house. When he first came there he had taken the rooms now occupied by Mme. Couture; he had paid twelve hundred francs a year like a man to whom five louis more or less was a mere trifle. For him Mme. Vauquer had made various improvements in the three rooms destined for his use, in consideration of a certain sum paid in advance, so it was said, for the miserable furniture, that is to say, for some yellow cotton curtains, a few chairs of stained wood covered with Utrecht velvet, several wretched colored prints in frames, and wall papers that a little suburban tavern would have disdained. Possibly it was the careless generosity with which Father Goriot allowed himself to be overreached at this period of his life (they called him Monsieur Goriot very respectfully then) that gave Mme. Vauquer the meanest opinion of his business abilities; she looked on him as an imbecile where money was concerned.

°°°°Goriot had brought with him a considerable wardrobe, the gorgeous outfit of a retired tradesman who denies himself nothing. Mme. Vauquer's astonished eyes beheld no less than eighteen cambric- fronted shirts, the splendor of their fineness being enhanced by a pair of pins each bearing a large diamond, and connected by a short chain, an ornament which adorned the vermicelli-maker's shirt front. He usually wore a coat of corn-flower blue; his rotund and portly person was still further set off by a clean white waistcoat, and a gold chain and seals which dangled over that broad expanse. When his hostess accused him of being "a bit of a beau," he smiled with the vanity of a citizen whose foible is gratified. His cupboards (ormoires, as he called them in the popular dialect) were filled with a quantity of plate that he brought with him. The widow's eyes gleamed as she obligingly helped him to unpack the soup ladles, table-spoons, forks, cruet- stands, tureens, dishes, and breakfast services--all of silver, which were duly arranged upon shelves, besides a few more or less handsome pieces of plate, all weighing no inconsiderable number of ounces; he could not bring himself to part with these gifts that reminded him of past domestic festivals.

°°°°"This was my wife's present to me on the first anniversary of our wedding day," he said to Mme. Vauquer, as he put away a little silver posset dish, with two turtle-doves billing on the cover. "Poor dear! she spent on it all the money she had saved before we were married. Do you know, I would sooner scratch the earth with my nails for a living, madame, than part with that. But I shall be able to take my coffee out of it every morning for the rest of my days, thank the Lord! I am not to be pitied. There's not much fear of my starving for some time to come."

°°°°Finally, Mme. Vauquer's magpie's eye had discovered and read certain entries in the list of shareholders in the funds, and, after a rough calculation, was disposed to credit Goriot (worthy man) with something like ten thousand francs a year. From that day forward Mme. Vauquer (nee de Conflans), who, as a matter of fact, had seen forty-eight summers, though she would only own to thirty-nine of them--Mme. Vauquer had her own ideas. Though Goriot's eyes seemed to have shrunk in their sockets, though they were weak and watery, owing to some glandular affection which compelled him to wipe them continually, she considered him to be a very gentlemanly and pleasant-looking man. Moreover, the widow saw favorable indications of character in the well-developed calves of his legs and in his square-shaped nose, indications still further borne out by the worthy man's full-moon countenance and look of stupid good-nature. This, in all probability, was a strongly-build animal, whose brains mostly consisted in a capacity for affection. His hair, worn in ailes de pigeon, and duly powdered every morning by the barber from the Ecole Polytechnique, described five points on his low forehead, and made an elegant setting to his face. Though his manners were somewhat boorish, he was always as neat as a new pin and he took his snuff in a lordly way, like a man who knows that his snuff- box is always likely to be filled with maccaboy, so that when Mme. Vauquer lay down to rest on the day of M. Goriot's installation, her heart, like a larded partridge, sweltered before the fire of a burning desire to shake off the shroud of Vauquer and rise again as Goriot. She would marry again, sell her boarding-house, give her hand to this fine flower of citizenship, become a lady of consequence in the quarter, and ask for subscriptions for charitable purposes; she would make little Sunday excursions to Choisy, Soissy, Gentilly; she would have a box at the theatre when she liked, instead of waiting for the author's tickets that one of her boarders sometimes gave her, in July; the whole Eldorado of a little Parisian household rose up before Mme. Vauquer in her dreams. Nobody knew that she herself possessed forty thousand francs, accumulated sou by sou, that was her secret; surely as far as money was concerned she was a very tolerable match. "And in other respects, I am quite his equal," she said to herself, turning as if to assure herself of the charms of a form that the portly Sylvie found moulded in down feathers every morning.

°°°°For three months from that day Mme. Veuve Vauquer availed herself of the services of M. Goriot's coiffeur, and went to some expense over her toilette, expense justifiable on the ground that she owed it to herself and her establishment to pay some attention to appearances when such highly-respectable persons honored her house with their presence. She expended no small amount of ingenuity in a sort of weeding process of her lodgers, announcing her intention of receiving henceforward none but people who were in every way select. If a stranger presented himself, she let him know that M. Goriot, one of the best known and most highly- respected merchants in Paris, had singled out her boarding-house for a residence. She drew up a prospectus headed MAISON VAUQUER, in which it was asserted that hers was "one of the oldest and most highly recommended boarding-houses in the Latin Quarter." "From the windows of the house," thus ran the prospectus, "there is a charming view of the Vallee des Gobelins (so there is--from the third floor), and a BEAUTIFUL garden, EXTENDING down to AN AVENUE OF LINDENS at the further end." Mention was made of the bracing air of the place and its quiet situation.

°°°°It was this prospectus that attracted Mme. la Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil, a widow of six and thirty, who was awaiting the final settlement of her husband's affairs, and of another matter regarding a pension due to her as the wife of a general who had died "on the field of battle." On this Mme. Vauquer saw to her table, lighted a fire daily in the sitting-room for nearly six months, and kept the promise of her prospectus, even going to some expense to do so. And the Countess, on her side, addressed Mme. Vauquer as "my dear," and promised her two more boarders, the Baronne de Vaumerland and the widow of a colonel, the late Comte de Picquoisie, who were about to leave a boarding-house in the Marais, where the terms were higher than at the Maison Vauquer. Both these ladies, moreover, would be very well to do when the people at the War Office had come to an end of their formalities. "But Government departments are always so dilatory," the lady added.

°°°°After dinner the two widows went together up to Mme. Vauquer's room, and had a snug little chat over some cordial and various delicacies reserved for the mistress of the house. Mme. Vauquer's ideas as to Goriot were cordially approved by Mme. de l'Ambermesnil; it was a capital notion, which for that matter she had guessed from the very first; in her opinion the vermicelli maker was an excellent man.

°°°°"Ah! my dear lady, such a well-preserved man of his age, as sound as my eyesight--a man who might make a woman happy!" said the widow.

°°°°The good-natured Countess turned to the subject of Mme. Vauquer's dress, which was not in harmony with her projects. "You must put yourself on a war footing," said she.

°°°°After much serious consideration the two widows went shopping together--they purchased a hat adorned with ostrich feathers and a cap at the Palais Royal, and the Countess took her friend to the Magasin de la Petite Jeannette, where they chose a dress and a scarf. Thus equipped for the campaign, the widow looked exactly like the prize animal hung out for a sign above an a la mode beef shop; but she herself was so much pleased with the improvement, as she considered it, in her appearance, that she felt that she lay under some obligation to the Countess; and, though by no means open-handed, she begged that lady to accept a hat that cost twenty francs. The fact was that she needed the Countess' services on the delicate mission of sounding Goriot; the countess must sing her praises in his ears. Mme. de l'Ambermesnil lent herself very good-naturedly to this manoeuvre, began her operations, and succeeded in obtaining a private interview; but the overtures that she made, with a view to securing him for herself, were received with embarrassment, not to say a repulse. She left him, revolted by his coarseness.

°°°°"My angel," said she to her dear friend, "you will make nothing of that man yonder. He is absurdly suspicious, and he is a mean curmudgeon, an idiot, a fool; you would never be happy with him."

°°°°After what had passed between M. Goriot and Mme. de l'Ambermesnil, the Countess would no longer live under the same roof. She left the next day, forgot to pay for six months' board, and left behind her wardrobe, cast-off clothing to the value of five francs. Eagerly and persistently as Mme. Vauquer sought her quondam lodger, the Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil was never heard of again in Paris. The widow often talked of this deplorable business, and regretted her own too confiding disposition. As a matter of fact, she was as suspicious as a cat; but she was like many other people, who cannot trust their own kin and put themselves at the mercy of the next chance comer--an odd but common phenomenon, whose causes may readily be traced to the depths of the human heart.

°°°°Perhaps there are people who know that they have nothing more to look for from those with whom they live; they have shown the emptiness of their hearts to their housemates, and in their secret selves they are conscious that they are severely judged, and that they deserve to be judged severely; but still they feel an unconquerable craving for praises that they do not hear, or they are consumed by a desire to appear to possess, in the eyes of a new audience, the qualities which they have not, hoping to win the admiration or affection of strangers at the risk of forfeiting it again some day. Or, once more, there are other mercenary natures who never do a kindness to a friend or a relation simply because these have a claim upon them, while a service done to a stranger brings its reward to self-love. Such natures feel but little affection for those who are nearest to them; they keep their kindness for remoter circles of acquaintance, and show most to those who dwell on its utmost limits. Mme. Vauquer belonged to both these essentially mean, false, and execrable classes.

°°°°"If I had been there at the time," Vautrin would say at the end of the story, I would have shown her up, and that misfortune would not have befallen you. I know that kind of phiz!"

°°°°Like all narrow natures, Mme. Vauquer was wont to confine her attention to events, and did not go very deeply into the causes that brought them about; she likewise preferred to throw the blame of her own mistakes on other people, so she chose to consider that the honest vermicelli maker was responsible for her misfortune. It had opened her eyes, so she said, with regard to him. As soon as she saw that her blandishments were in vain, and that her outlay on her toilette was money thrown away, she was not slow to discover the reason of his indifference. It became plain to her at once that there was SOME OTHER ATTRACTION, to use her own expression. In short, it was evident that the hope she had so fondly cherished was a baseless delusion, and that she would "never make anything out of that man yonder," in the Countess' forcible phrase. The Countess seemed to have been a judge of character. Mme. Vauquer's aversion was naturally more energetic than her friendship, for her hatred was not in proportion to her love, but to her disappointed expectations. The human heart may find here and there a resting-place short of the highest height of affection, but we seldom stop in the steep, downward slope of hatred. Still, M. Goriot was a lodger, and the widow's wounded self-love could not vent itself in an explosion of wrath; like a monk harassed by the prior of his convent, she was forced to stifle her sighs of disappointment, and to gulp down her craving for revenge. Little minds find gratification for their feelings, benevolent or otherwise, by a constant exercise of petty ingenuity. The widow employed her woman's malice to devise a system of covert persecution. She began by a course of retrenchment--various luxuries which had found their way to the table appeared there no more.

°°°°"No more gherkins, no more anchovies; they have made a fool of me!" she said to Sylvie one morning, and they returned to the old bill of fare.

°°°°The thrifty frugality necessary to those who mean to make their way in the world had become an inveterate habit of life with M. Goriot. Soup, boiled beef, and a dish of vegetables had been, and always would be, the dinner he liked best, so Mme. Vauquer found it very difficult to annoy a boarder whose tastes were so simple. He was proof against her malice, and in desperation she spoke to him and of him slightingly before the other lodgers, who began to amuse themselves at his expense, and so gratified her desire for revenge.

°°°°Towards the end of the first year the widow's suspicions had reached such a pitch that she began to wonder how it was that a retired merchant with a secure income of seven or eight thousand livres, the owner of such magnificent plate and jewelry handsome enough for a kept mistress, should be living in her house. Why should he devote so small a proportion of his money to his expenses? Until the first year was nearly at an end, Goriot had dined out once or twice every week, but these occasions came less frequently, and at last he was scarcely absent from the dinner- table twice a month. It was hardly expected that Mme. Vauquer should regard the increased regularity of her boarder's habits with complacency, when those little excursions of his had been so much to her interest. She attributed the change not so much to a gradual diminution of fortune as to a spiteful wish to annoy his hostess. It is one of the most detestable habits of a Liliputian mind to credit other people with its own malignant pettiness.

°°°°Unluckily, towards the end of the second year, M. Goriot's conduct gave some color to the idle talk about him. He asked Mme. Vauquer to give him a room on the second floor, and to make a corresponding reduction in her charges. Apparently, such strict economy was called for, that he did without a fire all through the winter. Mme. Vauquer asked to be paid in advance, an arrangement to which M. Goriot consented, and thenceforward she spoke of him as "Father Goriot."

°°°°What had brought about this decline and fall? Conjecture was keen, but investigation was difficult. Father Goriot was not communicative; in the sham countess' phrase he was "a curmudgeon." Empty-headed people who babble about their own affairs because they have nothing else to occupy them, naturally conclude that if people say nothing of their doings it is because their doings will not bear being talked about; so the highly respectable merchant became a scoundrel, and the late beau was an old rogue. Opinion fluctuated. Sometimes, according to Vautrin, who came about this time to live in the Maison Vauquer, Father Goriot was a man who went on 'Change and DABBLED (to use the sufficiently expressive language of the Stock Exchange) in stocks and shares after he had ruined himself by heavy speculation. Sometimes it was held that he was one of those petty gamblers who nightly play for small stakes until they win a few francs. A theory that he was a detective in the employ of the Home Office found favor at one time, but Vautrin urged that "Goriot was not sharp enough for one of that sort." There were yet other solutions; Father Goriot was a skinflint, a shark of a money- lender, a man who lived by selling lottery tickets. He was by turns all the most mysterious brood of vice and shame and misery; yet, however vile his life might be, the feeling of repulsion which he aroused in others was not so strong that he must be banished from their society--he paid his way. Besides, Goriot had his uses, every one vented his spleen or sharpened his wit on him; he was pelted with jokes and belabored with hard words. The general consensus of opinion was in favor of a theory which seemed the most likely; this was Mme. Vauquer's view. According to her, the man so well preserved at his time of life, as sound as her eyesight, with whom a woman might be very happy, was a libertine who had strange tastes. These are the facts upon which Mme. Vauquer's slanders were based.

°°°°Early one morning, some few months after the departure of the unlucky Countess who had managed to live for six months at the widow's expense, Mme. Vauquer (not yet dressed) heard the rustle of a silk dress and a young woman's light footstep on the stair; some one was going to Goriot's room. He seemed to expect the visit, for his door stood ajar. The portly Sylvie presently came up to tell her mistress that a girl too pretty to be honest, "dressed like a goddess," and not a speck of mud on her laced cashmere boots, had glided in from the street like a snake, had found the kitchen, and asked for M. Goriot's room. Mme. Vauquer and the cook, listening, overheard several words affectionately spoken during the visit, which lasted for some time. When M. Goriot went downstairs with the lady, the stout Sylvie forthwith took her basket and followed the lover-like couple, under pretext of going to do her marketing.

°°°°"M. Goriot must be awfully rich, all the same, madame," she reported on her return, "to keep her in such style. Just imagine it! There was a splendid carriage waiting at the corner of the Place de l'Estrapade, and SHE got into it."

°°°°While they were at dinner that evening, Mme. Vauquer went to the window and drew the curtain, as the sun was shining into Goriot's eyes.

°°°°"You are beloved of fair ladies, M. Goriot--the sun seeks you out," she said, alluding to his visitor. "Peste! you have good taste; she was very pretty."

°°°°"That was my daughter," he said, with a kind of pride in his voice, and the rest chose to consider this as the fatuity of an old man who wishes to save appearances.

°°°°A month after this visit M. Goriot received another. The same daughter who had come to see him that morning came again after dinner, this time in evening dress. The boarders, in deep discussion in the dining-room, caught a glimpse of a lovely, fair-haired woman, slender, graceful, and much too distinguished- looking to be a daughter of Father Goriot's.

°°°°"Two of them!" cried the portly Sylvie, who did not recognize the lady of the first visit.

°°°°A few days later, and another young lady--a tall, well-moulded brunette, with dark hair and bright eyes--came to ask for M. Goriot.

°°°°"Three of them!" said Sylvie.

°°°°Then the second daughter, who had first come in the morning to see her father, came shortly afterwards in the evening. She wore a ball dress, and came in a carriage.

°°°°"Four of them!" commented Mme. Vauquer and her plump handmaid. Sylvie saw not a trace of resemblance between this great lady and the girl in her simple morning dress who had entered her kitchen on the occasion of her first visit.

°°°°At that time Goriot was paying twelve hundred francs a year to his landlady, and Mme. Vauquer saw nothing out of the common in the fact that a rich man had four or five mistresses; nay, she thought it very knowing of him to pass them off as his daughters. She was not at all inclined to draw a hard-and-fast line, or to take umbrage at his sending for them to the Maison Vauquer; yet, inasmuch as these visits explained her boarder's indifference to her, she went so far (at the end of the second year) as to speak of him as an "ugly old wretch." When at length her boarder declined to nine hundred francs a year, she asked him very insolently what he took her house to be, after meeting one of these ladies on he stairs. Father Goriot answered that the lady was his eldest daughter.

°°°°"So you have two or three dozen daughters, have you?" said Mme. Vauquer sharply.

°°°°"I have only two," her boarder answered meekly, like a ruined man who is broken in to all the cruel usage of misfortune.

°°°°Towards the end of the third year Father Goriot reduced his expenses still further; he went up to the third story, and now paid forty-five francs a month. He did without snuff, told his hairdresser that he no longer required his services, and gave up wearing powder. When Goriot appeared for the first time in this condition, an exclamation of astonishment broke from his hostess at the color of his hair--a dingy olive gray. He had grown sadder day by day under the influence of some hidden trouble; among all the faces round the table, his was the most woe-begone. There was no longer any doubt. Goriot was an elderly libertine, whose eyes had only been preserved by the skill of the physician from the malign influence of the remedies necessitated by the state of his health. The disgusting color of his hair was a result of his excesses and of the drugs which he had taken that he might continue his career. The poor old man's mental and physical condition afforded some grounds for the absurd rubbish talked about him. When his outfit was worn out, he replaced the fine linen by calico at fourteen sous the ell. His diamonds, his gold snuff-box, watch-chain and trinkets, disappeared one by one. He had left off wearing the corn-flower blue coat, and was sumptuously arrayed, summer as well as winter, in a coarse chestnut-brown coat, a plush waistcoat, and doeskin breeches. He grew thinner and thinner; his legs were shrunken, his cheeks, once so puffed out by contented bourgeois prosperity, were covered with wrinkles, and the outlines of the jawbones were distinctly visible; there were deep furrows in his forehead. In the fourth year of his residence in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve he was no longer like his former self. The hale vermicelli manufacturer, sixty-two years of age, who had looked scarce forty, the stout, comfortable, prosperous tradesman, with an almost bucolic air, and such a brisk demeanor that it did you good to look at him; the man with something boyish in his smile, had suddenly sunk into his dotage, and had become a feeble, vacillating septuagenarian.

°°°°The keen, bright blue eyes had grown dull, and faded to a steel- gray color; the red inflamed rims looked as though they had shed tears of blood. He excited feelings of repulsion in some, and of pity in others. The young medical students who came to the house noticed the drooping of his lower lip and the conformation of the facial angle; and, after teasing him for some time to no purpose, they declared that cretinism was setting in.

°°°°One evening after dinner Mme. Vauquer said half banteringly to him, "So those daughters of yours don't come to see you any more, eh?" meaning to imply her doubts as to his paternity; but Father Goriot shrank as if his hostess had touched him with a sword- point.

°°°°"They come sometimes," he said in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Aha! you still see them sometimes?" cried the students. "Bravo, Father Goriot!"

°°°°The old man scarcely seemed to hear the witticisms at his expense that followed on the words; he had relapsed into the dreamy state of mind that these superficial observers took for senile torpor, due to his lack of intelligence. If they had only known, they might have been deeply interested by the problem of his condition; but few problems were more obscure. It was easy, of course, to find out whether Goriot had really been a vermicelli manufacturer; the amount of his fortune was readily discoverable; but the old people, who were most inquisitive as to his concerns, never went beyond the limits of the Quarter, and lived in the lodging-house much as oysters cling to a rock. As for the rest, the current of life in Paris daily awaited them, and swept them away with it; so soon as they left the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, they forgot the existence of the old man, their butt at dinner. For those narrow souls, or for careless youth, the misery in Father Goriot's withered face and its dull apathy were quite incompatible with wealth or any sort of intelligence. As for the creatures whom he called his daughters, all Mme. Vauquer's boarders were of her opinion. With the faculty for severe logic sedulously cultivated by elderly women during long evenings of gossip till they can always find an hypothesis to fit all circumstances, she was wont to reason thus:

°°°°"If Father Goriot had daughters of his own as rich as those ladies who came here seemed to be, he would not be lodging in my house, on the third floor, at forty-five francs a month; and he would not go about dressed like a poor man."

°°°°No objection could be raised to these inferences. So by the end of the month of November 1819, at the time when the curtain rises on this drama, every one in the house had come to have a very decided opinion as to the poor old man. He had never had either wife or daughter; excesses had reduced him to this sluggish condition; he was a sort of human mollusk who should be classed among the capulidoe, so one of the dinner contingent, an employe at the Museum, who had a pretty wit of his own. Poiret was an eagle, a gentleman, compared with Goriot. Poiret would join the talk, argue, answer when he was spoken to; as a matter of fact, his talk, arguments, and responses contributed nothing to the conversation, for Poiret had a habit of repeating what the others said in different words; still, he did join in the talk; he was alive, and seemed capable of feeling; while Father Goriot (to quote the Museum official again) was invariably at zero--Reaumur.

°°°°Eugene de Rastignac had just returned to Paris in a state of mind not unknown to young men who are conscious of unusual powers, and to those whose faculties are so stimulated by a difficult position, that for the time being they rise above the ordinary level.

°°°°Rastignac's first year of study for the preliminary examinations in law had left him free to see the sights of Paris and to enjoy some of its amusements. A student has not much time on his hands if he sets himself to learn the repertory of every theatre, and to study the ins and outs of the labyrinth of Paris. To know its customs; to learn the language, and become familiar with the amusements of the capital, he must explore its recesses, good and bad, follow the studies that please him best, and form some idea of the treasures contained in galleries and museums.

°°°°At this stage of his career a student grows eager and excited about all sorts of follies that seem to him to be of immense importance. He has his hero, his great man, a professor at the College de France, paid to talk down to the level of his audience. He adjusts his cravat, and strikes various attitudes for the benefit of the women in the first galleries at the Opera- Comique. As he passes through all these successive initiations, and breaks out of his sheath, the horizons of life widen around him, and at length he grasps the plan of society with the different human strata of which it is composed.

°°°°If he begins by admiring the procession of carriages on sunny afternoons in the Champs-Elysees, he soon reaches the further stage of envying their owners. Unconsciously, Eugene had served his apprenticeship before he went back to Angouleme for the long vacation after taking his degrees as bachelor of arts and bachelor of law. The illusions of childhood had vanished, so also had the ideas he brought with him from the provinces; he had returned thither with an intelligence developed, with loftier ambitions, and saw things as they were at home in the old manor house. His father and mother, his two brothers and two sisters, with an aged aunt, whose whole fortune consisted in annuities, lived on the little estate of Rastignac. The whole property brought in about three thousand francs; and though the amount varied with the season (as must always be the case in a vine- growing district), they were obliged to spare an unvarying twelve hundred francs out of their income for him. He saw how constantly the poverty, which they had generously hidden from him, weighed upon them; he could not help comparing the sisters, who had seemed so beautiful to his boyish eyes, with women in Paris, who had realized the beauty of his dreams. The uncertain future of the whole family depended upon him. It did not escape his eyes that not a crumb was wasted in the house, nor that the wine they drank was made from the second pressing; a multitude of small things, which it is useless to speak of in detail here, made him burn to distinguish himself, and his ambition to succeed increased tenfold.

°°°°He meant, like all great souls, that his success should be owing entirely to his merits; but his was pre-eminently a southern temperament, the execution of his plans was sure to be marred by the vertigo that seizes on youth when youth sees itself alone in a wide sea, uncertain how to spend its energies, whither to steer its course, how to adapt its sails to the winds. At first he determined to fling himself heart and soul into his work, but he was diverted from this purpose by the need of society and connections; then he saw how great an influence women exert in social life, and suddenly made up his mind to go out into this world to seek a protectress there. Surely a clever and high- spirited young man, whose wit and courage were set off to advantage by a graceful figure and the vigorous kind of beauty that readily strikes a woman's imagination, need not despair of finding a protectress. These ideas occurred to him in his country walks with his sisters, whom he had once joined so gaily. The girls thought him very much changed.

°°°°His aunt, Mme. de Marcillac, had been presented at court, and had moved among the brightest heights of that lofty region. Suddenly the young man's ambition discerned in those recollections of hers, which had been like nursery fairy tales to her nephews and nieces, the elements of a social success at least as important as the success which he had achieved at the Ecole de Droit. He began to ask his aunt about those relations; some of the old ties might still hold good. After much shaking of the branches of the family tree, the old lady came to the conclusion that of all persons who could be useful to her nephew among the selfish genus of rich relations, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was the least likely to refuse. To this lady, therefore, she wrote in the old-fashioned style, recommending Eugene to her; pointing out to her nephew that if he succeeded in pleasing Mme. de Beauseant, the Vicomtesse would introduce him to other relations. A few days after his return to Paris, therefore, Rastignac sent his aunt's letter to Mme. de Beauseant. The Vicomtesse replied by an invitation to a ball for the following evening. This was the position of affairs at the Maison Vauquer at the end of November 1819.

°°°°A few days later, after Mme. de Beauseant's ball, Eugene came in at two o'clock in the morning. The persevering student meant to make up for the lost time by working until daylight. It was the first time that he had attempted to spend the night in this way in that silent quarter. The spell of a factitious energy was upon him; he had beheld the pomp and splendor of the world. He had not dined at the Maison Vauquer; the boarders probably would think that he would walk home at daybreak from the dance, as he had done sometimes on former occasions, after a fete at the Prado, or a ball at the Odeon, splashing his silk stockings thereby, and ruining his pumps.

°°°°It so happened that Christophe took a look into the street before drawing the bolts of the door; and Rastignac, coming in at that moment, could go up to his room without making any noise, followed by Christophe, who made a great deal. Eugene exchanged his dress suit for a shabby overcoat and slippers, kindled a fire with some blocks of patent fuel, and prepared for his night's work in such a sort that the faint sounds he made were drowned by Christophe's heavy tramp on the stairs.

°°°°Eugene sat absorbed in thought for a few moments before plunging into his law books. He had just become aware of the fact that the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was one of the queens of fashion, that her house was thought to be the pleasantest in the Faubourg Saint-Germain. And not only so, she was, by right of her fortune, and the name she bore, one of the most conspicuous figures in that aristocratic world. Thanks to the aunt, thanks to Mme. de Marcillac's letter of introduction, the poor student had been kindly received in that house before he knew the extent of the favor thus shown to him. It was almost like a patent of nobility to be admitted to those gilded salons; he had appeared in the most exclusive circle in Paris, and now all doors were open for him. Eugene had been dazzled at first by the brilliant assembly, and had scarcely exchanged a few words with the Vicomtesse; he had been content to single out a goddess among this throng of Parisian divinities, one of those women who are sure to attract a young man's fancy.

°°°°The Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud was tall and gracefully made; she had one of the prettiest figures in Paris. Imagine a pair of great dark eyes, a magnificently moulded hand, a shapely foot. There was a fiery energy in her movements; the Marquis de Ronquerolles had called her "a thoroughbred," "a pure pedigree," these figures of speech have replaced the "heavenly angel" and Ossianic nomenclature; the old mythology of love is extinct, doomed to perish by modern dandyism. But for Rastignac, Mme. Anastasie de Restaud was the woman for whom he had sighed. He had contrived to write his name twice upon the list of partners upon her fan, and had snatched a few words with her during the first quadrille.

°°°°"Where shall I meet you again, Madame?" he asked abruptly, and the tones of his voice were full of the vehement energy that women like so well.

°°°°"Oh, everywhere!" said she, "in the Bois, at the Bouffons, in my own house."

°°°°With the impetuosity of his adventurous southern temper, he did all he could to cultivate an acquaintance with this lovely countess, making the best of his opportunities in the quadrille and during a waltz that she gave him. When he told her that he was a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's, the Countess, whom he took for a great lady, asked him to call at her house, and after her parting smile, Rastignac felt convinced that he must make this visit. He was so lucky as to light upon some one who did not laugh at his ignorance, a fatal defect among the gilded and insolent youth of that period; the coterie of Maulincourts, Maximes de Trailles, de Marsays, Ronquerolles, Ajuda-Pintos, and Vandenesses who shone there in all the glory of coxcombry among the best-dressed women of fashion in Paris--Lady Brandon, the Duchesse de Langeais, the Comtesse de Kergarouet, Mme. de Serizy, the Duchesse de Carigliano, the Comtesse Ferraud, Mme. de Lanty, the Marquise d'Aiglemont, Mme. Firmiani, the Marquise de Listomere and the Marquise d'Espard, the Duchesse de Maufrigneuse and the Grandlieus. Luckily, therefore, for him, the novice happened upon the Marquis de Montriveau, the lover of the Duchesse de Langeais, a general as simple as a child; from him Rastignac learned that the Comtesse lived in the Rue du Helder.

°°°°Ah, what it is to be young, eager to see the world, greedily on the watch for any chance that brings you nearer the woman of your dreams, and behold two houses open their doors to you! To set foot in the Vicomtesse de Beauseant's house in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; to fall on your knees before a Comtesse de Restaud in the Chaussee d'Antin; to look at one glance across a vista of Paris drawing-rooms, conscious that, possessing sufficient good looks, you may hope to find aid and protection there in a feminine heart! To feel ambitious enough to spurn the tight-rope on which you must walk with the steady head of an acrobat for whom a fall is impossible, and to find in a charming woman the best of all balancing poles.

°°°°He sat there with his thoughts for a while, Law on the one hand, and Poverty on the other, beholding a radiant vision of a woman rise above the dull, smouldering fire. Who would not have paused and questioned the future as Eugene was doing? who would not have pictured it full of success? His wondering thoughts took wings; he was transported out of the present into that blissful future; he was sitting by Mme. de Restaud's side, when a sort of sigh, like the grunt of an overburdened St. Joseph, broke the silence of the night. It vibrated through the student, who took the sound for a death groan. He opened his door noiselessly, went out upon the landing, and saw a thin streak of light under Father Goriot's door. Eugene feared that his neighbor had been taken ill; he went over and looked through the keyhole; the old man was busily engaged in an occupation so singular and so suspicious that Rastignac thought he was only doing a piece of necessary service to society to watch the self-styled vermicelli maker's nocturnal industries.

°°°°The table was upturned, and Goriot had doubtless in some way secured a silver plate and cup to the bar before knotting a thick rope round them; he was pulling at this rope with such enormous force that they were being crushed and twisted out of shape; to all appearance he meant to convert the richly wrought metal into ingots.

°°°°"Peste! what a man!" said Rastignac, as he watched Goriot's muscular arms; there was not a sound in the room while the old man, with the aid of the rope, was kneading the silver like dough. "Was he then, indeed, a thief, or a receiver of stolen goods, who affected imbecility and decrepitude, and lived like a beggar that he might carry on his pursuits the more securely?" Eugene stood for a moment revolving these questions, then he looked again through the keyhole.

°°°°Father Goriot had unwound his coil of rope; he had covered the table with a blanket, and was now employed in rolling the flattened mass of silver into a bar, an operation which he performed with marvelous dexterity.

°°°°"Why, he must be as strong as Augustus, King of Poland!" said Eugene to himself when the bar was nearly finished.

°°°°Father Goriot looked sadly at his handiwork, tears fell from his eyes, he blew out the dip which had served him for a light while he manipulated the silver, and Eugene heard him sigh as he lay down again.

°°°°"He is mad," thought the student.

°°°°"Poor child!" Father Goriot said aloud. Rastignac, hearing those words, concluded to keep silence; he would not hastily condemn his neighbor. He was just in the doorway of his room when a strange sound from the staircase below reached his ears; it might have been made by two men coming up in list slippers. Eugene listened; two men there certainly were, he could hear their breathing. Yet there had been no sound of opening the street door, no footsteps in the passage. Suddenly, too, he saw a faint gleam of light on the second story; it came from M. Vautrin's room.

°°°°"There are a good many mysteries here for a lodging-house!" he said to himself.

°°°°He went part of the way downstairs and listened again. The rattle of gold reached his ears. In another moment the light was put out, and again he distinctly heard the breathing of two men, but no sound of a door being opened or shut. The two men went downstairs, the faint sounds growing fainter as they went.

°°°°"Who is there?" cried Mme. Vauquer out of her bedroom window.

°°°°"I, Mme. Vauquer," answered Vautrin's deep bass voice. "I am coming in."

°°°°"That is odd! Christophe drew the bolts," said Eugene, going back to his room. "You have to sit up at night, it seems, if you really mean to know all that is going on about you in Paris."

°°°°These incidents turned his thought from his ambitious dreams; he betook himself to his work, but his thought wandered back to Father Goriot's suspicious occupation; Mme. de Restaud's face swam again and again before his eyes like a vision of a brilliant future; and at last he lay down and slept with clenched fists. When a young man makes up his mind that he will work all night, the chances are that seven times out of ten he will sleep till morning. Such vigils do not begin before we are turned twenty.

°°°°The next morning Paris was wrapped in one of the dense fogs that throw the most punctual people out in their calculations as to the time; even the most business-like folk fail to keep their appointments in such weather, and ordinary mortals wake up at noon and fancy it is eight o'clock. On this morning it was half- past nine, and Mme. Vauquer still lay abed. Christophe was late, Sylvie was late, but the two sat comfortably taking their coffee as usual. It was Sylvie's custom to take the cream off the milk destined for the boarders' breakfast for her own, and to boil the remainder for some time, so that madame should not discover this illegal exaction.

°°°°"Sylvie," said Christophe, as he dipped a piece of toast into the coffee, "M. Vautrin, who is not such a bad sort, all the same, had two people come to see him again last night. If madame says anything, mind you say nothing about it."

°°°°"Has he given you something?"

°°°°"He gave me a five-franc piece this month, which is as good as saying, 'Hold your tongue.' "

°°°°"Except him and Mme. Couture, who doesn't look twice at every penny, there's no one in the house that doesn't try to get back with the left hand all that they give with the right at New Year," said Sylvie.

°°°°"And, after all," said Christophe, "what do they give you? A miserable five-franc piece. There is Father Goriot, who has cleaned his shoes himself these two years past. There is that old beggar Poiret, who goes without blacking altogether; he would sooner drink it than put it on his boots. Then there is that whipper-snapper of a student, who gives me a couple of francs, Two francs will not pay for my brushes, and he sells his old clothes, and gets more for them than they are worth. Oh! they're a shabby lot!"

°°°°"Pooh!" said Sylvie, sipping her coffee, "our places are the best in the Quarter, that I know. But about that great big chap Vautrin, Christophe; has any one told you anything about him?"

°°°°"Yes. I met a gentleman in the street a few days ago; he said to me, 'There's a gentleman in your place, isn't there? a tall man that dyes his whiskers?' I told him, 'No, sir; they aren't dyed. A gay fellow like him hasn't the time to do it.' And when I told M. Vautrin about it afterwards, he said, 'Quite right, my boy. That is the way to answer them. There is nothing more unpleasant than to have your little weaknesses known; it might spoil many a match.' "

°°°°"Well, and for my part," said Sylvie, "a man tried to humbug me at the market wanting to know if I had seen him put on his shirt. Such bosh! There," she cried, interrupting herself, "that's a quarter to ten striking at the Val-de-Grace, and not a soul stirring!"

°°°°"Pooh! they are all gone out. Mme. Couture and the girl went out at eight o'clock to take the wafer at Saint-Etienne. Father Goriot started off somewhere with a parcel, and the student won't be back from his lecture till ten o'clock. I saw them go while I was sweeping the stairs; Father Goriot knocked up against me, and his parcel was as hard as iron. What is the old fellow up to, I wonder? He is as good as a plaything for the rest of them; they can never let him alone; but he is a good man, all the same, and worth more than all of them put together. He doesn't give you much himself, but he sometimes sends you with a message to ladies who fork out famous tips; they are dressed grandly, too."

°°°°"His daughters, as he calls them, eh? There are a dozen of them."

°°°°"I have never been to more than two--the two who came here."

°°°°"There is madame moving overhead; I shall have to go, or she will raise a fine racket. Just keep an eye on the milk, Christophe; don't let the cat get at it."

°°°°Sylvie went up to her mistress' room.

°°°°"Sylvie! How is this? It's nearly ten o'clock, and you let me sleep like a dormouse! Such a thing has never happened before."

°°°°"It's the fog; it is that thick, you could cut it with a knife."

°°°°"But how about breakfast?"

°°°°"Bah! the boarders are possessed, I'm sure. They all cleared out before there was a wink of daylight."

°°°°"Do speak properly, Sylvie," Mme. Vauquer retorted; "say a blink of daylight."

°°°°"Ah, well, madame, whichever you please. Anyhow, you can have breakfast at ten o'clock. La Michonnette and Poiret have neither of them stirred. There are only those two upstairs, and they are sleeping like the logs they are."

°°°°"But, Sylvie, you put their names together as if----"

°°°°"As if what?" said Sylvie, bursting into a guffaw. "The two of them make a pair."

°°°°"It is a strange thing, isn't it, Sylvie, how M. Vautrin got in last night after Christophe had bolted the door?"

°°°°"Not at all, madame. Christophe heard M. Vautrin, and went down and undid the door. And here are you imagining that----?"

°°°°"Give me my bodice, and be quick and get breakfast ready. Dish up the rest of the mutton with the potatoes, and you can put the stewed pears on the table, those at five a penny."

°°°°A few moments later Mme. Vauquer came down, just in time to see the cat knock down a plate that covered a bowl of milk, and begin to lap in all haste.

°°°°"Mistigris!" she cried.

°°°°The cat fled, but promptly returned to rub against her ankles.

°°°°"Oh! yes, you can wheedle, you old hypocrite!" she said. "Sylvie! Sylvie!"

°°°°"Yes, madame; what is it?"

°°°°"Just see what the cat has done!"

°°°°"It is all that stupid Christophe's fault. I told him to stop and lay the table. What has become of him? Don't you worry, madame; Father Goriot shall have it. I will fill it up with water, and he won't know the difference; he never notices anything, not even what he eats."

°°°°"I wonder where the old heathen can have gone?" said Mme. Vauquer, setting the plates round the table.

°°°°"Who knows? He is up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"I have overslept myself," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"But madame looks as fresh as a rose, all the same."

°°°°The door bell rang at that moment, and Vautrin came through the sitting-room, singing loudly:

°°°°" 'Tis the same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance . .

°°°°"Oh! Mamma Vauquer! good-morning!" he cried at the sight of his hostess, and he put his arm gaily round her waist.

°°°°"There! have done----"

°°°°" 'Impertinence!' Say it!" he answered. "Come, say it! Now, isn't that what you really mean? Stop a bit, I will help you to set the table. Ah! I am a nice man, am I not?

°°°°"For the locks of brown and the golden hair   A sighing lover . . .

°°°°"Oh! I have just seen something so funny----

°°°°. . . . led by chance."

°°°°"What?" asked the widow.

°°°°"Father Goriot in the goldsmith's shop in the Rue Dauphine at half-past eight this morning. They buy old spoons and forks and gold lace there, and Goriot sold a piece of silver plate for a good round sum. It had been twisted out of shape very neatly for a man that's not used to the trade."

°°°°"Really? You don't say so?"

°°°°"Yes. One of my friends is expatriating himself; I had been to see him off on board the Royal Mail steamer, and was coming back here. I waited after that to see what Father Goriot would do; it is a comical affair. He came back to this quarter of the world, to the Rue des Gres, and went into a money-lender's house; everybody knows him, Gobseck, a stuck-up rascal, that would make dominoes out of his father's bones, a Turk, a heathen, an old Jew, a Greek; it would be a difficult matter to rob HIM, for he puts all his coin into the Bank."

°°°°"Then what was Father Goriot doing there?"

°°°°"Doing?" said Vautrin. "Nothing; he was bent on his own undoing. He is a simpleton, stupid enough to ruin himself by running after----"

°°°°"There he is!" cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Christophe," cried Father Goriot's voice, "come upstairs with me."

°°°°Christophe went up, and shortly afterwards came down again.

°°°°"Where are you going?" Mme. Vauquer asked of her servant.

°°°°"Out on an errand for M. Goriot."

°°°°"What may that be?" said Vautrin, pouncing on a letter in Christophe's hand. "Mme. la Comtesse Anastasie de Restaud," he read. "Where are you going with it?" he added, as he gave the letter back to Christophe.

°°°°"To the Rue du Helder. I have orders to give this into her hands myself."

°°°°"What is there inside it?" said Vautrin, holding the letter up to the light. "A banknote? No." He peered into the envelope. "A receipted account!" he cried. "My word! 'tis a gallant old dotard. Off with you, old chap," he said, bringing down a hand on Christophe's head, and spinning the man round like a thimble; "you will have a famous tip."

°°°°By this time the table was set. Sylvie was boiling the milk, Mme. Vauquer was lighting a fire in the stove with some assistance from Vautrin, who kept humming to himself:

°°°°"The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a roving glance."

°°°°When everything was ready, Mme. Couture and Mlle. Taillefer came in.

°°°°"Where have you been this morning, fair lady?" said Mme. Vauquer, turning to Mme. Couture.

°°°°"We have just been to say our prayers at Saint-Etienne du Mont. To-day is the day when we must go to see M. Taillefer. Poor little thing! She is trembling like a leaf," Mme. Couture went on, as she seated herself before the fire and held the steaming soles of her boots to the blaze.

°°°°"Warm yourself, Victorine," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"It is quite right and proper, mademoiselle, to pray to Heaven to soften your father's heart," said Vautrin, as he drew a chair nearer to the orphan girl; "but that is not enough. What you want is a friend who will give the monster a piece of his mind; a barbarian that has three millions (so they say), and will not give you a dowry; and a pretty girl needs a dowry nowadays."

°°°°"Poor child!" said Mme. Vauquer. "Never mind, my pet, your wretch of a father is going just the way to bring trouble upon himself."

°°°°Victorine's eyes filled with tears at the words, and the widow checked herself at a sign from Mme. Couture.

°°°°"If we could only see him!" said the Commissary-General's widow; "if I could speak to him myself and give him his wife's last letter! I have never dared to run the risk of sending it by post; he knew my handwriting----"

°°°°" 'Oh woman, persecuted and injured innocent!' " exclaimed Vautrin, breaking in upon her. "So that is how you are, is it? In a few days' time I will look into your affairs, and it will be all right, you shall see."

°°°°"Oh! sir," said Victorine, with a tearful but eager glance at Vautrin, who showed no sign of being touched by it, "if you know of any way of communicating with my father, please be sure and tell him that his affection and my mother's honor are more to me than all the money in the world. If you can induce him to relent a little towards me, I will pray to God for you. You may be sure of my gratitude----"

°°°°"The same old story everywhere," sang Vautrin, with a satirical intonation. At this juncture, Goriot, Mlle. Michonneau, and Poiret came downstairs together; possibly the scent of the gravy which Sylvie was making to serve with the mutton had announced breakfast. The seven people thus assembled bade each other good- morning, and took their places at the table; the clock struck ten, and the student's footstep was heard outside.

°°°°"Ah! here you are, M. Eugene," said Sylvie; "every one is breakfasting at home to-day."

°°°°The student exchanged greetings with the lodgers, and sat down beside Goriot.

°°°°"I have just met with a queer adventure," he said, as he helped himself abundantly to the mutton, and cut a slice of bread, which Mme. Vauquer's eyes gauged as usual.

°°°°"An adventure?" queried Poiret.

°°°°"Well, and what is there to astonish you in that, old boy?" Vautrin asked of Poiret. "M. Eugene is cut out for that kind of thing."

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer stole a timid glance at the young student.

°°°°"Tell us about your adventure!" demanded M. Vautrin.

°°°°"Yesterday evening I went to a ball given by a cousin of mine, the Vicomtesse de Beauseant. She has a magnificent house; the rooms are hung with silk--in short, it was a splendid affair, and I was as happy as a king---"

°°°°"Fisher," put in Vautrin, interrupting.

°°°°"What do you mean, sir?" said Eugene sharply.

°°°°"I said 'fisher,' because kingfishers see a good deal more fun than kings."

°°°°"Quite true; I would much rather be the little careless bird than a king," said Poiret the ditto-ist, "because----"

°°°°"In fact"--the law-student cut him short--"I danced with one of the handsomest women in the room, a charming countess, the most exquisite creature I have ever seen. There was peach blossom in her hair, and she had the loveliest bouquet of flowers--real flowers, that scented the air----but there! it is no use trying to describe a woman glowing with the dance. You ought to have seen her! Well, and this morning I met this divine countess about nine o'clock, on foot in the Rue de Gres. Oh! how my heart beat! I began to think----"

°°°°"That she was coming here," said Vautrin, with a keen look at the student. "I expect that she was going to call on old Gobseck, a money-lender. If ever you explore a Parisian woman's heart, you will find the money-lender first, and the lover afterwards. Your countess is called Anastasie de Restaud, and she lives in the Rue du Helder."

°°°°The student stared hard at Vautrin. Father Goriot raised his head at the words, and gave the two speakers a glance so full of intelligence and uneasiness that the lodgers beheld him with astonishment.

°°°°"Then Christophe was too late, and she must have gone to him!" cried Goriot, with anguish in his voice.

°°°°"It is just as I guessed," said Vautrin, leaning over to whisper in Mme. Vauquer's ear.

°°°°Goriot went on with his breakfast, but seemed unconscious of what he was doing. He had never looked more stupid nor more taken up with his own thoughts than he did at that moment.

°°°°"Who the devil could have told you her name, M. Vautrin?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! there you are!" answered Vautrin. "Old Father Goriot there knew it quite well! and why should I not know it too?"

°°°°"M. Goriot?" the student cried.

°°°°"What is it?" asked the old man. "So she was very beautiful, was she, yesterday night?"

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"Look at the old wretch," said Mme. Vauquer, speaking to Vautrin; "how his eyes light up!"

°°°°"Then does he really keep her?" said Mlle. Michonneau, in a whisper to the student.

°°°°"Oh! yes, she was tremendously pretty," Eugene answered. Father Goriot watched him with eager eyes. "If Mme. de Beauseant had not been there, my divine countess would have been the queen of the ball; none of the younger men had eyes for any one else. I was the twelfth on her list, and she danced every quadrille. The other women were furious. She must have enjoyed herself, if ever creature did! It is a true saying that there is no more beautiful sight than a frigate in full sail, a galloping horse, or a woman dancing."

°°°°"So the wheel turns," said Vautrin; "yesterday night at a duchess' ball, this morning in a money-lender's office, on the lowest rung of the ladder--just like a Parisienne! If their husbands cannot afford to pay for their frantic extravagance, they will sell themselves. Or if they cannot do that, they will tear out their mothers' hearts to find something to pay for their splendor. They will turn the world upside down. Just a Parisienne through and through!"

°°°°Father Goriot's face, which had shone at the student's words like the sun on a bright day, clouded over all at once at this cruel speech of Vautrin's.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. Vauquer, "but where is your adventure? Did you speak to her? Did you ask her if she wanted to study law?"

°°°°"She did not see me," said Eugene. "But only think of meeting one of the prettiest women in Paris in the Rue des Gres at nine o'clock! She could not have reached home after the ball till two o'clock this morning. Wasn't it queer? There is no place like Paris for this sort of adventures."

°°°°"Pshaw! much funnier things than THAT happen here!" exclaimed Vautrin.

°°°°Mlle. Taillefer had scarcely heeded the talk, she was so absorbed by the thought of the new attempt that she was about to make. Mme. Couture made a sign that it was time to go upstairs and dress; the two ladies went out, and Father Goriot followed their example.

°°°°"Well, did you see?" said Mme. Vauquer, addressing Vautrin and the rest of the circle. "He is ruining himself for those women, that is plain."

°°°°"Nothing will ever make me believe that that beautiful Comtesse de Restaud is anything to Father Goriot," cried the student.

°°°°"Well, and if you don't," broke in Vautrin, "we are not set on convincing you. You are too young to know Paris thoroughly yet; later on you will find out that there are what we call men with a passion----"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau gave Vautrin a quick glance at these words. They seemed to be like the sound of a trumpet to a trooper's horse. "Aha!" said Vautrin, stopping in his speech to give her a searching glance, "so we have had our little experiences, have we?"

°°°°The old maid lowered her eyes like a nun who sees a statue.

°°°°"Well," he went on, "when folk of that kind get a notion into their heads, they cannot drop it. They must drink the water from some particular spring--it is stagnant as often as not; but they will sell their wives and families, they will sell their own souls to the devil to get it. For some this spring is play, or the stock-exchange, or music, or a collection of pictures or insects; for others it is some woman who can give them the dainties they like. You might offer these last all the women on earth--they would turn up their noses; they will have the only one who can gratify their passion. It often happens that the woman does not care for them at all, and treats them cruelly; they buy their morsels of satisfaction very dear; but no matter, the fools are never tired of it; they will take their last blanket to the pawnbroker's to give their last five-franc piece to her. Father Goriot here is one of that sort. He is discreet, so the Countess exploits him--just the way of the gay world. The poor old fellow thinks of her and of nothing else. In all other respects you see he is a stupid animal; but get him on that subject, and his eyes sparkle like diamonds. That secret is not difficult to guess. He took some plate himself this morning to the melting-pot, and I saw him at Daddy Gobseck's in the Rue des Gres. And now, mark what follows--he came back here, and gave a letter for the Comtesse de Restaud to that noodle of a Christophe, who showed us the address; there was a receipted bill inside it. It is clear that it was an urgent matter if the Countess also went herself to the old money lender. Father Goriot has financed her handsomely. There is no need to tack a tale together; the thing is self-evident. So that shows you, sir student, that all the time your Countess was smiling, dancing, flirting, swaying her peach-flower crowned head, with her gown gathered into her hand, her slippers were pinching her, as they say; she was thinking of her protested bills, or her lover's protested bills."

°°°°"You have made me wild to know the truth," cried Eugene; "I will go to call on Mme. de Restaud to-morrow."

°°°°"Yes," echoed Poiret; "you must go and call on Mme. de Restaud."

°°°°"And perhaps you will find Father Goriot there, who will take payment for the assistance he politely rendered."

°°°°Eugene looked disgusted. "Why, then, this Paris of yours is a slough."

°°°°"And an uncommonly queer slough, too," replied Vautrin. "The mud splashes you as you drive through it in your carriage--you are a respectable person; you go afoot and are splashed--you are a scoundrel. You are so unlucky as to walk off with something or other belonging to somebody else, and they exhibit you as a curiosity in the Place du Palais-de-Justice; you steal a million, and you are pointed out in every salon as a model of virtue. And you pay thirty millions for the police and the courts of justice, for the maintenance of law and order! A pretty slate of things it is!"

°°°°"What," cried Mme. Vauquer, "has Father Goriot really melted down his silver posset-dish?"

°°°°"There were two turtle-doves on the lid, were there not?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that there were."

°°°°"Then, was he fond of it?" said Eugene. "He cried while he was breaking up the cup and plate. I happened to see him by accident."

°°°°"It was dear to him as his own life," answered the widow.

°°°°"There! you see how infatuated the old fellow is!" cried Vautrin. "The woman yonder can coax the soul out of him"

°°°°The student went up to his room. Vautrin went out, and a few moments later Mme. Couture and Victorine drove away in a cab which Sylvie had called for them. Poiret gave his arm to Mlle. Michonneau, and they went together to spend the two sunniest hours of the day in the Jardin des Plantes.

°°°°"Well, those two are as good as married," was the portly Sylvie's comment. "They are going out together to-day for the first time. They are such a couple of dry sticks that if they happen to strike against each other they will draw sparks like flint and steel."

°°°°"Keep clear of Mlle. Michonneau's shawl, then, said Mme. Vauquer, laughing; "it would flare up like tinder."

°°°°At four o'clock that evening, when Goriot came in, he saw, by the light of two smoky lamps, that Victorine's eyes were red. Mme. Vauquer was listening to the history of the visit made that morning to M. Taillefer; it had been made in vain. Taillefer was tired of the annual application made by his daughter and her elderly friend; he gave them a personal interview in order to arrive at an understanding with them.

°°°°"My dear lady," said Mme. Couture, addressing Mme. Vauquer, "just imagine it; he did not even ask Victorine to sit down, she was standing the whole time. He said to me quite coolly, without putting himself in a passion, that we might spare ourselves the trouble of going there; that the young lady (he would not call her his daughter) was injuring her cause by importuning him (IMPORTUNING! once a year, the wretch!); that as Victorine's mother had nothing when he married her, Victorine ought not to expect anything from him; in fact, he said the most cruel things, that made the poor child burst out crying. The little thing threw herself at her father's feet and spoke up bravely; she said that she only persevered in her visits for her mother's sake; that she would obey him without a murmur, but that she begged him to read her poor dead mother's farewell letter. She took it up and gave it to him, saying the most beautiful things in the world, most beautifully expressed; I do not know where she learned them; God

°°°°must have put them into her head, for the poor child was inspired to speak so nicely that it made me cry like a fool to hear her talk. And what do you think the monster was doing all the time? Cutting his nails! He took the letter that poor Mme. Taillefer had soaked with tears, and flung it on to the chimney-piece. 'That is all right,' he said. He held out his hands to raise his daughter, but she covered them with kisses, and he drew them away again. Scandalous, isn't it? And his great booby of a son came in and took no notice of his sister."

°°°°"What inhuman wretches they must be!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"And then they both went out of the room," Mme. Couture went on, without heeding the worthy vermicelli maker's exclamation; "father and son bowed to me, and asked me to excuse them on account of urgent business! That is the history of our call. Well, he has seen his daughter at any rate. How he can refuse to acknowledge her I cannot think, for they are as alike as two peas."

°°°°The boarders dropped in one after another, interchanging greetings and empty jokes that certain classes of Parisians regard as humorous and witty. Dulness is their prevailing ingredient, and the whole point consists in mispronouncing a word or a gesture. This kind of argot is always changing. The essence of the jest consists in some catchword suggested by a political event, an incident in the police courts, a street song, or a bit of burlesque at some theatre, and forgotten in a month. Anything and everything serves to keep up a game of battledore and shuttlecock with words and ideas. The diorama, a recent invention, which carried an optical illusion a degree further than panoramas, had given rise to a mania among art students for ending every word with RAMA. The Maison Vauquer had caught the infection from a young artist among the boarders.

°°°°"Well, Monsieur-r-r Poiret," said the employe from the Museum, "how is your health-orama?" Then, without waiting for an answer, he turned to Mme. Couture and Victorine with a "Ladies, you seem melancholy."

°°°°"Is dinner ready?" cried Horace Bianchon, a medical student, and a friend of Rastignac's; "my stomach is sinking usque ad talones."

°°°°"There is an uncommon frozerama outside," said Vautrin. "Make room there, Father Goriot! Confound it, your foot covers the whole front of the stove."

°°°°"Illustrious M. Vautrin," put in Bianchon, "why do you say frozerama? It is incorrect; it should be frozenrama."

°°°°"No, it shouldn't," said the official from the Museum; "frozerama is right by the same rule that you say 'My feet are froze.' "

°°°°"Ah! ah!"

°°°°"Here is his Excellency the Marquis de Rastignac, Doctor of the Law of Contraries," cried Bianchon, seizing Eugene by the throat, and almost throttling him.

°°°°"Hallo there! hallo!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau came noiselessly in, bowed to the rest of the party, and took her place beside the three women without saying a word.

°°°°"That old bat always makes me shudder," said Bianchon in a low voice, indicating Mlle. Michonneau to Vautrin. "I have studied Gall's system, and I am sure she has the bump of Judas."

°°°°"Then you have seen a case before?" said Vautrin.

°°°°"Who has not?" answered Bianchon. "Upon my word, that ghastly old maid looks just like one of the long worms that will gnaw a beam through, give them time enough."

°°°°"That is the way, young man," returned he of the forty years and the dyed whiskers:

°°°°"The rose has lived the life of a rose--   A morning's space."

°°°°"Aha! here is a magnificent soupe-au-rama," cried Poiret as Christophe came in bearing the soup with cautious heed.

°°°°"I beg your pardon, sir," said Mme. Vauquer; "it is soupe aux choux."

°°°°All the young men roared with laughter.

°°°°"Had you there, Poiret!"

°°°°"Poir-r-r-rette! she had you there!"

°°°°"Score two points to Mamma Vauquer," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Did any of you notice the fog this morning?" asked the official.

°°°°"It was a frantic fog," said Bianchon, "a fog unparalleled, doleful, melancholy, sea-green, asthmatical--a Goriot of a fog!"

°°°°"A Goriorama," said the art student, "because you couldn't see a thing in it."

°°°°"Hey! Milord Gaoriotte, they air talking about yoo-o-ou!"

°°°°Father Goriot, seated at the lower end of the table, close to the door through which the servant entered, raised his face; he had smelt at a scrap of bread that lay under his table napkin, an old trick acquired in his commercial capacity, that still showed itself at times.

°°°°"Well," Madame Vauquer cried in sharp tones, that rang above the rattle of spoons and plates and the sound of other voices, "and is there anything the matter with the bread?"

°°°°"Nothing whatever, madame," he answered; "on the contrary, it is made of the best quality of corn; flour from Etampes."

°°°°"How could you tell?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"By the color, by the flavor."

°°°°"You knew the flavor by the smell, I suppose," said Mme. Vauquer. "You have grown so economical, you will find out how to live on the smell of cooking at last."

°°°°"Take out a patent for it, then," cried the Museum official; "you would make a handsome fortune."

°°°°"Never mind him," said the artist; "he does that sort of thing to delude us into thinking that he was a vermicelli maker."

°°°°"Your nose is a corn-sampler, it appears?" inquired the official.

°°°°"Corn WHAT?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"Corn-el."

°°°°"Corn-et."

°°°°"Corn-elian."

°°°°"Corn-ice."

°°°°"Corn-ucopia."

°°°°"Corn-crake."

°°°°"Corn-cockle."

°°°°"Corn-orama."

°°°°The eight responses came like a rolling fire from every part of the room, and the laughter that followed was the more uproarious because poor Father Goriot stared at the others with a puzzled look, like a foreigner trying to catch the meaning of words in a language which he does not understand.

°°°°"Corn? . . ." he said, turning to Vautrin, his next neighbor.

°°°°"Corn on your foot, old man!" said Vautrin, and he drove Father Goriot's cap down over his eyes by a blow on the crown.

°°°°The poor old man thus suddenly attacked was for a moment too bewildered to do anything. Christophe carried off his plate, thinking that he had finished his soup, so that when Goriot had pushed back his cap from his eyes his spoon encountered the table. Every one burst out laughing. "You are a disagreeable joker, sir," said the old man, "and if you take any further liberties with me----"

°°°°"Well, what then, old boy?" Vautrin interrupted.

°°°°"Well, then, you shall pay dearly for it some day----"

°°°°"Down below, eh?" said the artist, "in the little dark corner where they put naughty boys."

°°°°"Well, mademoiselle," Vautrin said, turning to Victorine, "you are eating nothing. So papa was refractory, was he?"

°°°°"A monster!" said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"Mademoiselle might make application for aliment pending her suit; she is not eating anything. Eh! eh! just see how Father Goriot is staring at Mlle. Victorine."

°°°°The old man had forgotten his dinner, he was so absorbed in gazing at the poor girl; the sorrow in her face was unmistakable,--the slighted love of a child whose father would not recognize her.

°°°°"We are mistaken about Father Goriot, my dear boy," said Eugene in a low voice. "He is not an idiot, nor wanting in energy. Try your Gall system on him, and let me know what you think. I saw him crush a silver dish last night as if it had been made of wax; there seems to be something extra-ordinary going on in his mind just now, to judge by his face. His life is so mysterious that it must be worth studying. Oh! you may laugh, Bianchon; I am not joking."

°°°°"The man is a subject, is he?" said Bianchon; "all right! I will dissect him, if he will give me the chance."

°°°°"No; feel his bumps."

°°°°"Hm!--his stupidity might perhaps be contagious."

°°°°The next day Rastignac dressed himself very elegantly, and about three o'clock in the afternoon went to call on Mme. de Restaud. On the way thither he indulged in the wild intoxicating dreams which fill a young head so full of delicious excitement. Young men at his age take no account of obstacles nor of dangers; they see success in every direction; imagination has free play, and turns their lives into a romance; they are saddened or discouraged by the collapse of one of the visionary schemes that have no existence save in their heated fancy. If youth were not ignorant and timid, civilization would be impossible.

°°°°Eugene took unheard-of pains to keep himself in a spotless condition, but on his way through the streets he began to think about Mme. de Restaud and what he should say to her. He equipped himself with wit, rehearsed repartees in the course of an imaginary conversation, and prepared certain neat speeches a la Talleyrand, conjuring up a series of small events which should prepare the way for the declaration on which he had based his future; and during these musings the law student was bespattered with mud, and by the time he reached the Palais Royal he was obliged to have his boots blacked and his trousers brushed.

°°°°"If I were rich," he said, as he changed the five-franc piece he had brought with him in case anything might happen, "I would take a cab, then I could think at my ease."

°°°°At last he reached the Rue du Helder, and asked for the Comtesse de Restaud. He bore the contemptuous glances of the servants, who had seen him cross the court on foot, with the cold fury of a man who knows that he will succeed some day. He understood the meaning of their glances at once, for he had felt his inferiority as soon as he entered the court, where a smart cab was waiting. All the delights of life in Paris seemed to be implied by this visible and manifest sign of luxury and extravagance. A fine horse, in magnificent harness, was pawing the ground, and all at once the law student felt out of humor with himself. Every compartment in his brain which he had thought to find so full of wit was bolted fast; he grew positively stupid. He sent up his name to the Countess, and waited in the ante-chamber, standing on one foot before a window that looked out upon the court; mechanically he leaned his elbow against the sash, and stared before him. The time seemed long; he would have left the house but for the southern tenacity of purpose which works miracles when it is single-minded.

°°°°"Madame is in her boudoir, and cannot see any one at present, sir," said the servant. "She gave me no answer; but if you will go into the dining-room, there is some one already there."

°°°°Rastignac was impressed with a sense of the formidable power of the lackey who can accuse or condemn his masters by a word; he coolly opened the door by which the man had just entered the ante-chamber, meaning, no doubt, to show these insolent flunkeys that he was familiar with the house; but he found that he had thoughtlessly precipitated himself into a small room full of dressers, where lamps were standing, and hot-water pipes, on which towels were being dried; a dark passage and a back staircase lay beyond it. Stifled laughter from the ante-chamber added to his confusion.

°°°°"This way to the drawing-room, sir," said the servant, with the exaggerated respect which seemed to be one more jest at his expense.

°°°°Eugene turned so quickly that he stumbled against a bath. By good luck, he managed to keep his hat on his head, and saved it from immersion in the water; but just as he turned, a door opened at the further end of the dark passage, dimly lighted by a small lamp. Rastignac heard voices and the sound of a kiss; one of the speakers was Mme. de Restaud, the other was Father Goriot. Eugene followed the servant through the dining-room into the drawing- room; he went to a window that looked out into the courtyard, and stood there for a while. He meant to know whether this Goriot was really the Goriot that he knew. His heart beat unwontedly fast; he remembered Vautrin's hideous insinuations. A well-dressed young man suddenly emerged from the room almost as Eugene entered it, saying impatiently to the servant who stood at the door: "I am going, Maurice. Tell Madame la Comtesse that I waited more than half an hour for her."

°°°°Whereupon this insolent being, who, doubtless, had a right to be insolent, sang an Italian trill, and went towards the window where Eugene was standing, moved thereto quite as much by a desire to see the student's face as by a wish to look out into the courtyard.

°°°°"But M. le Comte had better wait a moment longer; madame is disengaged," said Maurice, as he returned to the ante-chamber.

°°°°Just at that moment Father Goriot appeared close to the gate; he had emerged from a door at the foot of the back staircase. The worthy soul was preparing to open his umbrella regardless of the fact that the great gate had opened to admit a tilbury, in which a young man with a ribbon at his button-hole was seated. Father Goriot had scarcely time to start back and save himself. The horse took fright at the umbrella, swerved, and dashed forward towards the flight of steps. The young man looked round in annoyance, saw Father Goriot, and greeted him as he went out with constrained courtesy, such as people usually show to a money- lender so long as they require his services, or the sort of respect they feel it necessary to show for some one whose reputation has been blown upon, so that they blush to acknowledge his acquaintance. Father Goriot gave him a little friendly nod and a good-natured smile. All this happened with lightning speed. Eugene was so deeply interested that he forgot that he was not alone till he suddenly heard the Countess' voice.

°°°°"Oh! Maxime, were you going away?" she said reproachfully, with a shade of pique in her manner. The Countess had not seen the incident nor the entrance of the tilbury. Rastignac turned abruptly and saw her standing before him, coquettishly dressed in a loose white cashmere gown with knots of rose-colored ribbon here and there; her hair was carelessly coiled about her head, as is the wont of Parisian women in the morning; there was a soft fragrance about her--doubtless she was fresh from a bath;--her graceful form seemed more flexible, her beauty more luxuriant. Her eyes glistened. A young man can see everything at a glance; he feels the radiant influence of woman as a plant discerns and absorbs its nutriment from the air; he did not need to touch her hands to feel their cool freshness. He saw faint rose tints through the cashmere of the dressing gown; it had fallen slightly open, giving glimpses of a bare throat, on which the student's eyes rested. The Countess had no need of the adventitious aid of corsets; her girdle defined the outlines of her slender waist; her throat was a challenge to love; her feet, thrust into slippers, were daintily small. As Maxime took her hand and kissed it, Eugene became aware of Maxime's existence, and the Countess saw Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! is that you M. de Rastignac? I am very glad to see you," she said, but there was something in her manner that a shrewd observer would have taken as a hint to depart.

°°°°Maxime, as the Countess Anastasie had called the young man with the haughty insolence of bearing, looked from Eugene to the lady, and from the lady to Eugene; it was sufficiently evident that he wished to be rid of the latter. An exact and faithful rendering of the glance might be given in the words: "Look here, my dear; I hope you intend to send this little whipper-snapper about his business."

°°°°The Countess consulted the young man's face with an intent submissiveness that betrays all the secrets of a woman's heart, and Rastignac all at once began to hate him violently. To begin with, the sight of the fair carefully arranged curls on the other's comely head had convinced him that his own crop was hideous; Maxime's boots, moreover, were elegant and spotless, while his own, in spite of all his care, bore some traces of his recent walk; and, finally, Maxime's overcoat fitted the outline of his figure gracefully, he looked like a pretty woman, while Eugene was wearing a black coat at half-past two. The quick- witted child of the Charente felt the disadvantage at which he was placed beside this tall, slender dandy, with the clear gaze and the pale face, one of those men who would ruin orphan children without scruple. Mme. de Restaud fled into the next room without waiting for Eugene to speak; shaking out the skirts of her dressing-gown in her flight, so that she looked like a white butterfly, and Maxime hurried after her. Eugene, in a fury, followed Maxime and the Countess, and the three stood once more face to face by the hearth in the large drawing-room. The law student felt quite sure that the odious Maxime found him in the way, and even at the risk of displeasing Mme. de Restaud, he meant to annoy the dandy. It had struck him all at once that he had seen the young man before at Mme. de Beauseant's ball; he guessed the relation between Maxime and Mme. de Restaud; and with the youthful audacity that commits prodigious blunders or achieves signal success, he said to himself, "This is my rival; I mean to cut him out."

°°°°Rash resolve! He did not know that M. le Comte Maxime de Trailles would wait till he was insulted, so as to fire first and kill his man. Eugene was a sportsman and a good shot, but he had not yet hit the bulls's eye twenty times out of twenty-two. The young Count dropped into a low chair by the hearth, took up the tongs, and made up the fire so violently and so sulkily, that Anastasie's fair face suddenly clouded over. She turned to Eugene, with a cool, questioning glance that asked plainly, "Why do you not go?" a glance which well-bred people regard as a cue to make their exit.

°°°°Eugene assumed an amiable expression.

°°°°"Madame," he began, "I hastened to call upon you----"

°°°°He stopped short. The door opened, and the owner of the tilbury suddenly appeared. He had left his hat outside, and did not greet the Countess; he looked meditatively at Rastignac, and held out his hand to Maxime with a cordial "Good morning," that astonished Eugene not a little. The young provincial did not understand the amenities of a triple alliance.

°°°°"M. de Restaud," said the Countess, introducing her husband to the law student.

°°°°Eugene bowed profoundly.

°°°°"This gentleman," she continued, presenting Eugene to her husband, "is M. de Rastignac; he is related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs; I had the pleasure of meeting him at her last ball."

°°°°Related to Mme. la Vicomtesse de Beauseant through the Marcillacs! These words, on which the countess threw ever so slight an emphasis, by reason of the pride that the mistress of a house takes in showing that she only receives people of distinction as visitors in her house, produced a magical effect. The Count's stiff manner relaxed at once as he returned the student's bow.

°°°°"Delighted to have an opportunity of making your acquaintance," he said.

°°°°Maxime de Trailles himself gave Eugene an uneasy glance, and suddenly dropped his insolent manner. The mighty name had all the power of a fairy's wand; those closed compartments in the southern brain flew open again; Rastignac's carefully drilled faculties returned. It was as if a sudden light had pierced the obscurity of this upper world of Paris, and he began to see, though everything was indistinct as yet. Mme. Vauquer's lodging- house and Father Goriot were very far remote from his thoughts.

°°°°"I thought that the Marcillacs were extinct," the Comte de Restaud said, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, they are extinct," answered the law student. "My great- uncle, the Chevalier de Rastignac, married the heiress of the Marcillac family. They had only one daughter, who married the Marechal de Clarimbault, Mme. de Beauseant's grandfather on the mother's side. We are the younger branch of the family, and the younger branch is all the poorer because my great-uncle, the Vice-Admiral, lost all that he had in the King's service. The Government during the Revolution refused to admit our claims when the Compagnie des Indes was liquidated."

°°°°"Was not your great-uncle in command of the Vengeur before 1789?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Then he would be acquainted with my grandfather, who commanded the Warwick."

°°°°Maxime looked at Mme. de Restaud and shrugged his shoulders, as who should say, "If he is going to discuss nautical matters with that fellow, it is all over with us." Anastasie understood the glance that M. de Trailles gave her. With a woman's admirable tact, she began to smile and said:

°°°°"Come with me, Maxime; I have something to say to you. We will leave you two gentlemen to sail in company on board the Warwick and the Vengeur."

°°°°She rose to her feet and signed to Maxime to follow her, mirth and mischief in her whole attitude, and the two went in the direction of the boudoir. The morganatic couple (to use a convenient German expression which has no exact equivalent) had reached the door, when the Count interrupted himself in his talk with Eugene.

°°°°"Anastasie!" he cried pettishly, "just stay a moment, dear; you know very well that----"

°°°°"I am coming back in a minute," she interrupted; "I have a commission for Maxime to execute, and I want to tell him about it."

°°°°She came back almost immediately. She had noticed the inflection in her husband's voice, and knew that it would not be safe to retire to the boudoir; like all women who are compelled to study their husbands' characters in order to have their own way, and whose business it is to know exactly how far they can go without endangering a good understanding, she was very careful to avoid petty collisions in domestic life. It was Eugene who had brought about this untoward incident; so the Countess looked at Maxime and indicated the law student with an air of exasperation. M. de Trailles addressed the Count, the Countess, and Eugene with the pointed remark, "You are busy, I do not want to interrupt you; good-day," and he went.

°°°°"Just wait a moment, Maxime!" the Count called after him.

°°°°"Come and dine with us," said the Countess, leaving Eugene and her husband together once more. She followed Maxime into the little drawing-room, where they sat together sufficiently long to feel sure that Rastignac had taken his leave.

°°°°The law student heard their laughter, and their voices, and the pauses in their talk; he grew malicious, exerted his conversational powers for M. de Restaud, flattered him, and drew him into discussions, to the end that he might see the Countess again and discover the nature of her relations with Father Goriot. This Countess with a husband and a lover, for Maxime clearly was her lover, was a mystery. What was the secret tie that bound her to the old tradesman? This mystery he meant to penetrate, hoping by its means to gain a sovereign ascendency over this fair typical Parisian.

°°°°"Anastasie!" the Count called again to his wife.

°°°°"Poor Maxime!" she said, addressing the young man. "Come, we must resign ourselves. This evening----"

°°°°"I hope, Nasie," he said in her ear, "that you will give orders not to admit that youngster, whose eyes light up like live coals when he looks at you. He will make you a declaration, and compromise you, and then you will compel me to kill him."

°°°°"Are you mad, Maxime?" she said. "A young lad of a student is, on the contrary, a capital lightning-conductor; is not that so? Of course, I mean to make Restaud furiously jealous of him."

°°°°Maxime burst out laughing, and went out, followed by the Countess, who stood at the window to watch him into his carriage; he shook his whip, and made his horse prance. She only returned when the great gate had been closed after him.

°°°°"What do you think, dear?" cried the Count, her husband, "this gentleman's family estate is not far from Verteuil, on the Charente; his great-uncle and my grandfather were acquainted."

°°°°"Delighted to find that we have acquaintances in common," said the Countess, with a preoccupied manner.

°°°°"More than you think," said Eugene, in a low voice.

°°°°"What do you mean?" she asked quickly.

°°°°"Why, only just now," said the student, "I saw a gentleman go out at the gate, Father Goriot, my next door neighbor in the house where I am lodging."

°°°°At the sound of this name, and the prefix that embellished it, the Count, who was stirring the fire, let the tongs fall as though they had burned his fingers, and rose to his feet.

°°°°"Sir," he cried, "you might have called him 'Monsieur Goriot'!"

°°°°The Countess turned pale at first at the sight of her husband's vexation, then she reddened; clearly she was embarrassed, her answer was made in a tone that she tried to make natural, and with an air of assumed carelessness:

°°°°"You could not know any one who is dearer to us both . . ."

°°°°She broke off, glanced at the piano as if some fancy had crossed her mind, and asked, "Are you fond of music, M. de Rastignac?"

°°°°"Exceedingly," answered Eugene, flushing, and disconcerted by a dim suspicion that he had somehow been guilty of a clumsy piece of folly.

°°°°"Do you sing?" she cried, going to the piano, and, sitting down before it, she swept her fingers over the keyboard from end to end. R-r-r-rah!

°°°°"No, madame."

°°°°The Comte de Restaud walked to and fro.

°°°°"That is a pity; you are without one great means of success.--Ca- ro, ca-a-ro, ca-a-a-ro, non du-bi-ta-re," sang the Countess.

°°°°Eugene had a second time waved a magic wand when he uttered Goriot's name, but the effect seemed to be entirely opposite to that produced by the formula "related to Mme. de Beauseant." His position was not unlike that of some visitor permitted as a favor to inspect a private collection of curiosities, when by inadvertence he comes into collision with a glass case full of sculptured figures, and three or four heads, imperfectly secured, fall at the shock. He wished the earth would open and swallow him. Mme. de Restaud's expression was reserved and chilly, her eyes had grown indifferent, and sedulously avoided meeting those of the unlucky student of law.

°°°°"Madame," he said, "you wish to talk with M. de Restaud; permit me to wish you good-day----"

°°°°The Countess interrupted him by a gesture, saying hastily, "Whenever you come to see us, both M. de Restaud and I shall be delighted to see you."

°°°°Eugene made a profound bow and took his leave, followed by M. de Restaud, who insisted, in spite of his remonstrances, on accompanying him into the hall.

°°°°"Neither your mistress nor I are at home to that gentleman when he calls," the Count said to Maurice.

°°°°As Eugene set foot on the steps, he saw that it was raining.

°°°°"Come," said he to himself, "somehow I have just made a mess of it, I do not know how. And now I am going to spoil my hat and coat into the bargain. I ought to stop in my corner, grind away at law, and never look to be anything but a boorish country magistrate. How can I go into society, when to manage properly you want a lot of cabs, varnished boots, gold watch chains, and all sorts of things; you have to wear white doeskin gloves that cost six francs in the morning, and primrose kid gloves every evening? A fig for that old humbug of a Goriot!"

°°°°When he reached the street door, the driver of a hackney coach, who had probably just deposited a wedding party at their door, and asked nothing better than a chance of making a little money for himself without his employer's knowledge, saw that Eugene had no umbrella, remarked his black coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, and varnished boots, and stopped and looked at him inquiringly. Eugene, in the blind desperation that drives a young man to plunge deeper and deeper into an abyss, as if he might hope to find a fortunate issue in its lowest depths, nodded in reply to the driver's signal, and stepped into the cab; a few stray petals of orange blossom and scraps of wire bore witness to its recent occupation by a wedding party.

°°°°"Where am I to drive, sir?" demanded the man, who, by this time, had taken off his white gloves.

°°°°"Confound it!" Eugene said to himself, "I am in for it now, and at least I will not spend cab-hire for nothing!--Drive to the Hotel Beauseant," he said aloud.

°°°°"Which?" asked the man, a portentous word that reduced Eugene to confusion. This young man of fashion, species incerta, did not know that there were two Hotels Beauseant; he was not aware how rich he was in relations who did not care about him.

°°°°"The Vicomte de Beauseant, Rue----"

°°°°"De Grenelle," interrupted the driver, with a jerk of his head. "You see, there are the hotels of the Marquis and Comte de Beauseant in the Rue Saint-Dominique," he added, drawing up the step.

°°°°"I know all about that," said Eugene, severely.--"Everybody is laughing at me to-day, it seems!" he said to himself, as he deposited his hat on the opposite seat. "This escapade will cost me a king's ransom, but, at any rate, I shall call on my so- called cousin in a thoroughly aristocratic fashion. Goriot has cost me ten francs already, the old scoundrel. My word! I will tell Mme. de Beauseant about my adventure; perhaps it may amuse her. Doubtless she will know the secret of the criminal relation between that handsome woman and the old rat without a tail. It would be better to find favor in my cousin's eyes than to come in contact with that shameless woman, who seems to me to have very expensive tastes. Surely the beautiful Vicomtesse's personal interest would turn the scale for me, when the mere mention of her name produces such an effect. Let us look higher. If you set yourself to carry the heights of heaven, you must face God."

°°°°The innumerable thoughts that surged through his brain might be summed up in these phrases. He grew calmer, and recovered something of his assurance as he watched the falling rain. He told himself that though he was about to squander two of the precious five-franc pieces that remained to him, the money was well laid out in preserving his coat, boots, and hat; and his cabman's cry of "Gate, if you please," almost put him in spirits. A Swiss, in scarlet and gold, appeared, the great door groaned on its hinges, and Rastignac, with sweet satisfaction, beheld his equipage pass under the archway and stop before the flight of steps beneath the awning. The driver, in a blue-and-red greatcoat, dismounted and let down the step. As Eugene stepped out of the cab, he heard smothered laughter from the peristyle. Three or four lackeys were making merry over the festal appearance of the vehicle. In another moment the law student was enlightened as to the cause of their hilarity; he felt the full force of the contrast between his equipage and one of the smartest broughams in Paris; a coachman, with powdered hair, seemed to find it difficult to hold a pair of spirited horses, who stood chafing the bit. In Mme. de Restaud's courtyard, in the Chaussee d'Antin, he had seen the neat turnout of a young man of six-and-twenty; in the Faubourg Saint-Germain he found the luxurious equipage of a man of rank; thirty thousand francs would not have purchased it.

°°°°"Who can be here?" said Eugene to himself. He began to understand, though somewhat tardily, that he must not expect to find many women in Paris who were not already appropriated, and that the capture of one of these queens would be likely to cost something more than bloodshed. "Confound it all! I expect my cousin also has her Maxime."

°°°°He went up the steps, feeling that he was a blighted being. The glass door was opened for him; the servants were as solemn as jackasses under the curry comb. So far, Eugene had only been in the ballroom on the ground floor of the Hotel Beauseant; the fete had followed so closely on the invitation, that he had not had time to call on his cousin, and had therefore never seen Mme. de Beauseant's apartments; he was about to behold for the first time a great lady among the wonderful and elegant surroundings that reveal her character and reflect her daily life. He was the more curious, because Mme. de Restaud's drawing-room had provided him with a standard of comparison.

°°°°At half-past four the Vicomtesse de Beauseant was visible. Five minutes earlier she would not have received her cousin, but Eugene knew nothing of the recognized routine of various houses in Paris. He was conducted up the wide, white-painted, crimson- carpeted staircase, between the gilded balusters and masses of flowering plants, to Mme. de Beauseant's apartments. He did not know the rumor current about Mme. de Beauseant, one of the biographies told, with variations, in whispers, every evening in the salons of Paris.

°°°°For three years past her name had been spoken of in connection with that of one of the most wealthy and distinguished Portuguese nobles, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto. It was one of those innocent liaisons which possess so much charm for the two thus attached to each other that they find the presence of a third person intolerable. The Vicomte de Beauseant, therefore, had himself set an example to the rest of the world by respecting, with as good a grace as might be, this morganatic union. Any one who came to call on the Vicomtesse in the early days of this friendship was sure to find the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto there. As, under the circumstances, Mme. de Beauseant could not very well shut her door against these visitors, she gave them such a cold reception, and showed so much interest in the study of the ceiling, that no one could fail to understand how much he bored her; and when it became known in Paris that Mme. de Beauseant was bored by callers between two and four o'clock, she was left in perfect solitude during that interval. She went to the Bouffons or to the Opera with M. de Beauseant and M. d'Ajuda-Pinto; and M. de Beauseant, like a well-bred man of the world, always left his wife and the Portuguese as soon as he had installed them. But M. d'Ajuda-Pinto must marry, and a Mlle. de Rochefide was the young lady. In the whole fashionable world there was but one person who as yet knew nothing of the arrangement, and that was Mme. de Beauseant. Some of her friends had hinted at the possibility, and she had laughed at them, believing that envy had prompted those ladies to try to make mischief. And now, though the bans were about to be published, and although the handsome Portuguese had come that day to break the news to the Vicomtesse, he had not found courage as yet to say one word about his treachery. How was it? Nothing is doubtless more difficult than the notification of an ultimatum of this kind. There are men who feel more at their ease when they stand up before another man who threatens their lives with sword or pistol than in the presence of a woman who, after two hours of lamentations and reproaches, falls into a dead swoon and requires salts. At this moment, therefore, M. d'Ajuda-Pinto was on thorns, and anxious to take his leave. He told himself that in some way or other the news would reach Mme. de Beauseant; he would write, it would be much better to do it by letter, and not to utter the words that should stab her to the heart.

°°°°So when the servant announced M. Eugene de Rastignac, the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto trembled with joy. To be sure, a loving woman shows even more ingenuity in inventing doubts of her lover than in varying the monotony of his happiness; and when she is about to be forsaken, she instinctively interprets every gesture as rapidly as Virgil's courser detected the presence of his companion by snuffing the breeze. It was impossible, therefore, that Mme. de Beauseant should not detect that involuntary thrill of satisfaction; slight though it was, it was appalling in its artlessness.

°°°°Eugene had yet to learn that no one in Paris should present himself in any house without first making himself acquainted with the whole history of its owner, and of its owner's wife and family, so that he may avoid making any of the terrible blunders which in Poland draw forth the picturesque exclamation, "Harness five bullocks to your cart!" probably because you will need them all to pull you out of the quagmire into which a false step has plunged you. If, down to the present day, our language has no name for these conversational disasters, it is probably because they are believed to be impossible, the publicity given in Paris to every scandal is so prodigious. After the awkward incident at Mme. de Restaud's, no one but Eugene could have reappeared in his character of bullock-driver in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room. But if Mme. de Restaud and M. de Trailles had found him horribly in the way, M. d'Ajuda hailed his coming with relief.

°°°°"Good-bye," said the Portuguese, hurrying to the door, as Eugene made his entrance into a dainty little pink-and-gray drawing- room, where luxury seemed nothing more than good taste.

°°°°"Until this evening," said Mme. de Beauseant, turning her head to give the Marquis a glance. "We are going to the Bouffons, are we not?"

°°°°"I cannot go," he said, with his fingers on the door handle.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant rose and beckoned to him to return. She did not pay the slightest attention to Eugene, who stood there dazzled by the sparkling marvels around him; he began to think that this was some story out of the Arabian Nights made real, and did not know where to hide himself, when the woman before him seemed to be unconscious of his existence. The Vicomtesse had raised the forefinger of her right hand, and gracefully signed to the Marquis to seat himself beside her. The Marquis felt the imperious sway of passion in her gesture; he came back towards her. Eugene watched him, not without a feeling of envy.

°°°°"That is the owner of the brougham!" he said to himself. "But is it necessary to have a pair of spirited horses, servants in livery, and torrents of gold to draw a glance from a woman here in Paris?"

°°°°The demon of luxury gnawed at his heart, greed burned in his veins, his throat was parched with the thirst of gold.

°°°°He had a hundred and thirty francs every quarter. His father, mother, brothers, sisters, and aunt did not spend two hundred francs a month among them. This swift comparison between his present condition and the aims he had in view helped to benumb his faculties.

°°°°"Why not?" the Vicomtesse was saying, as she smiled at the Portuguese. "Why cannot you come to the Italiens?"

°°°°"Affairs! I am to dine with the English Ambassador."

°°°°"Throw him over."

°°°°When a man once enters on a course of deception, he is compelled to add lie to lie. M. d'Ajuda therefore said, smiling, "Do you lay your commands on me?"

°°°°"Yes, certainly."

°°°°"That was what I wanted to have you say to me," he answered, dissembling his feelings in a glance which would have reassured any other woman.

°°°°He took the Vicomtesse's hand, kissed it, and went.

°°°°Eugene ran his fingers through his hair, and constrained himself to bow. He thought that now Mme. de Beauseant would give him her attention; but suddenly she sprang forward, rushed to a window in the gallery, and watched M. d'Ajuda step into his carriage; she listened to the order that he gave, and heard the Swiss repeat it to the coachman:

°°°°"To M. de Rochefide's house."

°°°°Those words, and the way in which M. d'Ajuda flung himself back in the carriage, were like a lightning flash and a thunderbolt for her; she walked back again with a deadly fear gnawing at her heart. The most terrible catastrophes only happen among the heights. The Vicomtesse went to her own room, sat down at a table, and took up a sheet of dainty notepaper.

°°°°"When, instead of dining with the English Ambassador,"   she wrote, "you go to the Rochefides, you owe me an   explanation, which I am waiting to hear."

°°°°She retraced several of the letters, for her hand was trembling so that they were indistinct; then she signed the note with an initial C for "Claire de Bourgogne," and rang the bell.

°°°°"Jacques," she said to the servant, who appeared immediately, "take this note to M. de Rochefide's house at half-past seven and ask for the Marquis d'Ajuda. If M. d'Ajuda is there, leave the note without waiting for an answer; if he is not there, bring the note back to me."

°°°°"Madame la Vicomtess, there is a visitor in the drawing-room."

°°°°"Ah! yes, of course," she said, opening the door.

°°°°Eugene was beginning to feel very uncomfortable, but at last the Vicomtesse appeared; she spoke to him, and the tremulous tones of her voice vibrated through his heart.

°°°°"Pardon me, monsieur," she said; "I had a letter to write. Now I am quite at liberty."

°°°°She scarcely knew what she was saying, for even as she spoke she thought, "Ah! he means to marry Mlle. de Rochefide? But is he still free? This evening the marriage shall be broken off, or else . . . But before to-morrow I shall know."

°°°°"Cousin . . ." the student replied.

°°°°"Eh?" said the Countess, with an insolent glance that sent a cold shudder through Eugene; he understood what that "Eh?" meant; he had learned a great deal in three hours, and his wits were on the alert. He reddened:

°°°°"Madame . . ." he began; he hesitated a moment, and then went on. "Pardon me; I am in such need of protection that the nearest scrap of relationship could do me no harm."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant smiled but there was sadness in her smile; even now she felt forebodings of the coming pain, the air she breathed was heavy with the storm that was about to burst.

°°°°"If you knew how my family are situated," he went on, "you would love to play the part of a beneficent fairy godmother who graciously clears the obstacles from the path of her protege."

°°°°"Well, cousin," she said, laughing, "and how can I be of service to you?"

°°°°"But do I know even that? I am distantly related to you, and this obscure and remote relationship is even now a perfect godsend to me. You have confused my ideas; I cannot remember the things that I meant to say to you. I know no one else here in Paris. . . . Ah! if I could only ask you to counsel me, ask you to look upon me as a poor child who would fain cling to the hem of your dress, who would lay down his life for you."

°°°°"Would you kill a man for me?"

°°°°"Two," said Eugene.

°°°°"You, child. Yes, you are a child," she said, keeping back the tears that came to her eyes; "you would love sincerely."

°°°°"Oh!" he cried, flinging up his head.

°°°°The audacity of the student's answer interested the Vicomtesse in him. The southern brain was beginning to scheme for the first time. Between Mme. de Restaud's blue boudoir and Mme. de Beauseant's rose-colored drawing-room he had made a three years' advance in a kind of law which is not a recognized study in Paris, although it is a sort of higher jurisprudence, and, when well understood, is a highroad to success of every kind.

°°°°"Ah! that is what I meant to say!" said Eugene. "I met Mme. de Restaud at your ball, and this morning I went to see her.

°°°°"You must have been very much in the way," said Mme. de Beauseant, smiling as she spoke.

°°°°"Yes, indeed. I am a novice, and my blunders will set every one against me, if you do not give me your counsel. I believe that in Paris it is very difficult to meet with a young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion who would be willing to teach me, what you women can explain so well--life. I shall find a M. de Trailles everywhere. So I have come to you to ask you to give me a key to a puzzle, to entreat you to tell me what sort of blunder I made this morning. I mentioned an old man----"

°°°°"Madame la Duchess de Langeais," Jacques cut the student short; Eugene gave expression to his intense annoyance by a gesture.

°°°°"If you mean to succeed," said the Vicomtesse in a low voice, "in the first place you must not be so demonstrative."

°°°°"Ah! good morning, dear," she continued, and rising and crossing the room, she grasped the Duchess' hands as affectionately as if they had been sisters; the Duchess responded in the prettiest and most gracious way.

°°°°"Two intimate friends!" said Rastignac to himself. "Henceforward I shall have two protectresses; those two women are great friends, no doubt, and this newcomer will doubtless interest herself in her friend's cousin."

°°°°"To what happy inspiration do I owe this piece of good fortune, dear Antoinette?" asked Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°"Well, I saw M. d'Ajuda-Pinto at M. de Rochefide's door, so I thought that if I came I should find you alone."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant's mouth did not tighten, her color did not rise, her expression did not alter, or rather, her brow seemed to clear as the Duchess uttered those deadly words.

°°°°"If I had known that you were engaged----" the speaker added, glancing at Eugene.

°°°°"This gentleman is M. Eugene de Rastignac, one of my cousins," said the Vicomtesse. "Have you any news of General de Montriveau?" she continued. "Serizy told me yesterday that he never goes anywhere now; has he been to see you to-day?"

°°°°It was believed that the Duchess was desperately in love with M. de Montriveau, and that he was a faithless lover; she felt the question in her very heart, and her face flushed as she answered:

°°°°"He was at the Elysee yesterday."

°°°°"In attendance?"

°°°°"Claire," returned the Duchess, and hatred overflowed in the glances she threw at Mme. de Beauseant; "of course you know that M. d'Ajuda-Pinto is going to marry Mlle. de Rochefide; the bans will be published to-morrow."

°°°°This thrust was too cruel; the Vicomtesse's face grew white, but she answered, laughing, "One of those rumors that fools amuse themselves with. What should induce M. d'Ajuda to take one of the noblest names in Portugal to the Rochefides? The Rochefides were only ennobled yesterday."

°°°°"But Bertha will have two hundred thousand livres a year, they say."

°°°°"M. d'Ajuda is too wealthy to marry for money."

°°°°"But, my dear, Mlle. de Rochefide is a charming girl."

°°°°"Indeed?"

°°°°"And, as a matter of fact, he is dining with them to-day; the thing is settled. It is very surprising to me that you should know so little about it."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant turned to Rastignac. "What was the blunder that you made, monsieur?" she asked. "The poor boy is only just launched into the world, Antoinette, so that he understands nothing of all this that we are speaking of. Be merciful to him, and let us finish our talk to-morrow. Everything will be announced to-morrow, you know, and your kind informal communication can be accompanied by official confirmation."

°°°°The Duchess gave Eugene one of those insolent glances that measure a man from head to foot, and leave him crushed and annihilated.

°°°°"Madame, I have unwittingly plunged a dagger into Mme. de Restaud's heart; unwittingly--therein lies my offence," said the student of law, whose keen brain had served him sufficiently well, for he had detected the biting epigrams that lurked beneath this friendly talk. "You continue to receive, possibly you fear, those who know the amount of pain that they deliberately inflict; but a clumsy blunderer who has no idea how deeply he wounds is looked upon as a fool who does not know how to make use of his opportunities, and every one despise him."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant gave the student a glance, one of those glances in which a great soul can mingle dignity and gratitude. It was like balm to the law student, who was still smarting under the Duchess' insolent scrutiny; she had looked at him as an auctioneer might look at some article to appraise its value.

°°°°"Imagine, too, that I had just made some progress with the Comte de Restaud; for I should tell you, madame," he went on, turning to the Duchess with a mixture of humility and malice in his manner, "that as yet I am only a poor devil of a student, very much alone in the world, and very poor----"

°°°°"You should not tell us that, M. de Rastignac. We women never care about anything that no one else will take."

°°°°"Bah!" said Eugene. "I am only two-and-twenty, and I must make up my mind to the drawbacks of my time of life. Besides, I am confessing my sins, and it would be impossible to kneel in a more charming confessional; you commit your sins in one drawing-room, and receive absolution for them in another."

°°°°The Duchess' expression grew colder, she did not like the flippant tone of these remarks, and showed that she considered them to be in bad taste by turning to the Vicomtesse with--"This gentleman has only just come----"

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant began to laugh outright at her cousin and at the Duchess both.

°°°°"He has only just come to Paris, dear, and is in search of some one who will give him lessons in good taste."

°°°°"Mme. la Duchesse," said Eugene, "is it not natural to wish to be initiated into the mysteries which charm us?" ("Come, now," he said to himself, "my language is superfinely elegant, I'm sure.")

°°°°"But Mme. de Restaud is herself, I believe, M. de Trailles' pupil," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Of that I had no idea, madame," answered the law student, "so I rashly came between them. In fact, I got on very well with the lady's husband, and his wife tolerated me for a time until I took it into my head to tell them that I knew some one of whom I had just caught a glimpse as he went out by a back staircase, a man who had given the Countess a kiss at the end of a passage."

°°°°"Who was it?" both women asked together.

°°°°"An old man who lives at the rate of two louis a month in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau, where I, a poor student, lodge likewise. He is a truly unfortunate creature, everybody laughs at him--we all call him 'Father Goriot.' "

°°°°"Why, child that you are," cried the Vicomtesse, "Mme. de Restaud was a Mlle. Goriot!"

°°°°"The daughter of a vermicelli manufacturer," the Duchess added; "and when the little creature went to Court, the daughter of a pastry-cook was presented on the same day. Do you remember, Claire? The King began to laugh, and made some joke in Latin about flour. People--what was it?--people----"

°°°°"Ejusdem farinae," said Eugene.

°°°°"Yes, that was it," said the Duchess.

°°°°"Oh! is that her father?" the law student continued, aghast.

°°°°"Yes, certainly; the old man had two daughters; he dotes on them, so to speak, though they will scarcely acknowledge him."

°°°°"Didn't the second daughter marry a banker with a German name?" the Vicomtesse asked, turning to Mme. de Langeais, "a Baron de Nucingen? And her name is Delphine, is it not? Isn't she a fair- haired woman who has a side-box at the Opera? She comes sometimes to the Bouffons, and laughs loudly to attract attention."

°°°°The Duchess smiled and said:

°°°°"I wonder at you, dear. Why do you take so much interest in people of that kind? One must have been as madly in love as Restaud was, to be infatuated with Mlle. Anastasie and her flour sacks. Oh! he will not find her a good bargain! She is in M. de Trailles' hands, and he will ruin her."

°°°°"And they do not acknowledge their father!" Eugene repeated.

°°°°"Oh! well, yes, their father, the father, a father," replied the Vicomtesse, "a kind father who gave them each five or six hundred thousand francs, it is said, to secure their happiness by marrying them well; while he only kept eight or ten thousand livres a year for himself, thinking that his daughters would always be his daughters, thinking that in them he would live his life twice over again, that in their houses he should find two homes, where he would be loved and looked up to, and made much of. And in two years' time both his sons-in-law had turned him out of their houses as if he were one of the lowest outcasts."

°°°°Tears came into Eugene's eyes. He was still under the spell of youthful beliefs, he had just left home, pure and sacred feelings had been stirred within him, and this was his first day on the battlefield of civilization in Paris. Genuine feeling is so infectious that for a moment the three looked at each other in silence.

°°°°"Eh, mon Dieu!" said Mme. de Langeais; "yes, it seems very horrible, and yet we see such things every day. Is there not a reason for it? Tell me, dear, have you ever really thought what a son-in-law is? A son-in-law is the man for whom we bring up, you and I, a dear little one, bound to us very closely in innumerable ways; for seventeen years she will be the joy of her family, its 'white soul,' as Lamartine says, and suddenly she will become its scourge. When HE comes and takes her from us, his love from the very beginning is like an axe laid to the root of all the old affection in our darling's heart, and all the ties that bound her to her family are severed. But yesterday our little daughter thought of no one but her mother and father, as we had no thought that was not for her; by to-morrow she will have become a hostile stranger. The tragedy is always going on under our eyes. On the one hand you see a father who has sacrificed himself to his son, and his daughter-in-law shows him the last degree of insolence. On the other hand, it is the son-in-law who turns his wife's mother out of the house. I sometimes hear it said that there is nothing dramatic about society in these days; but the Drama of the Son-in-law is appalling, to say nothing of our marriages, which have come to be very poor farces. I can explain how it all came about in the old vermicelli maker's case. I think I recollect that Foriot----"

°°°°"Goriot, madame."

°°°°"Yes, that Moriot was once President of his Section during the Revolution. He was in the secret of the famous scarcity of grain, and laid the foundation of his fortune in those days by selling flour for ten times its cost. He had as much flour as he wanted. My grandmother's steward sold him immense quantities. No doubt Noriot shared the plunder with the Committee of Public Salvation, as that sort of person always did. I recollect the steward telling my grandmother that she might live at Grandvilliers in complete security, because her corn was as good as a certificate of civism. Well, then, this Loriot, who sold corn to those butchers, has never had but one passion, they say--he idolizes his daughters. He settled one of them under Restaud's roof, and grafted the other into the Nucingen family tree, the Baron de Nucingen being a rich banker who had turned Royalist. You can quite understand that so long as Bonaparte was Emperor, the two sons-in-law could manage to put up with the old Ninety-three; but after the restoration of the Bourbons, M. de Restaud felt bored by the old man's society, and the banker was still more tired of it. His daughters were still fond of him; they wanted 'to keep the goat and the cabbage,' so they used to see Joriot whenever there was no one there, under pretence of affection. 'Come to- day, papa, we shall have you all to ourselves, and that will be much nicer!' and all that sort of thing. As for me, dear, I believe that love has second-sight: poor Ninety-three; his heart must have bled. He saw that his daughters were ashamed of him, that if they loved their husbands his visits must make mischief. So he immolated himself. He made the sacrifice because he was a father; he went into voluntary exile. His daughters were satisfied, so he thought that he had done the best thing he could; but it was a family crime, and father and daughters were accomplices. You see this sort of thing everywhere. What could this old Doriot have been but a splash of mud in his daughters' drawing-rooms? He would only have been in the way, and bored other people, besides being bored himself. And this that happened between father and daughters may happen to the prettiest woman in

°°°°Paris and the man she loves the best; if her love grows tiresome, he will go; he will descend to the basest trickery to leave her. It is the same with all love and friendship. Our heart is a treasury; if you pour out all its wealth at once, you are bankrupt. We show no more mercy to the affection that reveals its utmost extent than we do to another kind of prodigal who has not a penny left. Their father had given them all he had. For twenty years he had given his whole heart to them; then, one day, he gave them all his fortune too. The lemon was squeezed; the girls left the rest in the gutter."

°°°°"The world is very base," said the Vicomtesse, plucking at the threads of her shawl. She did not raise her head as she spoke; the words that Mme. de Langeais had meant for her in the course of her story had cut her to the quick.

°°°°"Base? Oh, no," answered the Duchess; "the world goes its own way, that is all. If I speak in this way, it is only to show that I am not duped by it. I think as you do," she said, pressing the Vicomtesse's hand. "The world is a slough; let us try to live on the heights above it."

°°°°She rose to her feet and kissed Mme. de Beauseant on the forehead as she said: "You look very charming to-day, dear. I have never seen such a lovely color in your cheeks before."

°°°°Then she went out with a slight inclination of the head to the cousin.

°°°°"Father Goriot is sublime!" said Eugene to himself, as he remembered how he had watched his neighbor work the silver vessel into a shapeless mass that night.

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant did not hear him; she was absorbed in her own thoughts. For several minutes the silence remained unbroken till the law student became almost paralyzed with embarrassment, and was equally afraid to go or stay or speak a word.

°°°°"The world is basely ungrateful and ill-natured," said the Vicomtesse at last. "No sooner does a trouble befall you than a friend is ready to bring the tidings and to probe your heart with the point of a dagger while calling on you to admire the handle. Epigrams and sarcasms already! Ah! I will defend myself!"

°°°°She raised her head like the great lady that she was, and lightnings flashed from her proud eyes.

°°°°"Ah!" she said, as she saw Eugene, "are you there?"

°°°°"Still," he said piteously.

°°°°"Well, then, M. de Rastignac, deal with the world as it deserves. You are determined to succeed? I will help you. You shall sound the depths of corruption in woman; you shall measure the extent of man's pitiful vanity. Deeply as I am versed in such learning, there were pages in the book of life that I had not read. Now I know all. The more cold-blooded your calculations, the further you will go. Strike ruthlessly; you will be feared. Men and women for you must be nothing more than post-horses; take a fresh relay, and leave the last to drop by the roadside; in this way you will reach the goal of your ambition. You will be nothing here, you see, unless a woman interests herself in you; and she must be young and wealthy, and a woman of the world. Yet, if you have a heart, lock it carefully away like a treasure; do not let any one suspect it, or you will be lost; you would cease to be the executioner, you would take the victim's place. And if ever you should love, never let your secret escape you! Trust no one until you are very sure of the heart to which you open your heart. Learn to mistrust every one; take every precaution for the sake of the love which does not exist as yet. Listen, Miguel"-- the name slipped from her so naturally that she did not notice her mistake--"there is something still more appalling than the ingratitude of daughters who have cast off their old father and wish that he were dead, and that is a rivalry between two sisters. Restaud comes of a good family, his wife has been received into their circle; she has been presented at court; and her sister, her wealthy sister, Mme. Delphine de Nucingen, the wife of a great capitalist, is consumed with envy, and ready to die of spleen. There is gulf set between the sisters--indeed, they are sisters no longer--the two women who refuse to acknowledge their father do not acknowledge each other. So Mme. de Nucingen would lap up all the mud that lies between the Rue Saint-Lazare and the Rue de Grenelle to gain admittance to my salon. She fancied that she should gain her end through de Marsay; she has made herself de Marsay's slave, and she bores him. De Marsay cares very little about her. If you will introduce her to me, you will be her darling, her Benjamin; she will idolize you. If, after that, you can love her, do so; if not, make her useful. I will ask her to come once or twice to one of my great crushes, but I will never receive her here in the morning. I will bow to her when I see her, and that will be quite sufficient. You have shut the Comtesse de Restaud's door against you by mentioning Father Goriot's name. Yes, my good friend, you may call at her house twenty times, and every time out of the twenty you will find that she is not at home. The servants have their orders, and will not admit you. Very well, then, now let Father Goriot gain the right of entry into her sister's house for you. The beautiful Mme. de Nucingen will give the signal for a battle. As soon as she singles you out, other women will begin to lose their heads about you, and her enemies and rivals and intimate friends will all try to take you from her. There are women who will fall in love with a man because another woman has chosen him; like the city madams, poor things, who copy our millinery, and hope thereby to acquire our manners. You will have a success, and in Paris success is everything; it is the key of power. If the women credit you with wit and talent, the men will follow suit so long as you do not undeceive them yourself. There will be nothing you may not aspire to; you will go everywhere, and you will find out what the world is--an assemblage of fools and knaves. But you must be neither the one nor the other. I am giving you my name like Ariadne's clue of thread to take with you into the labyrinth; make no unworthy use of it," she said, with a queenly glance and curve of her throat; "give it back to me unsullied. And now, go; leave me. We women also have our battles to fight."

°°°°"And if you should ever need some one who would gladly set a match to a train for you----"

°°°°"Well?" she asked.

°°°°He tapped his heart, smiled in answer to his cousin's smile, and went.

°°°°It was five o'clock, and Eugene was hungry; he was afraid lest he should not be in time for dinner, a misgiving which made him feel that it was pleasant to be borne so quickly across Paris. This sensation of physical comfort left his mind free to grapple with the thoughts that assailed him. A mortification usually sends a young man of his age into a furious rage; he shakes his fist at society, and vows vengeance when his belief in himself is shaken. Just then Rastignac was overwhelmed by the words, "You have shut the Countess' door against you."

°°°°"I shall call!" he said to himself, "and if Mme. de Beauseant is right, if I never find her at home--I . . . well, Mme. de Restaud shall meet me in every salon in Paris. I will learn to fence and have some pistol practice, and kill that Maxime of hers!"

°°°°"And money?" cried an inward monitor. "How about money, where is that to come from?" And all at once the wealth displayed in the Countess de Restaud's drawing-room rose before his eyes. That was the luxury which Goriot's daughter had loved too well, the gilding, the ostentatious splendor, the unintelligent luxury of the parvenu, the riotous extravagance of a courtesan. Then the attractive vision suddenly went under an eclipse as he remembered the stately grandeur of the Hotel de Beauseant. As his fancy wandered among these lofty regions in the great world of Paris, innumerable dark thoughts gathered in his heart; his ideas widened, and his conscience grew more elastic. He saw the world as it is; saw how the rich lived beyond the jurisdiction of law and public opinion, and found in success the ultima ratio mundi.

°°°°"Vautrin is right, success is virtue!" he said to himself.

°°°°Arrived in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, he rushed up to his room for ten francs wherewith to satisfy the demands of the cabman, and went in to dinner. He glanced round the squalid room, saw the eighteen poverty-stricken creatures about to feed like cattle in their stalls, and the sight filled him with loathing. The transition was too sudden, and the contrast was so violent that it could not but act as a powerful stimulant; his ambition developed and grew beyond all social bounds. On the one hand, he beheld a vision of social life in its most charming and refined forms, of quick-pulsed youth, of fair, impassioned faces invested with all the charm of poetry, framed in a marvelous setting of luxury or art; and, on the other hand, he saw a sombre picture, the miry verge beyond these faces, in which passion was extinct and nothing was left of the drama but the cords and pulleys and bare mechanism. Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, the words uttered in anger by the forsaken lady, her petulant offer, came to his mind, and poverty was a ready expositor. Rastignac determined to open two parallel trenches so as to insure success; he would be a learned doctor of law and a man of fashion. Clearly he was still a child! Those two lines are asymptotes, and will never meet.

°°°°"You are very dull, my lord Marquis," said Vautrin, with one of the shrewd glances that seem to read the innermost secrets of another mind.

°°°°"I am not in the humor to stand jokes from people who call me 'my lord Marquis,' " answered Eugene. "A marquis here in Paris, if he is not the veriest sham, ought to have a hundred thousand livres a year at least; and a lodger in the Maison Vauquer is not exactly Fortune's favorite."

°°°°Vautrin's glance at Rastignac was half-paternal, half- contemptuous. "Puppy!" it seemed to say; "I should make one mouthful of him!" Then he answered:

°°°°"You are in a bad humor; perhaps your visit to the beautiful Comtesse de Restaud was not a success."

°°°°"She has shut her door against me because I told her that her father dined at our table," cried Rastignac.

°°°°Glances were exchanged all round the room; Father Goriot looked down.

°°°°"You have sent some snuff into my eye," he said to his neighbor, turning a little aside to rub his hand over his face.

°°°°"Any one who molests Father Goriot will have henceforward to reckon with me," said Eugene, looking at the old man's neighbor; "he is worth all the rest of us put together.--I am not speaking of the ladies," he added, turning in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer.

°°°°Eugene's remarks produced a sensation, and his tone silenced the dinner-table. Vautrin alone spoke. "If you are going to champion Father Goriot, and set up for his responsible editor into the bargain, you had need be a crack shot and know how to handle the foils," he said, banteringly.

°°°°"So I intend," said Eugene.

°°°°"Then you are taking the field today?"

°°°°"Perhaps," Rastignac answered. "But I owe no account of myself to any one, especially as I do not try to find out what other people do of a night."

°°°°Vautrin looked askance at Rastignac.

°°°°"If you do not mean to be deceived by the puppets, my boy, you must go behind and see the whole show, and not peep through holes in the curtain. That is enough," he added, seeing that Eugene was about to fly into a passion. "We can have a little talk whenever you like."

°°°°There was a general feeling of gloom and constraint. Father Goriot was so deeply dejected by the student's remark that he did not notice the change in the disposition of his fellow-lodgers, nor know that he had met with a champion capable of putting an end to the persecution.

°°°°"Then, M. Goriot sitting there is the father of a countess," said Mme. Vauquer in a low voice.

°°°°"And of a baroness," answered Rastignac.

°°°°"That is about all he is capable of," said Bianchon to Rastignac; "I have taken a look at his head; there is only one bump--the bump of Paternity; he must be an ETERNAL FATHER."

°°°°Eugene was too intent on his thoughts to laugh at Bianchon's joke. He determined to profit by Mme. de Beauseant's counsels, and was asking himself how he could obtain the necessary money. He grew grave. The wide savannas of the world stretched before his eyes; all things lay before him, nothing was his. Dinner came to an end, the others went, and he was left in the dining-room.

°°°°"So you have seen my daughter?" Goriot spoke tremulously, and the sound of his voice broke in upon Eugene's dreams. The young man took the elder's hand, and looked at him with something like kindness in his eyes.

°°°°"You are a good and noble man," he said. "We will have some talk about your daughters by and by."

°°°°He rose without waiting for Goriot's answer, and went to his room. There he wrote the following letter to his mother:--

°°°°"My Dear Mother,--Can you nourish your child from your breast again? I am in a position to make a rapid fortune, but I want twelve hundred francs--I must have them at all costs. Say nothing about this to my father; perhaps he might make objections, and unless I have the money, I may be led to put an end to myself, and so escape the clutches of despair. I will tell you everything when I see you. I will not begin to try to describe my present situation; it would take volumes to put the whole story clearly and fully. I have not been gambling, my kind mother, I owe no one a penny; but if you would preserve the life that you gave me, you must send me the sum I mention. As a matter of fact, I go to see the Vicomtesse de Beauseant; she is using her influence for me; I am obliged to go into society, and I have not a penny to lay out on clean gloves. I can manage to exist on bread and water, or go without food, if need be, but I cannot do without the tools with which they cultivate the vineyards in this country. I must resolutely make up my mind at once to make my way, or stick in the mire for the rest of my days. I know that all your hopes are set on me, and I want to realize them quickly. Sell some of your old jewelry, my kind mother; I will give you other jewels very soon. I know enough of our affairs at home to know all that such a sacrifice means, and you must not think that I would lightly ask you to make it; I should be a monster if I could. You must think of my entreaty as a cry forced from me by imperative necessity. Our whole future lies in the subsidy with which I must begin my first campaign, for life in Paris is one continual battle. If you cannot otherwise procure the whole of the money, and are forced to sell our aunt's lace, tell her that I will send her some still handsomer," and so forth.

°°°°He wrote to ask each of his sisters for their savings--would they despoil themselves for him, and keep the sacrifice a secret from the family? To his request he knew that they would not fail to respond gladly, and he added to it an appeal to their delicacy by touching the chord of honor that vibrates so loudly in young and high-strung natures.

°°°°Yet when he had written the letters, he could not help feeling misgivings in spite of his youthful ambition; his heart beat fast, and he trembled. He knew the spotless nobleness of the lives buried away in the lonely manor house; he knew what trouble and what joy his request would cause his sisters, and how happy they would be as they talked at the bottom of the orchard of that dear brother of theirs in Paris. Visions rose before his eyes; a sudden strong light revealed his sisters secretly counting over their little store, devising some girlish stratagem by which the money could be sent to him incognito, essaying, for the first time in their lives, a piece of deceit that reached the sublime in its unselfishness.

°°°°"A sister's heart is a diamond for purity, a deep sea of tenderness!" he said to himself. He felt ashamed of those letters.

°°°°What power there must be in the petitions put up by such hearts; how pure the fervor that bears their souls to Heaven in prayer! What exquisite joy they would find in self-sacrifice! What a pang for his mother's heart if she could not send him all that he asked for! And this noble affection, these sacrifices made at such terrible cost, were to serve as the ladder by which he meant to climb to Delphine de Nucingen. A few tears, like the last grains of incense flung upon the sacred alter fire of the hearth, fell from his eyes. He walked up and down, and despair mingled with his emotion. Father Goriot saw him through the half-open door.

°°°°"What is the matter, sir?" he asked from the threshold.

°°°°"Ah! my good neighbor, I am as much a son and brother as you are a father. You do well to fear for the Comtesse Anastasie; there is one M. Maxime de Trailles, who will be her ruin."

°°°°Father Goriot withdrew, stammering some words, but Eugene failed to catch their meaning.

°°°°The next morning Rastignac went out to post his letters. Up to the last moment he wavered and doubted, but he ended by flinging them into the box. "I shall succeed!" he said to himself. So says the gambler; so says the great captain; but the three words that have been the salvation of some few, have been the ruin of many more.

°°°°A few days after this Eugene called at Mme. de Restaud's house; she was not at home. Three times he tried the experiment, and three times he found her doors closed against him, though he was careful to choose an hour when M. de Trailles was not there. The Vicomtesse was right.

°°°°The student studied no longer. He put in an appearance at lectures simply to answer to his name, and after thus attesting his presence, departed forthwith. He had been through a reasoning process familiar to most students. He had seen the advisability of deferring his studies to the last moment before going up for his examinations; he made up his mind to cram his second and third years' work into the third year, when he meant to begin to work in earnest, and to complete his studies in law with one great effort. In the meantime he had fifteen months in which to navigate the ocean of Paris, to spread the nets and set the lines that would bring him a protectress and a fortune. Twice during that week he saw Mme. de Beauseant; he did not go to her house until he had seen the Marquis d'Ajuda drive away.

°°°°Victory for yet a few more days was with the great lady, the most poetic figure in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; and the marriage of the Marquis d'Ajuda-Pinto with Mlle. de Rochefide was postponed. The dread of losing her happiness filled those days with a fever of joy unknown before, but the end was only so much the nearer. The Marquis d'Ajuda and the Rochefides agreed that this quarrel and reconciliation was a very fortunate thing; Mme. de Beauseant (so they hoped) would gradually become reconciled to the idea of the marriage, and in the end would be brought to sacrifice d'Ajuda's morning visits to the exigencies of a man's career, exigencies which she must have foreseen. In spite of the most solemn promises, daily renewed, M. d'Ajuda was playing a part, and the Vicomtesse was eager to be deceived. "Instead of taking a leap heroically from the window, she is falling headlong down the staircase," said her most intimate friend, the Duchesse de Langeais. Yet this after-glow of happiness lasted long enough for the Vicomtesse to be of service to her young cousin. She had a half-superstitious affection for him. Eugene had shown her sympathy and devotion at a crisis when a woman sees no pity, no real comfort in any eyes; when if a man is ready with soothing flatteries, it is because he has an interested motive.

°°°°Rastignac made up his mind that he must learn the whole of Goriot's previous history; he would come to his bearings before attempting to board the Maison de Nucingen. The results of his inquiries may be given briefly as follows:--

°°°°In the days before the Revolution, Jean-Joachim Goriot was simply a workman in the employ of a vermicelli maker. He was a skilful, thrifty workman, sufficiently enterprising to buy his master's business when the latter fell a chance victim to the disturbances of 1789. Goriot established himself in the Rue de la Jussienne, close to the Corn Exchange. His plain good sense led him to accept the position of President of the Section, so as to secure for his business the protection of those in power at that dangerous epoch. This prudent step had led to success; the foundations of his fortune were laid in the time of the Scarcity (real or artificial), when the price of grain of all kinds rose enormously in Paris. People used to fight for bread at the bakers' doors; while other persons went to the grocers' shops and bought Italian paste foods without brawling over it. It was during this year that Goriot made the money, which, at a later time, was to give him all the advantage of the great capitalist over the small buyer; he had, moreover, the usual luck of average ability; his mediocrity was the salvation of him. He excited no one's envy, it was not even suspected that he was rich till the peril of being rich was over, and all his intelligence was concentrated, not on political, but on commercial speculations. Goriot was an authority second to none on all questions relating to corn, flour, and "middlings"; and the production, storage, and quality of grain. He could estimate the yield of the harvest, and foresee market prices; he bought his cereals in Sicily, and imported Russian wheat. Any one who had heard him hold forth on the regulations that control the importation and exportation of grain, who had seen his grasp of the subject, his clear insight into the principles involved, his appreciation of weak points in the way that the system worked, would have thought that here was the stuff of which a minister is made. Patient, active, and persevering, energetic and prompt in action, he surveyed his business horizon with an eagle eye. Nothing there took him by surprise; he foresaw all things, knew all that was happening, and kept his own counsel; he was a diplomatist in his quick comprehension of a situation; and in the routine of business he was as patient and plodding as a soldier on the march. But beyond this business horizon he could not see. He used to spend his hours of leisure on the threshold of his shop, leaning against the framework of the door. Take him from his dark little counting-house, and he became once more the rough, slow-witted workman, a man who cannot understand a piece of reasoning, who is indifferent to all intellectual pleasures, and falls asleep at the play, a Parisian Dolibom in short, against whose stupidity other minds are powerless.

°°°°Natures of this kind are nearly all alike; in almost all of them you will find some hidden depth of sublime affection. Two all- absorbing affections filled the vermicelli maker's heart to the exclusion of every other feeling; into them he seemed to put all the forces of his nature, as he put the whole power of his brain into the corn trade. He had regarded his wife, the only daughter of a rich farmer of La Brie, with a devout admiration; his love for her had been boundless. Goriot had felt the charm of a lovely and sensitive nature, which, in its delicate strength, was the very opposite of his own. Is there any instinct more deeply implanted in the heart of man than the pride of protection, a protection which is constantly exerted for a fragile and defenceless creature? Join love thereto, the warmth of gratitude that all generous souls feel for the source of their pleasures, and you have the explanation of many strange incongruities in human nature.

°°°°After seven years of unclouded happiness, Goriot lost his wife. It was very unfortunate for him. She was beginning to gain an ascendency over him in other ways; possibly she might have brought that barren soil under cultivation, she might have widened his ideas and given other directions to his thoughts. But when she was dead, the instinct of fatherhood developed in him till it almost became a mania. All the affection balked by death seemed to turn to his daughters, and he found full satisfaction for his heart in loving them. More or less brilliant proposals were made to him from time to time; wealthy merchants or farmers with daughters vied with each other in offering inducements to him to marry again; but he determined to remain a widower. His father-in-law, the only man for whom he felt a decided friendship, gave out that Goriot had made a vow to be faithful to his wife's memory. The frequenters of the Corn Exchange, who could not comprehend this sublime piece of folly, joked about it among themselves, and found a ridiculous nickname for him. One of them ventured (after a glass over a bargain) to call him by it, and a blow from the vermicelli maker's fist sent him headlong into a gutter in the Rue Oblin. He could think of nothing else when his children were concerned; his love for them made him fidgety and anxious; and this was so well known, that one day a competitor, who wished to get rid of him to secure the field to himself, told Goriot that Delphine had just been knocked down by a cab. The vermicelli maker turned ghastly pale, left the Exchange at once, and did not return for several days afterwards; he was ill in consequence of the shock and the subsequent relief on discovering that it was a false alarm. This time, however, the offender did not escape with a bruised shoulder; at a critical moment in the man's affairs, Goriot drove him into bankruptcy, and forced him to disappear from the Corn Exchange.

°°°°As might have been expected, the two girls were spoiled. With an income of sixty thousand francs, Goriot scarcely spent twelve hundred on himself, and found all his happiness in satisfying the whims of the two girls. The best masters were engaged, that Anastasie and Delphine might be endowed with all the accomplishments which distinguish a good education. They had a chaperon--luckily for them, she was a woman who had good sense and good taste;--they learned to ride; they had a carriage for their use; they lived as the mistress of a rich old lord might live; they had only to express a wish, their father would hasten to give them their most extravagant desires, and asked nothing of them in return but a kiss. Goriot had raised the two girls to the level of the angels; and, quite naturally, he himself was left beneath them. Poor man! he loved them even for the pain that they gave him.

°°°°When the girls were old enough to be married, they were left free to choose for themselves. Each had half her father's fortune as her dowry; and when the Comte de Restaud came to woo Anastasie for her beauty, her social aspirations led her to leave her father's house for a more exalted sphere. Delphine wished for money; she married Nucingen, a banker of German extraction, who became a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire. Goriot remained a vermicelli maker as before. His daughters and his sons-in-law began to demur; they did not like to see him still engaged in trade, though his whole life was bound up with his business. For five years he stood out against their entreaties, then he yielded, and consented to retire on the amount realized by the sale of his business and the savings of the last few years. It was this capital that Mme. Vauquer, in the early days of his residence with her, had calculated would bring in eight or ten thousand livres in a year. He had taken refuge in her lodging- house, driven there by despair when he knew that his daughters were compelled by their husbands not only to refuse to receive him as an inmate in their houses, but even to see him no more except in private.

°°°°This was all the information which Rastignac gained from a M. Muret who had purchased Goriot's business, information which confirmed the Duchesse de Langeais' suppositions, and herewith the preliminary explanation of this obscure but terrible Parisian tragedy comes to an end.

°°°°Towards the end of the first week in December Rastignac received two letters--one from his mother, and one from his eldest sister. His heart beat fast, half with happiness, half with fear, at the sight of the familiar handwriting. Those two little scraps of paper contained life or death for his hopes. But while he felt a shiver of dread as he remembered their dire poverty at home, he knew their love for him so well that he could not help fearing that he was draining their very life-blood. His mother's letter ran as follows:--

°°°°"My Dear Child,--I am sending you the money that you asked for. Make a good use of it. Even to save your life I could not raise so large a sum a second time without your father's knowledge, and there would be trouble about it. We should be obliged to mortgage the land. It is impossible to judge of the merits of schemes of which I am ignorant; but what sort of schemes can they be, that you should fear to tell me about them? Volumes of explanation would not have been needed; we mothers can understand at a word, and that word would have spared me the anguish of uncertainty. I do not know how to hide the painful impression that your letter has made upon me, my dear son. What can you have felt when you were moved to send this chill of dread through my heart? It must have been very painful to you to write the letter that gave me so much pain as I read it. To what courses are you committed? You are going to appear to be something that you are not, and your whole life and success depends upon this? You are about to see a society into which you cannot enter without rushing into expense that you cannot afford, without losing precious time that is needed for your studies. Ah! my dear Eugene, believe your mother, crooked ways cannot lead to great ends. Patience and endurance are the two qualities most needed in your position. I am not scolding you; I do not want any tinge of bitterness to spoil our offering. I am only talking like a mother whose trust in you is as great as her foresight for you. You know the steps that you must take, and I, for my part, know the purity of heart, and how good your intentions are; so I can say to you without a doubt, 'Go forward, beloved!' If I tremble, it is because I am a mother, but my prayers and blessings will be with you at every step. Be very careful, dear boy. You must have a man's prudence, for it lies with you to shape the destinies of five others who are dear to you, and must look to you. Yes, our fortunes depend upon you, and your success is ours. We all pray to God to be with you in all that you do. Your aunt Marcillac has been most generous beyond words in this matter; she saw at once how it was, even down to your gloves. 'But I have a weakness for the eldest!' she said gaily. You must love your aunt very much, dear Eugene. I shall wait till you have succeeded before telling you all that she has done for you, or her money would burn your fingers. You, who are young, do not know what it is to part with something that is a piece of your past! But what would we not sacrifice for your sakes? Your aunt says that I am to send you a kiss on the forehead from her, and that kiss is to bring you luck again and again, she says. She would have written you herself, the dear kind-hearted woman, but she is troubled with the gout in her fingers just now. Your father is very well. The vintage of 1819 has turned out better than we expected. Good-bye, dear boy; I will say nothing about your sisters, because Laure is writing to you, and I must let her have the pleasure of giving you all the home news. Heaven send that you may succeed! Oh! yes, dear Eugene, you must succeed. I have come, through you, to a knowledge of a pain so sharp that I do not think I could endure it a second time. I have come to know what it is to be poor, and to long for money for my children's sake. There, good-bye! Do not leave us for long without news of you; and here, at the last, take a kiss from your mother."

°°°°By the time Eugene had finished the letter he was in tears. He thought of Father Goriot crushing his silver keepsake into a shapeless mass before he sold it to meet his daughter's bill of exchange.

°°°°"Your mother has broken up her jewels for you," he said to himself; "your aunt shed tears over those relics of hers before she sold them for your sake. What right have you to heap execrations on Anastasie? You have followed her example; you have selfishly sacrificed others to your own future, and she sacrifices her father to her lover; and of you two, which is the worse?"

°°°°He was ready to renounce his attempts; he could not bear to take that money. The fires of remorse burned in his heart, and gave him intolerable pain, the generous secret remorse which men seldom take into account when they sit in judgment upon their fellow-men; but perhaps the angels in heaven, beholding it, pardon the criminal whom our justice condemns. Rastignac opened his sister's letter; its simplicity and kindness revived his heart.

°°°°"Your letter came just at the right time, dear brother. Agathe and I had thought of so many different ways of spending our money, that we did not know what to buy with it; and now you have come in, and, like the servant who upset all the watches that belonged to the King of Spain, you have restored harmony; for, really and truly, we did not know which of all the things we wanted we wanted most, and we were always quarreling about it, never thinking, dear Eugene, of a way of spending our money which would satisfy us completely. Agathe jumped for you. Indeed, we have been like two mad things all day, 'to such a prodigious degree' (as aunt would say), that mother said, with her severe expression, 'Whatever can be the matter with you, mesdemoiselles?' I think if we had been scolded a little, we should have been still better pleased. A woman ought to be very glad to suffer for one she loves! I, however, in my inmost soul, was doleful and cross in the midst of all my joy. I shall make a bad wife, I am afraid, I am too fond of spending. I had bought two sashes and a nice little stiletto for piercing eyelet-holes in my stays, trifles that I really did not want, so that I have less than that slow-coach Agathe, who is so economical, and hoards her money like a magpie. She had two hundred francs! And I have only one hundred and fifty! I am nicely punished; I could throw my sash down the well; it will be painful to me to wear it now. Poor dear, I have robbed you. And Agathe was so nice about it. She said, 'Let us send the three hundred and fifty francs in our two names!' But I could not help telling you everything just as it happened.

°°°°"Do you know how we managed to keep your commandments? We took our glittering hoard, we went out for a walk, and when once fairly on the highway we ran all the way to Ruffec, where we handed over the coin, without more ado, to M. Grimbert of the Messageries Royales. We came back again like swallows on the wing. 'Don't you think that happiness has made us lighter?' Agathe said. We said all sorts of things, which I shall not tell you, Monsieur le Parisien, because they were all about you. Oh, we love you dearly, dear brother; it was all summed up in those few words. As for keeping the secret, little masqueraders like us are capable of anything (according to our aunt), even of holding our tongues. Our mother has been on a mysterious journey to Angouleme, and the aunt went with her, not without solemn councils, from which we were shut out, and M. le Baron likewise. They are silent as to the weighty political considerations that prompted their mission, and conjectures are rife in the State of Rastignac. The Infantas are embroidering a muslin robe with open- work sprigs for her Majesty the Queen; the work progresses in the most profound secrecy. There be but two more breadths to finish. A decree has gone forth that no wall shall be built on the side of Verteuil, but that a hedge shall be planted instead thereof. Our subjects may sustain some disappointment of fruit and espaliers, but strangers will enjoy a fair prospect. Should the heir-presumptive lack pocket-handkerchiefs, be it known unto him that the dowager Lady of Marcillac, exploring the recesses of her drawers and boxes (known respectively as Pompeii and Herculaneum), having brought to light a fair piece of cambric whereof she wotted not, the Princesses Agathe and Laure place at their brother's disposal their thread, their needles, and hands somewhat of the reddest. The two young Princes, Don Henri and Don Gabriel, retain their fatal habits of stuffing themselves with grape-jelly, of teasing their sisters, of taking their pleasure by going a-bird-nesting, and of cutting switches for themselves from the osier-beds, maugre the laws of the realm. Moreover, they list not to learn naught, wherefore the Papal Nuncio (called of the commonalty, M. le Cure) threateneth them with excommunication, since that they neglect the sacred canons of grammatical construction for the construction of other canon, deadly engines made of the stems of elder.

°°°°"Farewell, dear brother, never did letter carry so many wishes for your success, so much love fully satisfied. You will have a great deal to tell us when you come home! You will tell me everything, won't you? I am the oldest. From something the aunt let fall, we think you must have had some success.

°°°°"Something was said of a lady, but nothing more was said . . .

°°°°"Of course not, in our family! Oh, by-the-by, Eugene, would you rather that we made that piece of cambric into shirts for you instead of pocket-handkerchiefs? If you want some really nice shirts at once, we ought to lose no time in beginning upon them; and if the fashion is different now in Paris, send us one for a pattern; we want more particularly to know about the cuffs. Good- bye! Good-bye! Take my kiss on the left side of your forehead, on the temple that belongs to me, and to no one else in the world. I am leaving the other side of the sheet for Agathe, who has solemnly promised not to read a word that I have written; but, all the same, I mean to sit by her side while she writes, so as to be quite sure that she keeps her word.--Your loving sister, "Laure de Rastignac."

°°°°"Yes!" said Eugene to himself. "Yes! Success at all costs now! Riches could not repay such devotion as this. I wish I could give them every sort of happiness! Fifteen hundred and fifty francs," he went on after a pause. "Every shot must go to the mark! Laure is right. Trust a woman! I have only calico shirts. Where some one else's welfare is concerned, a young girl becomes as ingenious as a thief. Guileless where she herself is in question, and full of foresight for me,--she is like a heavenly angel forgiving the strange incomprehensible sins of earth."

°°°°The world lay before him. His tailor had been summoned and sounded, and had finally surrendered. When Rastignac met M. de Trailles, he had seen at once how great a part the tailor plays in a young man's career; a tailor is either a deadly enemy or a staunch friend, with an invoice for a bond of friendship; between these two extremes there is, alack! no middle term. In this representative of his craft Eugene discovered a man who understood that his was a sort of paternal function for young men at their entrance into life, who regarded himself as a stepping- stone between a young man's present and future. And Rastignac in gratitude made the man's fortune by an epigram of a kind in which he excelled at a later period of his life.

°°°°"I have twice known a pair of trousers turned out by him make a match of twenty thousand livres a year!"

°°°°Fifteen hundred francs, and as many suits of clothes as he chose to order! At that moment the poor child of the South felt no more doubts of any kind. The young man went down to breakfast with the indefinable air which the consciousness of the possession of money gives to youth. No sooner are the coins slipped into a student's pocket than his wealth, in imagination at least, is piled into a fantastic column, which affords him a moral support. He begins to hold up his head as he walks; he is conscious that he has a means of bringing his powers to bear on a given point; he looks you straight in the face; his gestures are quick and decided; only yesterday he was diffident and shy, any one might have pushed him aside; to-morrow, he will take the wall of a prime minister. A miracle has been wrought in him. Nothing is beyond the reach of his ambition, and his ambition soars at random; he is light-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic; in short, the fledgling bird has discovered that he has wings. A poor student snatches at every chance pleasure much as a dog runs all sorts of risks to steal a bone, cracking it and sucking the marrow as he flies from pursuit; but a young man who can rattle a few runaway gold coins in his pocket can take his pleasure deliberately, can taste the whole of the sweets of secure possession; he soars far above earth; he has forgotten what the word POVERTY means; all Paris is his. Those are days when the whole world shines radiant with light, when everything glows and sparkles before the eyes of youth, days that bring joyous energy that is never brought into harness, days of debts and of painful fears that go hand in hand with every delight. Those who do not know the left bank of the Seine between the Rue Saint-Jacques and the Rue des Saints-Peres know nothing of life.

°°°°"Ah! if the women of Paris but knew," said Rastignac, as he devoured Mme. Vauquer's stewed pears (at five for a penny), "they would come here in search of a lover."

°°°°Just then a porter from the Messageries Royales appeared at the door of the room; they had previously heard the bell ring as the wicket opened to admit him. The man asked for M. Eugene de Rastignac, holding out two bags for him to take, and a form of receipt for his signature. Vautrin's keen glance cut Eugene like a lash.

°°°°"Now you will be able to pay for those fencing lessons and go to the shooting gallery," he said.

°°°°"Your ship has come in," said Mme. Vauquer, eyeing the bags.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau did not dare to look at the money, for fear her eyes should betray her cupidity.

°°°°"You have a kind mother," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"You have a kind mother, sir," echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, mamma has been drained dry," said Vautrin, "and now you can have your fling, go into society, and fish for heiresses, and dance with countesses who have peach blossom in their hair. But take my advice, young man, and don't neglect your pistol practice."

°°°°Vautrin struck an attitude, as if he were facing an antagonist. Rastignac, meaning to give the porter a tip, felt in his pockets and found nothing. Vautrin flung down a franc piece on the table.

°°°°"Your credit is good," he remarked, eyeing the student, and Rastignac was forced to thank him, though, since the sharp encounter of wits at dinner that day, after Eugene came in from calling on Mme. de Beauseant, he had made up his mind that Vautrin was insufferable. For a week, in fact, they had both kept silence in each other's presence, and watched each other. The student tried in vain to account to himself for this attitude.

°°°°An idea, of course, gains in force by the energy with which it is expressed; it strikes where the brain sends it, by a law as mathematically exact as the law that determines the course of a shell from a mortar. The amount of impression it makes is not to be determined so exactly. Sometimes, in an impressible nature, the idea works havoc, but there are, no less, natures so robustly protected, that this sort of projectile falls flat and harmless on skulls of triple brass, as cannon-shot against solid masonry; then there are flaccid and spongy-fibred natures into which ideas from without sink like spent bullets into the earthworks of a redoubt. Rastignac's head was something of the powder-magazine order; the least shock sufficed to bring about an explosion. He was too quick, too young, not to be readily accessible to ideas; and open to that subtle influence of thought and feeling in others which causes so many strange phenomena that make an impression upon us of which we are all unconscious at the time. Nothing escaped his mental vision; he was lynx-eyed; in him the mental powers of perception, which seem like duplicates of the senses, had the mysterious power of swift projection that astonishes us in intellects of a high order--slingers who are quick to detect the weak spot in any armor.

°°°°In the past month Eugene's good qualities and defects had rapidly developed with his character. Intercourse with the world and the endeavor to satisfy his growing desires had brought out his defects. But Rastignac came from the South side of the Loire, and had the good qualities of his countrymen. He had the impetuous courage of the South, that rushes to the attack of a difficulty, as well as the southern impatience of delay or suspense. These traits are held to be defects in the North; they made the fortune of Murat, but they likewise cut short his career. The moral would appear to be that when the dash and boldness of the South side of the Loire meets, in a southern temperament, with the guile of the North, the character is complete, and such a man will gain (and keep) the crown of Sweden.

°°°°Rastignac, therefore, could not stand the fire from Vautrin's batteries for long without discovering whether this was a friend or a foe. He felt as if this strange being was reading his inmost soul, and dissecting his feelings, while Vautrin himself was so close and secretive that he seemed to have something of the profound and unmoved serenity of a sphinx, seeing and hearing all things and saying nothing. Eugene, conscious of that money in his pocket, grew rebellious.

°°°°"Be so good as to wait a moment," he said to Vautrin, as the latter rose, after slowly emptying his coffee-cup, sip by sip.

°°°°"What for?" inquired the older man, as he put on his large- brimmed hat and took up the sword-cane that he was wont to twirl like a man who will face three or four footpads without flinching.

°°°°"I will repay you in a minute," returned Eugene. He unsealed one of the bags as he spoke, counted out a hundred and forty francs, and pushed them towards Mme. Vauquer. "Short reckonings make good friends" he added, turning to the widow; "that clears our accounts till the end of the year. Can you give me change for a five-franc piece?"

°°°°"Good friends make short reckonings," echoed Poiret, with a glance at Vautrin.

°°°°"Here is your franc," said Rastignac, holding out the coin to the sphinx in the black wig.

°°°°"Any one might think that you were afraid to owe me a trifle," exclaimed this latter, with a searching glance that seemed to read the young man's inmost thoughts; there was a satirical and cynical smile on Vautrin's face such as Eugene had seen scores of times already; every time he saw it, it exasperated him almost beyond endurance.

°°°°"Well . . . so I am," he answered. He held both the bags in his hand, and had risen to go up to his room.

°°°°Vautrin made as if he were going out through the sitting-room, and the student turned to go through the second door that opened into the square lobby at the foot of the staircase.

°°°°"Do you know, Monsieur le Marquis de Rastignacorama, that what you were saying just now was not exactly polite?" Vautrin remarked, as he rattled his sword-cane across the panels of the sitting-room door, and came up to the student.

°°°°Rastignac looked coolly at Vautrin, drew him to the foot of the staircase, and shut the dining-room door. They were standing in the little square lobby between the kitchen and the dining-room; the place was lighted by an iron-barred fanlight above a door that gave access into the garden. Sylvie came out of her kitchen, and Eugene chose that moment to say:

°°°°MONSIEUR Vautrin, I am not a marquis, and my name is not Rastignacorama."

°°°°"They will fight," said Mlle. Michonneau, in an indifferent tone.

°°°°"Fight!" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"Not they," replied Mme. Vauquer, lovingly fingering her pile of coins.

°°°°"But there they are under the lime-trees," cried Mlle. Victorine, who had risen so that she might see out into the garden. "Poor young man! he was in the right, after all."

°°°°"We must go upstairs, my pet," said Mme. Couture; "it is no business of ours."

°°°°At the door, however, Mme. Couture and Victorine found their progress barred by the portly form of Sylvie the cook.

°°°°"What ever can have happened?" she said. "M. Vautrin said to M. Eugene, 'Let us have an explanation!' then he took him by the arm, and there they are, out among the artichokes."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking. "Mamma Vauquer," he said smiling, "don't frighten yourself at all. I am only going to try my pistols under the lime-trees."

°°°°"Oh! monsieur," cried Victorine, clasping her hands as she spoke, "why do you want to kill M. Eugene?"

°°°°Vautrin stepped back a pace or two, and gazed at Victorine.

°°°°"Oh! this is something fresh!" he exclaimed in a bantering tone, that brought the color into the poor girl's face. "That young fellow yonder is very nice, isn't he?" he went on. "You have given me a notion, my pretty child; I will make you both happy."

°°°°Mme. Couture laid her hand on the arm of her ward, and drew the girl away, as she said in her ear:

°°°°"Why, Victorine, I cannot imagine what has come over you this morning."

°°°°"I don't want any shots fired in my garden," said Mme. Vauquer. "You will frighten the neighborhood and bring the police up here all in a moment."

°°°°"Come, keep cool, Mamma Vauquer," answered Vautrin. "There, there; it's all right; we will go to the shooting-gallery."

°°°°He went back to Rastignac, laying his hand familiarly on the young man's arm.

°°°°"When I have given you ocular demonstration of the fact that I can put a bullet through the ace on a card five times running at thirty-five paces," he said, "that won't take away your appetite, I suppose? You look to me to be inclined to be a trifle quarrelsome this morning, and as if you would rush on your death like a blockhead."

°°°°"Do you draw back?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Don't try to raise my temperature," answered Vautrin, "it is not cold this morning. Let us go and sit over there," he added, pointing to the green-painted garden seats; "no one can overhear us. I want a little talk with you. You are not a bad sort of youngster, and I have no quarrel with you. I like you, take Trump--(confound it!)--take Vautrin's word for it. What makes me like you? I will tell you by-and-by. Meantime, I can tell you that I know you as well as if I had made you myself, as I will prove to you in a minute. Put down your bags," he continued, pointing to the round table.

°°°°Rastignac deposited his money on the table, and sat down. He was consumed with curiosity, which the sudden change in the manner of the man before him had excited to the highest pitch. Here was a strange being who, a moment ago, had talked of killing him, and now posed as his protector.

°°°°"You would like to know who I really am, what I was, and what I do now," Vautrin went on. "You want to know too much, youngster. Come! come! keep cool! You will hear more astonishing things than that. I have had my misfortunes. Just hear me out first, and you shall have your turn afterwards. Here is my past in three words. Who am I? Vautrin. What do I do? Just what I please. Let us change the subject. You want to know my character. I am good- natured to those who do me a good turn, or to those whose hearts speak to mine. These last may do anything they like with me; they may bruise my shins, and I shall not tell them to 'mind what they are about'; but, nom d'une pipe, the devil himself is not an uglier customer than I can be if people annoy me, or if I don't happen to take to them; and you may just as well know at once that I think no more of killing a man than of that," and he spat before him as he spoke. "Only when it is absolutely necessary to do so, I do my best to kill him properly. I am what you call an artist. I have read Benvenuto Cellini's Memoirs, such as you see me; and, what is more, in Italian: A fine-spirited fellow he was! From him I learned to follow the example set us by Providence, who strikes us down at random, and to admire the beautiful whenever and wherever it is found. And, setting other questions aside, is it not a glorious part to play, when you pit yourself against mankind, and the luck is on your side? I have thought a good deal about the constitution of your present social Dis- order. A duel is downright childish, my boy! utter nonsense and folly! When one of two living men must be got out of the way, none but an idiot would leave chance to decide which it is to be; and in a duel it is a toss-up--heads or tails--and there you are! Now I, for instance, can hit the ace in the middle of a card five times running, send one bullet after another through the same hole, and at thirty-five paces, moreover! With that little accomplishment you might think yourself certain of killing your man, mightn't you. Well, I have fired, at twenty paces, and missed, and the rogue who had never handled a pistol in his life-- look here!"--(he unbuttoned his waistcoat and exposed his chest, covered, like a bear's back, with a shaggy fell; the student gave a startled shudder)--"he was a raw lad, but he made his mark on me," the extraordinary man went on, drawing Rastignac's fingers over a deep scar on his breast. But that happened when I myself was a mere boy; I was one-and-twenty then (your age), and I had some beliefs left--in a woman's love, and in a pack of rubbish that you will be over head and ears in directly. You and I were to have fought just now, weren't we? You might have killed me. Suppose that I were put under the earth, where would you be? You would have to clear out of this, go to Switzerland, draw on papa's purse--and he has none too much in it as it is. I mean to open your eyes to your real position, that is what I am going to do: but I shall do it from the point of view of a man who, after studying the world very closely, sees that there are but two alternatives--stupid obedience or revolt. I obey nobody; is that clear? Now, do you know how much you will want at the pace you are going? A million; and promptly, too, or that little head of ours will be swaying to and fro in the drag-nets at Saint-Cloud, while we are gone to find out whether or no there is a Supreme Being. I will put you in the way of that million."

°°°°He stopped for a moment and looked at Eugene.

°°°°"Aha! you do not look so sourly at papa Vautrin now! At the mention of the million you look like a young girl when somebody has said, 'I will come for you this evening!' and she betakes herself to her toilette as a cat licks its whiskers over a saucer of milk. All right. Come, now, let us go into the question, young man; all between ourselves, you know. We have a papa and mamma down yonder, a great-aunt, two sisters (aged eighteen and seventeen), two young brothers (one fifteen, and the other ten), that is about the roll-call of the crew. The aunt brings up the two sisters; the cure comes and teaches the boys Latin. Boiled chestnuts are oftener on the table than white bread. Papa makes a suit of clothes last a long while; if mamma has a different dress winter and summer, it is about as much as she has; the sisters manage as best they can. I know all about it; I have lived in the south.

°°°°"That is how things are at home. They send you twelve hundred francs a year, and the whole property only brings in three thousand francs all told. We have a cook and a manservant; papa is a baron, and we must keep up appearances. Then we have our ambitions; we are connected with the Beauseants, and we go afoot through the streets; we want to be rich, and we have not a penny; we eat Mme. Vauquer's messes, and we like grand dinners in the Faubourg Saint-Germain; we sleep on a truckle-bed, and dream of a mansion! I do not blame you for wanting these things. What sort of men do the women run after? Men of ambition. Men of ambition have stronger frames, their blood is richer in iron, their hearts are warmer than those of ordinary men. Women feel that when their power is greatest, they look their best, and that those are their happiest hours; they like power in men, and prefer the strongest even if it is a power that may be their own destruction. I am going to make an inventory of your desires in order to put the question at issue before you. Here it is:--

°°°°"We are as hungry as a wolf, and those newly-cut teeth of ours are sharp; what are we to do to keep the pot boiling? In the first place, we have the Code to browse upon; it is not amusing, and we are none the wiser for it, but that cannot be helped. So far so good. We mean to make an advocate of ourselves with a prospect of one day being made President of a Court of Assize, when we shall send poor devils, our betters, to the galleys with a T.F.* [*Travaux forces.] on their shoulders, so that the rich may be convinced that they can sleep in peace. There is no fun in that; and you are a long while coming to it; for, to begin with, there are two years of nauseous drudgery in Paris, we see all the lollipops that we long for out of our reach. It is tiresome to want things and never to have them. If you were a pallid creature of the mollusk order, you would have nothing to fear, but it is different when you have the hot blood of a lion and are ready to get into a score of scrapes every day of your life. This is the ghastliest form of torture known in this inferno of God's making, and you will give in to it. Or suppose that you are a good boy, drink nothing stronger than milk, and bemoan your hard lot; you, with your generous nature, will endure hardships that would drive a dog mad, and make a start, after long waiting, as deputy to some rascal or other in a hole of a place where the Government will fling you a thousand francs a year like the scraps that are thrown to the butcher's dog. Bark at thieves, plead the cause of the rich, send men of heart to the guillotine, that is your work! Many thanks! If you have no influence, you may rot in your provincial tribunal. At thirty you will be a Justice with twelve hundred francs a year (if you have not flung off the gown for good before then). By the time you are forty you may look to marry a miller's daughter, an heiress with some six thousand livres a year. Much obliged! If you have influence, you may possibly be a Public Prosecutor by the time you are thirty; with a salary of a thousand crowns, you could look to marry the mayor's daughter. Some petty piece of political trickery, such as mistaking Villele for Manuel in a bulletin (the names rhyme, and that quiets your conscience), and you will probably be a Procureur General by the time you are forty, with a chance of becoming a deputy. Please to observe, my dear boy, that our conscience will have been a little damaged in the process, and that we shall endure twenty years of drudgery and hidden poverty, and that our sisters are wearing Dian's livery. I have the honor to call your attention to another fact: to wit, that there are but twenty Procureurs Generaux at a time in all France, while there are some twenty thousand of you young men who aspire to that elevated position; that there are some mountebanks among you who would sell their family to screw their fortunes a peg higher. If this sort of thing sickens you, try another course. The Baron de Rastignac thinks of becoming an advocate, does he? There's a nice prospect for you! Ten years of drudgery straight away. You are obliged to live at the rate of a thousand francs a month; you must have a library of law books, live in chambers, go into society, go down on your knees to ask a solicitor for briefs, lick the dust off the floor of the Palais de Justice. If this kind of business led to anything, I should not say no; but just give me the names of five advocates here in Paris who by the time that they are fifty are making fifty thousand francs a year! Bah! I would sooner turn pirate on the high seas than have my soul shrivel up inside me like that. How will you find the capital? There is but one way, marry a woman who has money. There is no fun in it. Have you a mind to marry? You hang a stone around your neck; for if you marry for money, what becomes of our exalted notions of honor and so forth? You might as well fly in the face of social conventions at once. Is it nothing to crawl like a serpent before your wife, to lick her mother's feet, to descend to dirty actions that would sicken swine--faugh!--never mind if you at least make your fortune. But you will be as doleful as a dripstone if you marry for money. It is better to wrestle with men than to wrangle at home with your wife. You are at the crossway of the roads of life, my boy; choose your way.

°°°°"But you have chosen already. You have gone to see your cousin of Beauseant, and you have had an inkling of luxury; you have been to Mme. de Restaud's house, and in Father Goriot's daughter you have seen a glimpse of the Parisienne for the first time. That day you came back with a word written on your forehead. I knew it, I could read it--'SUCCESS!' Yes, success at any price. 'Bravo,' said I to myself, 'here is the sort of fellow for me.' You wanted money. Where was it all to come from? You have drained your sisters' little hoard (all brothers sponge more or less on their sisters). Those fifteen hundred francs of yours (got together, God knows how! in a country where there are more chestnuts than five-franc pieces) will slip away like soldiers after pillage. And, then, what will you do? Shall you begin to work? Work, or what you understand by work at this moment, means, for a man of Poiret's calibre, an old age in Mamma Vauquer's lodging-house. There are fifty thousand young men in your position at this moment, all bent as you are on solving one and the same problem--how to acquire a fortune rapidly. You are but a unit in that aggregate. You can guess, therefore, what efforts you must make, how desperate the struggle is. There are not fifty thousand good positions for you; you must fight and devour one another like spiders in a pot. Do you know how a man makes his way here? By brilliant genius or by skilful corruption. You must either cut your way through these masses of men like a cannon ball, or steal among them like a plague. Honesty is nothing to the purpose. Men bow before the power of genius; they hate it, and try to slander it, because genius does not divide the spoil; but if genius persists, they bow before it. To sum it all up in a phrase, if they fail to smother genius in the mud, they fall on their knees and worship it. Corruption is a great power in the world, and talent is scarce. So corruption is the weapon of superfluous mediocrity; you will be made to feel the point of it everywhere. You will see women who spend more than ten thousand francs a year on dress, while their husband's salary (his whole income) is six thousand francs. You will see officials buying estates on twelve thousand francs a year. You will see women who sell themselves body and soul to drive in a carriage belonging to the son of a peer of France, who has a right to drive in the middle rank at Longchamp. You have seen that poor simpleton of a Goriot obliged to meet a bill with his daughter's name at the back of it, though her husband has fifty thousand francs a year. I defy you to walk a couple of yards anywhere in Paris without stumbling on some infernal complication. I'll bet my head to a head of that salad that you will stir up a hornet's nest by taking a fancy to the first young, rich, and pretty woman you meet. They are all dodging the law, all at loggerheads with their husbands. If I were to begin to tell you all that vanity or necessity (virtue is not often mixed up in it, you may be sure), all that vanity and necessity drive them to do for lovers, finery, housekeeping, or children, I should never come to an end. So an honest man is the common enemy.

°°°°"But do you know what an honest man is? Here, in Paris, an honest man is the man who keeps his own counsel, and will not divide the plunder. I am not speaking now of those poor bond-slaves who do the work of the world without a reward for their toil--God Almighty's outcasts, I call them. Among them, I grant you, is virtue in all the flower of its stupidity, but poverty is no less their portion. At this moment, I think I see the long faces those good folk would pull if God played a practical joke on them and stayed away at the Last Judgment.

°°°°"Well, then, if you mean to make a fortune quickly, you must either be rich to begin with, or make people believe that you are rich. It is no use playing here except for high stakes; once take to low play, it is all up with you. If in the scores of professions that are open to you, there are ten men who rise very rapidly, people are sure to call them thieves. You can draw your own conclusions. Such is life. It is no cleaner than a kitchen; it reeks like a kitchen; and if you mean to cook your dinner, you must expect to soil your hands; the real art is in getting them clean again, and therein lies the whole morality of our epoch. If I take this tone in speaking of the world to you, I have the right to do so; I know it well. Do you think that I am blaming it? Far from it; the world has always been as it is now. Moralists' strictures will never change it. Mankind are not perfect, but one age is more or less hypocritical than another, and then simpletons say that its morality is high or low. I do not think that the rich are any worse than the poor; man is much the same, high or low, or wherever he is. In a million of these human cattle there may be half a score of bold spirits who rise above the rest, above the laws; I am one of them. And you, if you are cleverer than your fellows, make straight to your end, and hold your head high. But you must lay your account with envy and slander and mediocrity, and every man's hand will be against you. Napoleon met with a Minister of War, Aubry by name, who all but sent him to the colonies.

°°°°"Feel your pulse. Think whether you can get up morning after morning, strengthened in yesterday's purpose. In that case I will make you an offer that no one would decline. Listen attentively. You see, I have an idea of my own. My idea is to live a patriarchal life on a vast estate, say a hundred thousand acres, somewhere in the Southern States of America. I mean to be a planter, to have slaves, to make a few snug millions by selling my cattle, timber, and tobacco; I want to live an absolute monarch, and to do just as I please; to lead such a life as no one here in these squalid dens of lath and plaster ever imagines. I am a great poet; I do not write my poems, I feel them, and act them. At this moment I have fifty thousand francs, which might possibly buy forty negroes. I want two hundred thousand francs, because I want to have two hundred negroes to carry out my notions of the patriarachal life properly. Negroes, you see, are like a sort of family ready grown, and there are no inquisitive public prosecutors out there to interfere with you. That investment in ebony ought to mean three or four million francs in ten years' time. If I am successful, no one will ask me who I am. I shall be Mr. Four Millions, an American citizen. I shall be fifty years old by then, and sound and hearty still; I shall enjoy life after my own fashion. In two words, if I find you an heiress with a million, will you give me two hundred thousand francs? Twenty per cent commission, eh? Is that too much? Your little wife will be very much in love with you. Once married, you will show signs of uneasiness and remorse; for a couple of weeks you will be depressed. Then, some night after sundry grimacings, comes the confession, between two kisses, 'Two hundred thousand francs of debts, my darling!' This sort of farce is played every day in Paris, and by young men of the highest fashion. When a young wife has given her heart, she will not refuse her purse. Perhaps you are thinking that you will lose the money for good? Not you. You will make two hundred thousand francs again by some stroke of business. With your capital and your brains you should be able to accumulate as large a fortune as you could wish. ERGO, in six months you will have made your own fortune, and our old friend Vautrin's, and made an amiable woman very happy, to say nothing of your people at home, who must blow on their fingers to warm them, in the winter, for lack of firewood. You need not be surprised at my proposal, nor at the demand I make. Forty-seven out of every sixty great matches here in Paris are made after just such a bargain as this. The Chamber of Notaries compels my gentleman to----"

°°°°"What must I do?" said Rastignac, eagerly interrupting Vautrin's speech.

°°°°"Next to nothing," returned the other, with a slight involuntary movement, the suppressed exultation of the angler when he feels a bite at the end of his line. "Follow me carefully! The heart of a girl whose life is wretched and unhappy is a sponge that will thirstily absorb love; a dry sponge that swells at the first drop of sentiment. If you pay court to a young girl whose existence is a compound of loneliness, despair, and poverty, and who has no suspicion that she will come into a fortune, good Lord! it is quint and quatorze at piquet; it is knowing the numbers of the lottery before-hand; it is speculating in the funds when you have news from a sure source; it is building up a marriage on an indestructible foundation. The girl may come in for millions, and she will fling them, as if they were so many pebbles, at your feet. 'Take it, my beloved! Take it, Alfred, Adolphe, Eugene!' or whoever it was that showed his sense by sacrificing himself for her. And as for sacrificing himself, this is how I understand it. You sell a coat that is getting shabby, so that you can take her to the Cadran bleu, treat her to mushrooms on toast, and then go to the Ambigu-Comique in the evening; you pawn your watch to buy her a shawl. I need not remind you of the fiddle-faddle sentimentality that goes down so well with all women; you spill a few drops of water on your stationery, for instance; those are the tears you shed while far away from her. You look to me as if you were perfectly acquainted with the argot of the heart. Paris, you see, is like a forest in the New World, where you have to deal with a score of varieties of savages--Illinois and Hurons, who live on the proceed of their social hunting. You are a hunter of millions; you set your snares; you use lures and nets; there are many ways of hunting. Some hunt heiresses, others a legacy; some fish for souls, yet others sell their clients, bound hand and foot. Every one who comes back from the chase with his game- bag well filled meets with a warm welcome in good society. In justice to this hospitable part of the world, it must be said that you have to do with the most easy and good-natured of great cities. If the proud aristocracies of the rest of Europe refuse admittance among their ranks to a disreputable millionaire, Paris stretches out a hand to him, goes to his banquets, eats his dinners, and hobnobs with his infamy."

°°°°"But where is such a girl to be found?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Under your eyes; she is yours already."

°°°°"Mlle. Victorine?"

°°°°"Precisely."

°°°°"And what was that you said?"

°°°°"She is in love with you already, your little Baronne de Rastignac!"

°°°°"She has not a penny," Eugene continued, much mystified.

°°°°"Ah! now we are coming to it! Just another word or two, and it will all be clear enough. Her father, Taillefer, is an old scoundrel; it is said that he murdered one of his friends at the time of the Revolution. He is one of your comedians that sets up to have opinions of his own. He is a banker--senior partner in the house of Frederic Taillefer and Company. He has one son, and means to leave all he has to the boy, to the prejudice of Victorine. For my part, I don't like to see injustice of this sort. I am like Don Quixote, I have a fancy for defending the weak against the strong. If it should please God to take that youth away from him, Taillefer would have only his daughter left; he would want to leave his money to some one or other; an absurd notion, but it is only human nature, and he is not likely to have any more children, as I know. Victorine is gentle and amiable; she will soon twist her father round her fingers, and set his head spinning like a German top by plying him with sentiment! She will be too much touched by your devotion to forget you; you will marry her. I mean to play Providence for you, and Providence is to do my will. I have a friend whom I have attached closely to myself, a colonel in the Army of the Loire, who has just been transferred into the garde royale. He has taken my advice and turned ultra-royalist; he is not one of those fools who never change their opinions. Of all pieces of advice, my cherub, I would give you this--don't stick to your opinions any more than to your words. If any one asks you for them, let him have them-- at a price. A man who prides himself on going in a straight line through life is an idiot who believes in infallibility. There are no such things as principles; there are only events, and there are no laws but those of expediency: a man of talent accepts events and the circumstances in which he finds himself, and turns everything to his own ends. If laws and principles were fixed and invariable, nations would not change them as readily as we change our shirts. The individual is not obliged to be more particular than the nation. A man whose services to France have been of the very slightest is a fetich looked on with superstitious awe because he has always seen everything in red; but he is good, at the most, to be put into the Museum of Arts and Crafts, among the automatic machines, and labeled La Fayette; while the prince at whom everybody flings a stone, the man who despises humanity so much that he spits as many oaths as he is asked for in the face of humanity, saved France from being torn in pieces at the Congress of Vienna; and they who should have given him laurels fling mud at him. Oh! I know something of affairs, I can tell you; I have the secrets of many men! Enough. When I find three minds in agreement as to the application of a principle, I shall have a fixed and immovable opinion--I shall have to wait a long while first. In the Tribunals you will not find three judges of the same opinion on a single point of law. To return to the man I was telling you of. He would crucify Jesus Christ again, if I bade him. At a word from his old chum Vautrin he will pick a quarrel with a scamp that will not send so much as five francs to his sister, poor girl, and" (here Vautrin rose to his feet and stood like a fencing-master about to lunge)--"turn him off into the dark!" he added.

°°°°"How frightful!" said Eugene. "You do not really mean it? M. Vautrin, you are joking!"

°°°°"There! there! Keep cool!" said the other. "Don't behave like a baby. But if you find any amusement in it, be indignant, flare up! Say that I am a scoundrel, a rascal, a rogue, a bandit; but do not call me a blackleg nor a spy! There, out with it, fire away! I forgive you; it is quite natural at your age. I was like that myself once. Only remember this, you will do worse things yourself some day. You will flirt with some pretty woman and take her money. You have thought of that, of course," said Vautrin, "for how are you to succeed unless love is laid under contribution? There are no two ways about virtue, my dear student; it either is, or it is not. Talk of doing penance for your sins! It is a nice system of business, when you pay for your crime by an act of contrition! You seduce a woman that you may set your foot on such and such a rung of the social ladder; you sow dissension among the children of a family; you descend, in short, to every base action that can be committed at home or abroad, to gain your own ends for your own pleasure or your profit; and can you imagine that these are acts of faith, hope, or charity? How is it that a dandy, who in a night has robbed a boy of half his fortune, gets only a couple of months in prison; while a poor devil who steals a banknote for a thousand francs, with aggravating circumstances, is condemned to penal servitude? Those are your laws. Not a single provision but lands you in some absurdity. That man with yellow gloves and a golden tongue commits many a murder; he sheds no blood, but he drains his victim's veins as surely; a desperado forces open a door with a crowbar, dark deeds both of them! You yourself will do every one of those things that I suggest to you to-day, bar the bloodshed. Do you believe that there is any absolute standard in this world? Despise mankind and find out the meshes that you can slip through in the net of the Code. The secret of a great success for which you are at a loss to account is a crime that has never been found out, because it was properly executed."

°°°°"Silence, sir! I will not hear any more; you make me doubt myself. At this moment my sentiments are all my science."

°°°°"Just as you please, my fine fellow; I did think you were so weak-minded," said Vautrin, "I shall say no more about it. One last word, however," and he looked hard at the student--"you have my secret," he said.

°°°°"A young man who refuses your offer knows that he must forget it."

°°°°"Quite right, quite right; I am glad to hear you say so. Somebody else might not be so scrupulous, you see. Keep in mind what I want to do for you. I will give you a fortnight. The offer is still open."

°°°°"What a head of iron the man has!" said Eugene to himself, as he watched Vautrin walk unconcernedly away with his cane under his arm. "Yet Mme. de Beauseant said as much more gracefully; he has only stated the case in cruder language. He would tear my heart with claws of steel. What made me think of going to Mme. de Nucingen? He guessed my motives before I knew them myself. To sum it up, that outlaw has told me more about virtue than all I have learned from men and books. If virtue admits of no compromises, I have certainly robbed my sisters," he said, throwing down the bags on the table.

°°°°He sat down again and fell, unconscious of his surroundings, into deep thought.

°°°°"To be faithful to an ideal of virtue! A heroic martyrdom! Pshaw! every one believes in virtue, but who is virtuous? Nations have made an idol of Liberty, but what nation on the face of the earth is free? My youth is still like a blue and cloudless sky. If I set myself to obtain wealth or power, does it mean that I must make up my mind to lie, and fawn, and cringe, and swagger, and flatter, and dissemble? To consent to be the servant of others who have likewise fawned, and lied, and flattered? Must I cringe to them before I can hope to be their accomplice? Well, then, I decline. I mean to work nobly and with a single heart. I will work day and night; I will owe my fortune to nothing but my own exertions. It may be the slowest of all roads to success, but I shall lay my head on the pillow at night untroubled by evil thoughts. Is there a greater thing than this--to look back over your life and know that it is stainless as a lily? I and my life are like a young man and his betrothed. Vautrin has put before me all that comes after ten years of marriage. The devil! my head is swimming. I do not want to think at all; the heart is a sure guide."

°°°°Eugene was roused from his musings by the voice of the stout Sylvie, who announced that the tailor had come, and Eugene therefore made his appearance before the man with the two money bags, and was not ill pleased that it should be so. When he had tried on his dress suit, he put on his new morning costume, which completely metamorphosed him.

°°°°"I am quite equal to M. de Trailles," he said to himself. "In short, I look like a gentleman."

°°°°"You asked me, sir, if I knew the houses where Mme. de Nucingen goes," Father Goriot's voice spoke from the doorway of Eugene's room."

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Very well then, she is going to the Marechale Carigliano's ball on Monday. If you can manage to be there, I shall hear from you whether my two girls enjoyed themselves, and how they were dressed, and all about it in fact."

°°°°"How did you find that out, my good Goriot?" said Eugene, putting a chair by the fire for his visitor.

°°°°"Her maid told me. I hear all about their doings from Therese and Constance," he added gleefully.

°°°°The old man looked like a lover who is still young enough to be made happy by the discovery of some little stratagem which brings him information of his lady-love without her knowledge.

°°°°"YOU will see them both!" he said, giving artless expression to a pang of jealousy.

°°°°"I do not know," answered Eugene. "I will go to Mme. de Beauseant and ask her for an introduction to the Marechale."

°°°°Eugene felt a thrill of pleasure at the thought of appearing before the Vicomtesse, dressed as henceforward he always meant to be. The "abysses of the human heart," in the moralists' phrase, are only insidious thoughts, involuntary promptings of personal interest. The instinct of enjoyment turns the scale; those rapid changes of purpose which have furnished the text for so much rhetoric are calculations prompted by the hope of pleasure. Rastignac beholding himself well dressed and impeccable as to gloves and boots, forgot his virtuous resolutions. Youth, moreover, when bent upon wrongdoing does not dare to behold himself in the mirror of consciousness; mature age has seen itself; and therein lies the whole difference between these two phases of life.

°°°°A friendship between Eugene and his neighbor, Father Goriot, had been growing up for several days past. This secret friendship and the antipathy that the student had begun to entertain for Vautrin arose from the same psychological causes. The bold philosopher who shall investigate the effects of mental action upon the physical world will doubtless find more than one proof of the material nature of our sentiments in other animals. What physiognomist is as quick to discern character as a dog is to discover from a stranger's face whether this is a friend or no? Those by-words--"atoms," "affinities"--are facts surviving in modern languages for the confusion of philosophic wiseacres who amuse themselves by winnowing the chaff of language to find its grammatical roots. We FEEL that we are loved. Our sentiments make themselves felt in everything, even at a great distance. A letter is a living soul, and so faithful an echo of the voice that speaks in it, that finer natures look upon a letter as one of love's most precious treasures. Father Goriot's affection was of the instinctive order, a canine affection raised to a sublime pitch; he had scented compassion in the air, and the kindly respect and youthful sympathy in the student's heart. This friendship had, however, scarcely reached the stage at which confidences are made. Though Eugene had spoken of his wish to meet Mme. de Nucingen, it was not because he counted on the old man to introduce him to her house, for he hoped that his own audacity might stand him in good stead. All that Father Goriot had said as yet about his daughters had referred to the remarks that the student had made so freely in public on that day of the two visits.

°°°°"How could you think that Mme. de Restaud bore you a grudge for mentioning my name?" he had said on the day following that scene at dinner. "My daughters are very fond of me; I am a happy father; but my sons-in-law have behaved badly to me, and rather than make trouble between my darlings and their husbands, I choose to see my daughters secretly. Fathers who can see their daughters at any time have no idea of all the pleasure that all this mystery gives me; I cannot always see mine when I wish, do you understand? So when it is fine I walk out in the Champs- Elysees, after finding out from their waiting-maids whether my daughters mean to go out. I wait near the entrance; my heart beats fast when the carriages begin to come; I admire them in their dresses, and as they pass they give me a little smile, and it seems as if everything was lighted up for me by a ray of bright sunlight. I wait, for they always go back the same way, and then I see them again; the fresh air has done them good and brought color into their cheeks; all about me people say, 'What a beautiful woman that is!' and it does my heart good to hear them.

°°°°"Are they not my own flesh and blood? I love the very horses that draw them; I envy the little lap-dog on their knees. Their happiness is my life. Every one loves after his own fashion, and mine does no one any harm; why should people trouble their heads about me? I am happy in my own way. Is there any law against going to see my girls in the evening when they are going out to a ball? And what a disappointment it is when I get there too late, and am told that 'Madame has gone out!' Once I waited till three o'clock in the morning for Nasie; I had not seen her for two whole days. I was so pleased, that it was almost too much for me! Please do not speak of me unless it is to say how good my daughters are to me. They are always wanting to heap presents upon me, but I will not have it. 'Just keep your money,' I tell them. 'What should I do with it? I want nothing.' And what am I, sir, after all? An old carcase, whose soul is always where my daughters are. When you have seen Mme. de Nucingen, tell me which you like the most," said the old man after a moment's pause, while Eugene put the last touches to his toilette. The student was about to go out to walk in the Garden of the Tuileries until the hour when he could venture to appear in Mme. de Beauseant's drawing-room.

°°°°That walk was a turning-point in Eugene's career. Several women noticed him; he looked so handsome, so young, and so well dressed. This almost admiring attention gave a new turn to his thoughts. He forgot his sisters and the aunt who had robbed herself for him; he no longer remembered his own virtuous scruples. He had seen hovering above his head the fiend so easy to mistake for an angel, the Devil with rainbow wings, who scatters rubies, and aims his golden shafts at palace fronts, who invests women with purple, and thrones with a glory that dazzles the eyes of fools till they forget the simple origins of royal dominion; he had heard the rustle of that Vanity whose tinsel seems to us to be the symbol of power. However cynical Vautrin's words had been, they had made an impression on his mind, as the sordid features of the old crone who whispers, "A lover, and gold in torrents," remain engraven on a young girl's memory.

°°°°Eugene lounged about the walks till it was nearly five o'clock, then he went to Mme. de Beauseant, and received one of the terrible blows against which young hearts are defenceless. Hitherto the Vicomtesse had received him with the kindly urbanity, the bland grace of manner that is the result of fine breeding, but is only complete when it comes from the heart.

°°°°Today Mme. de Beauseant bowed constrainedly, and spoke curtly:

°°°°"M. de Rastignac, I cannot possibly see you, at least not at this moment. I am engaged . . ."

°°°°An observer, and Rastignac instantly became an observer, could read the whole history, the character and customs of caste, in the phrase, in the tones of her voice, in her glance and bearing. He caught a glimpse of the iron hand beneath the velvet glove-- the personality, the egoism beneath the manner, the wood beneath the varnish. In short, he heard that unmistakable I THE KING that issues from the plumed canopy of the throne, and finds its last echo under the crest of the simplest gentleman.

°°°°Eugene had trusted too implicitly to the generosity of a woman; he could not believe in her haughtiness. Like all the unfortunate, he had subscribed, in all good faith, the generous compact which should bind the benefactor to the recipient, and the first article in that bond, between two large-hearted natures, is a perfect equality. The kindness which knits two souls together is as rare, as divine, and as little understood as the passion of love, for both love and kindness are the lavish generosity of noble natures. Rastignac was set upon going to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball, so he swallowed down this rebuff.

°°°°"Madame," he faltered out, "I would not have come to trouble you about a trifling matter; be so kind as to permit me to see you later, I can wait."

°°°°"Very well, come and dine with me," she said, a little confused by the harsh way in which she had spoken, for this lady was as genuinely kind-hearted as she was high-born.

°°°°Eugene was touched by this sudden relenting, but none the less he said to himself as he went away, "Crawl in the dust, put up with every kind of treatment. What must the rest of the world be like when one of the kindest of women forgets all her promises of befriending me in a moment, and tosses me aside like an old shoe? So it is every one for himself? It is true that her house is not a shop, and I have put myself in the wrong by needing her help. You should cut your way through the world like a cannon ball, as Vautrin said."

°°°°But the student's bitter thoughts were soon dissipated by the pleasure which he promised himself in this dinner with the Vicomtesse. Fate seemed to determine that the smallest accidents in his life should combine to urge him into a career, which the terrible sphinx of the Maison Vauquer had described as a field of battle where you must either slay or be slain, and cheat to avoid being cheated. You leave your conscience and your heart at the barriers, and wear a mask on entering into this game of grim earnest, where, as in ancient Sparta, you must snatch your prize without being detected if you would deserve the crown.

°°°°On his return he found the Vicomtesse gracious and kindly, as she had always been to him. They went together to the dining-room, where the Vicomte was waiting for his wife. In the time of the Restoration the luxury of the table was carried, as is well known, to the highest degree, and M. de Beauseant, like many jaded men of the world, had few pleasures left but those of good cheer; in this matter, in fact, he was a gourmand of the schools of Louis XVIII. and of the Duc d'Escars, and luxury was supplemented by splendor. Eugene, dining for the first time in a house where the traditions of grandeur had descended through many generations, had never seen any spectacle like this that now met his eyes. In the time of the Empire, balls had always ended with a supper, because the officers who took part in them must be fortified for immediate service, and even in Paris might be called upon to leave the ballroom for the battlefield. This arrangement had gone out of fashion under the Monarchy, and Eugene had so far only been asked to dances. The self-possession which pre-eminently distinguished him in later life already stood him in good stead, and he did not betray his amazement. Yet as he saw for the first time the finely wrought silver plate, the completeness of every detail, the sumptuous dinner, noiselessly served, it was difficult for such an ardent imagination not to prefer this life of studied and refined luxury to the hardships of the life which he had chosen only that morning.

°°°°His thoughts went back for a moment to the lodging-house, and with a feeling of profound loathing, he vowed to himself that at New Year he would go; prompted at least as much by a desire to live among cleaner surroundings as by a wish to shake off Vautrin, whose huge hand he seemed to feel on his shoulder at that moment. When you consider the numberless forms, clamorous or mute, that corruption takes in Paris, common-sense begins to wonder what mental aberration prompted the State to establish great colleges and schools there, and assemble young men in the capital; how it is that pretty women are respected, or that the gold coin displayed in the money-changer's wooden saucers does not take to itself wings in the twinkling of an eye; and when you come to think further, how comparatively few cases of crime there are, and to count up the misdemeanors committed by youth, is there not a certain amount of respect due to these patient Tantaluses who wrestle with themselves and nearly always come off victorious? The struggles of the poor student in Paris, if skilfully drawn, would furnish a most dramatic picture of modern civilization.

°°°°In vain Mme. de Beauseant looked at Eugene as if asking him to speak; the student was tongue-tied in the Vicomte's presence.

°°°°"Are you going to take me to the Italiens this evening?" the Vicomtesse asked her husband.

°°°°"You cannot doubt that I should obey you with pleasure," he answered, and there was a sarcastic tinge in his politeness which Eugene did not detect, "but I ought to go to meet some one at the Varietes."

°°°°"His mistress," said she to herself.

°°°°"Then, is not Ajuda coming for you this evening?" inquired the Vicomte.

°°°°"No," she answered, petulantly.

°°°°"Very well, then, if you really must have an arm, take that of M. de Rastignac."

°°°°The Vicomtess turned to Eugene with a smile.

°°°°"That would be a very compromising step for you," she said.

°°°°" 'A Frenchman loves danger, because in danger there is glory,' to quote M. de Chateaubriand," said Rastignac, with a bow.

°°°°A few moments later he was sitting beside Mme. de Beauseant in a brougham, that whirled them through the streets of Paris to a fashionable theatre. It seemed to him that some fairy magic had suddenly transported him into a box facing the stage. All the lorgnettes of the house were pointed at him as he entered, and at the Vicomtesse in her charming toilette. He went from enchantment to enchantment.

°°°°"You must talk to me, you know," said Mme. de Beauseant. "Ah! look! There is Mme. de Nucingen in the third box from ours. Her sister and M. de Trailles are on the other side."

°°°°The Vicomtesse glanced as she spoke at the box where Mlle. de Rochefide should have been; M. d'Ajuda was not there, and Mme. de Beauseant's face lighted up in a marvelous way.

°°°°"She is charming," said Eugene, after looking at Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"She has white eyelashes."

°°°°"Yes, but she has such a pretty slender figure!"

°°°°"Her hands are large."

°°°°"Such beautiful eyes!"

°°°°"Her face is long."

°°°°"Yes, but length gives distinction."

°°°°"It is lucky for her that she has some distinction in her face. Just see how she fidgets with her opera-glass! The Goriot blood shows itself in every movement," said the Vicomtesse, much to Eugene's astonishment.

°°°°Indeed, Mme. de Beauseant seemed to be engaged in making a survey of the house, and to be unconscious of Mme. Nucingen's existence; but no movement made by the latter was lost upon the Vicomtesse. The house was full of the loveliest women in Paris, so that Delphine de Nucingen was not a little flattered to receive the undivided attention of Mme. de Beauseant's young, handsome, and well-dressed cousin, who seemed to have no eyes for any one else.

°°°°"If you look at her so persistently, you will make people talk, M. de Rastignac. You will never succeed if you fling yourself at any one's head like that."

°°°°"My dear cousin," said Eugene, "you have protected me indeed so far, and now if you would complete your work, I only ask of you a favor which will cost you but little, and be of very great service to me. I have lost my heart."

°°°°"Already!"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"And to that woman!"

°°°°"How could I aspire to find any one else to listen to me?" he asked, with a keen glance at his cousin. "Her Grace the Duchesse de Carigliano is a friend of the Duchesse de Berri," he went on, after a pause; "you are sure to see her, will you be so kind as to present me to her, and to take me to her ball on Monday? I shall meet Mme. de Nucingen there, and enter into my first skirmish."

°°°°"Willingly," she said. "If you have a liking for her already, your affairs of the heart are like to prosper. That is de Marsay over there in the Princesse Galathionne's box. Mme. de Nucingen is racked with jealousy. There is no better time for approaching a woman, especially if she happens to be a banker's wife. All those ladies of the Chaussee-d'Antin love revenge."

°°°°"Then, what would you do yourself in such a case?"

°°°°"I should suffer in silence."

°°°°At this point the Marquis d'Ajuda appeared in Mme. de Beauseant's box.

°°°°"I have made a muddle of my affairs to come to you," he said, "and I am telling you about it, so that it may not be a sacrifice."

°°°°Eugene saw the glow of joy on the Vicomtesse's face, and knew that this was love, and learned the difference between love and the affectations of Parisian coquetry. He admired his cousin, grew mute, and yielded his place to M. d'Ajuda with a sigh.

°°°°"How noble, how sublime a woman is when she loves like that!" he said to himself. "And HE could forsake her for a doll! Oh! how could any one forsake her?"

°°°°There was a boy's passionate indignation in his heart. He could have flung himself at Mme. de Beauseant's feet; he longed for the power of the devil if he could snatch her away and hide her in his heart, as an eagle snatches up some white yeanling from the plains and bears it to its eyrie. It was humiliating to him to think that in all this gallery of fair pictures he had not one picture of his own. "To have a mistress and an almost royal position is a sign of power," he said to himself. And he looked at Mme. de Nucingen as a man measures another who has insulted him.

°°°°The Vicomtesse turned to him, and the expression of her eyes thanked him a thousand times for his discretion. The first act came to an end just then.

°°°°"Do you know Mme. de Nucingen well enough to present M. de Rastignac to her?" she asked of the Marquis d'Ajuda.

°°°°"She will be delighted," said the Marquis. The handsome Portuguese rose as he spoke and took the student's arm, and in another moment Eugene found himself in Mme. de Nucingen's box.

°°°°"Madame," said the Marquis, "I have the honor of presenting to you the Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac; he is a cousin of Mme. de Beauseant's. You have made so deep an impression upon him, that I thought I would fill up the measure of his happiness by bringing him nearer to his divinity."

°°°°Words spoken half jestingly to cover their somewhat disrespectful import; but such an implication, if carefully disguised, never gives offence to a woman. Mme. de Nucingen smiled, and offered Eugene the place which her husband had just left.

°°°°"I do not venture to suggest that you should stay with me, monsieur," she said. "Those who are so fortunate as to be in Mme. de Beauseant's company do not desire to leave it."

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, lowering his voice, "I think that to please my cousin I should remain with you. Before my lord Marquis came we were speaking of you and of your exceedingly distinguished appearance," he added aloud.

°°°°M. d'Ajuda turned and left them.

°°°°"Are you really going to stay with me, monsieur?" asked the Baroness. "Then we shall make each other's acquaintance. Mme. de Restaud told me about you, and has made me anxious to meet you."

°°°°"She must be very insincere, then, for she has shut her door on me."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Madame, I will tell you honestly the reason why; but I must crave your indulgence before confiding such a secret to you. I am your father's neighbor; I had no idea that Mme. de Restaud was his daughter. I was rash enough to mention his name; I meant no harm, but I annoyed your sister and her husband very much. You cannot think how severely the Duchesse de Langeais and my cousin blamed this apostasy on a daughter's part, as a piece of bad taste. I told them all about it, and they both burst out laughing. Then Mme. de Beauseant made some comparison between you and your sister, speaking in high terms of you, and saying how very fond you were of my neighbor, M. Goriot. And, indeed, how could you help loving him? He adores you so passionately that I am jealous already. We talked about you this morning for two hours. So this evening I was quite full of all that your father had told me, and while I was dining with my cousin I said that you could not be as beautiful as affectionate. Mme. de Beauseant meant to gratify such warm admiration, I think, when she brought me here, telling me, in her gracious way, that I should see you."

°°°°"Then, even now, I owe you a debt of gratitude, monsieur," said the banker's wife. "We shall be quite old friends in a little while."

°°°°"Although a friendship with you could not be like an ordinary friendship," said Rastignac; "I should never wish to be your friend."

°°°°Such stereotyped phrases as these, in the mouths of beginners, possess an unfailing charm for women, and are insipid only when read coldly; for a young man's tone, glance and attitude give a surpassing eloquence to the banal phrases. Mme. de Nucingen thought that Rastignac was adorable. Then, woman-like, being at a loss how to reply to the student's outspoken admiration, she answered a previous remark.

°°°°"Yes, it is very wrong of my sister to treat our poor father as she does," she said; "he has been a Providence to us. It was not until M. de Nucingen positively ordered me only to receive him in the mornings that I yielded the point. But I have been unhappy about it for a long while; I have shed many tears over it. This violence to my feelings, with my husband's brutal treatment, have been two causes of my unhappy married life. There is certainly no woman in Paris whose lot seems more enviable than mine, and yet, in reality, there is not one so much to be pitied. You will think I must be out of my senses to talk to you like this; but you know my father, and I cannot regard you as a stranger."

°°°°"You will find no one," said Eugene, "who longs as eagerly as I do to be yours. What do all women seek? Happiness." (He answered his own question in low, vibrating tones.) "And if happiness for a woman means that she is to be loved and adored, to have a friend to whom she can pour out her wishes, her fancies, her sorrows and joys; to whom she can lay bare her heart and soul, and all her fair defects and her gracious virtues, without fear of a betrayal; believe me, the devotion and the warmth that never fails can only be found in the heart of a young man who, at a bare sign from you, would go to his death, who neither knows nor cares to know anything as yet of the world, because you will be all the world to him. I myself, you see (you will laugh at my simplicity), have just come from a remote country district; I am quite new to this world of Paris; I have only known true and loving hearts; and I made up my mind that here I should find no love. Then I chanced to meet my cousin, and to see my cousin's heart from very near; I have divined the inexhaustible treasures of passion, and, like Cherubino, I am the lover of all women, until the day comes when I find THE woman to whom I may devote myself. As soon as I saw you, as soon as I came into the theatre this evening, I felt myself borne towards you as if by the current of a stream. I had so often thought of you already, but I had never dreamed that you would be so beautiful! Mme. de Beauseant told me that I must not look so much at you. She does not know the charm of your red lips, your fair face, nor see how soft your eyes are. . . . I also am beginning to talk nonsense; but let me talk."

°°°°Nothing pleases a woman better than to listen to such whispered words as these; the most puritanical among them listens even when she ought not to reply to them; and Rastignac, having once begun, continued to pour out his story, dropping his voice, that she might lean and listen; and Mme. de Nucingen, smiling, glanced from time to time at de Marsay, who still sat in the Princesse Galathionne's box.

°°°°Rastignac did not leave Mme. de Nucingen till her husband came to take her home.

°°°°"Madame," Eugene said, "I shall have the pleasure of calling upon you before the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball."

°°°°"If Matame infites you to come," said the Baron, a thickset Alsatian, with indications of a sinister cunning in his full-moon countenance, "you are quide sure of being well receifed."

°°°°"My affairs seem to be in a promising way," said Eugene to himself.--" 'Can you love me?' I asked her, and she did not resent it. The bit is in the horse's mouth, and I have only to mount and ride;" and with that he went to pay his respects to Mme. de Beauseant, who was leaving the theatre on d'Ajuda's arm.

°°°°The student did not know that the Baroness' thoughts had been wandering; that she was even then expecting a letter from de Marsay, one of those letters that bring about a rupture that rends the soul; so, happy in his delusion, Eugene went with the Vicomtesse to the peristyle, where people were waiting till their carriages were announced.

°°°°"That cousin of yours is hardly recognizable for the same man," said the Portuguese laughingly to the Vicomtesse, when Eugene had taken leave of them. "He will break the bank. He is as supple as an eel; he will go a long way, of that I am sure. Who else could have picked out a woman for him, as you did, just when she needed consolation?"

°°°°"But it is not certain that she does not still love the faithless lover," said Mme. de Beauseant.

°°°°The student meanwhile walked back from the Theatre-Italien to the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, making the most delightful plans as he went. He had noticed how closely Mme. de Restaud had scrutinized him when he sat beside Mme. de Nucingen, and inferred that the Countess' doors would not be closed in the future. Four important houses were now open to him--for he meant to stand well with the Marechale; he had four supporters in the inmost circle of society in Paris. Even now it was clear to him that, once involved in this intricate social machinery, he must attach himself to a spoke of the wheel that was to turn and raise his fortunes; he would not examine himself too curiously as to the methods, but he was certain of the end, and conscious of the power to gain and keep his hold.

°°°°"If Mme. de Nucingen takes an interest in me, I will teach her how to manage her husband. That husband of hers is a great speculator; he might put me in the way of making a fortune by a single stroke."

°°°°He did not say this bluntly in so many words; as yet, indeed, he was not sufficient of a diplomatist to sum up a situation, to see its possibilities at a glance, and calculate the chances in his favor. These were nothing but hazy ideas that floated over his mental horizon; they were less cynical than Vautrin's notions; but if they had been tried in the crucible of conscience, no very pure result would have issued from the test. It is by a succession of such like transactions that men sink at last to the level of the relaxed morality of this epoch, when there have never been so few of those who square their courses with their theories, so few of those noble characters who do not yield to temptation, for whom the slightest deviation from the line of rectitude is a crime. To these magnificent types of uncompromising Right we owe two masterpieces--the Alceste of Moliere, and, in our own day, the characters of Jeanie Deans and her father in Sir Walter Scott's novel. Perhaps a work which should chronicle the opposite course, which should trace out all the devious courses through which a man of the world, a man of ambitions, drags his conscience, just steering clear of crime that he may gain his end and yet save appearances, such a chronicle would be no less edifying and no less dramatic.

°°°°Rastignac went home. He was fascinated by Mme. de Nucingen; he seemed to see her before him, slender and graceful as a swallow. He recalled the intoxicating sweetness of her eyes, her fair hair, the delicate silken tissue of the skin, beneath which it almost seemed to him that he could see the blood coursing; the tones of her voice still exerted a spell over him; he had forgotten nothing; his walk perhaps heated his imagination by sending a glow of warmth through his veins. He knocked unceremoniously at Goriot's door.

°°°°"I have seen Mme. Delphine, neighbor," said he.

°°°°"Where?"

°°°°"At the Italiens."

°°°°"Did she enjoy it?. . . . Just come inside," and the old man left his bed, unlocked the door, and promptly returned again.

°°°°It was the first time that Eugene had been in Father Goriot's room, and he could not control his feeling of amazement at the contrast between the den in which the father lived and the costume of the daughter whom he had just beheld. The window was curtainless, the walls were damp, in places the varnished wall- paper had come away and gave glimpses of the grimy yellow plaster beneath. The wretched bed on which the old man lay boasted but one thin blanket, and a wadded quilt made out of large pieces of Mme. Vauquer's old dresses. The floor was damp and gritty. Opposite the window stood a chest of drawers made of rosewood, one of the old-fashioned kind with a curving front and brass handles, shaped like rings of twisted vine stems covered with flowers and leaves. On a venerable piece of furniture with a wooden shelf stood a ewer and basin and shaving apparatus. A pair of shoes stood in one corner; a night-table by the bed had neither a door nor marble slab. There was not a trace of a fire in the empty grate; the square walnut table with the crossbar against which Father Goriot had crushed and twisted his posset- dish stood near the hearth. The old man's hat was lying on a broken-down bureau. An armchair stuffed with straw and a couple of chairs completed the list of ramshackle furniture. From the tester of the bed, tied to the ceiling by a piece of rag, hung a strip of some cheap material in large red and black checks. No poor drudge in a garret could be worse lodged than Father Goriot in Mme. Vauquer's lodging-house. The mere sight of the room sent a chill through you and a sense of oppression; it was like the worst cell in a prison. Luckily, Goriot could not see the effect that his surroundings produced on Eugene as the latter deposited his candle on the night-table. The old man turned round, keeping the bedclothes huddled up to his chin.

°°°°"Well," he said, "and which do you like the best, Mme. de Restaud or Mme. de Nucingen?"

°°°°"I like Mme. Delphine the best," said the law student, "because she loves you the best."

°°°°At the words so heartily spoken the old man's hand slipped out from under the bedclothes and grasped Eugene's.

°°°°"Thank you, thank you," he said, gratefully. "Then what did she say about me?"

°°°°The student repeated the Baroness' remarks with some embellishments of his own, the old man listening the while as though he heard a voice from Heaven.

°°°°"Dear child!" he said. "Yes, yes, she is very fond of me. But you must not believe all that she tells you about Anastasie. The two sisters are jealous of each other, you see, another proof of their affection. Mme. de Restaud is very fond of me too. I know she is. A father sees his children as God sees all of us; he looks into the very depths of their hearts; he knows their intentions; and both of them are so loving. Oh! if I only had good sons-in-law, I should be too happy, and I dare say there is no perfect happiness here below. If I might live with them-- simply hear their voices, know that they are there, see them go and come as I used to do at home when they were still with me; why, my heart bounds at the thought. . . . Were they nicely dressed?"

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene. "But, M. Goriot, how is it that your daughters have such fine houses, while you live in such a den as this?"

°°°°"Dear me, why should I want anything better?" he replied, with seeming carelessness. "I can't quite explain to you how it is; I am not used to stringing words together properly, but it all lies there----" he said, tapping his heart. "My real life is in my two girls, you see; and so long as they are happy, and smartly dressed, and have soft carpets under their feet, what does it matter what clothes I wear or where I lie down of a night? I shall never feel cold so long as they are warm; I shall never feel dull if they are laughing. I have no troubles but theirs. When you, too, are a father, and you hear your children's little voices, you will say to yourself, 'That has all come from me.' You will feel that those little ones are akin to every drop in your veins, that they are the very flower of your life (and what else are they?); you will cleave so closely to them that you seem to feel every movement that they make. Everywhere I hear their voices sounding in my ears. If they are sad, the look in their eyes freezes my blood. Some day you will find out that there is far more happiness in another's happiness than in your own. It is something that I cannot explain, something within that sends a glow of warmth all through you. In short, I live my life three times over. Shall I tell you something funny? Well, then, since I have been a father, I have come to understand God. He is everywhere in the world, because the whole world comes from Him. And it is just the same with my children, monsieur. Only, I love my daughters better than God loves the world, for the world is not so beautiful as God Himself is, but my children are more beautiful than I am. Their lives are so bound up with mine that I felt somehow that you would see them this evening. Great Heaven! If any man would make my little Delphine as happy as a wife is when she is loved, I would black his boots and run on his errands. That miserable M. de Marsay is a cur; I know all about him from her maid. A longing to wring his neck comes over me now and then. He does not love her! does not love a pearl of a woman, with a voice like a nightingale and shaped like a model. Where can her eyes have been when she married that great lump of an Alsatian? They ought both of them to have married young men, good-looking and good-tempered--but, after all, they had their own way."

°°°°Father Goriot was sublime. Eugene had never yet seen his face light up as it did now with the passionate fervor of a father's love. It is worthy of remark that strong feeling has a very subtle and pervasive power; the roughest nature, in the endeavor to express a deep and sincere affection, communicates to others the influence that has put resonance into the voice, and eloquence into every gesture, wrought a change in the very features of the speaker; for under the inspiration of passion the stupidest human being attains to the highest eloquence of ideas, if not of language, and seems to move in some sphere of light. In the old man's tones and gesture there was something just then of the same spell that a great actor exerts over his audience. But does not the poet in us find expression in our affections?

°°°°"Well," said Eugene, "perhaps you will not be sorry to hear that she is pretty sure to break with de Marsay before long. That sprig of fashion has left her for the Princesse Galathionne. For my part, I fell in love with Mme. Delphine this evening."

°°°°"Stuff!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"I did indeed, and she did not regard me with aversion. For a whole hour we talked of love, and I am to go to call on her on Saturday, the day after to-morrow."

°°°°"Oh! how I should love you, if she should like you. You are kind- hearted; you would never make her miserable. If you were to forsake her, I would cut your throat at once. A woman does not love twice, you see! Good heavens! what nonsense I am talking, M. Eugene! It is cold; you ought not to stay here. MON DIEU! so you have heard her speak? What message did she give you for me?"

°°°°"None at all," said Eugene to himself; aloud he answered, "She told me to tell you that your daughter sends you a good kiss."

°°°°"Good-night, neighbor! Sleep well, and pleasant dreams to you! I have mine already made for me by that message from her. May God grant you all your desires! You have come in like a good angel on me to-night, and brought with you the air that my daughter breathes."

°°°°"Poor old fellow!" said Eugene as he lay down. "It is enough to melt a heart of stone. His daughter no more thought of him than of the Grand Turk."

°°°°Ever after this conference Goriot looked upon his neighbor as a friend, a confidant such as he had never hoped to find; and there was established between the two the only relationship that could attach this old man to another man. The passions never miscalculate. Father Goriot felt that this friendship brought him closer to his daughter Delphine; he thought that he should find a warmer welcome for himself if the Baroness should care for Eugene. Moreover, he had confided one of his troubles to the younger man. Mme. de Nucingen, for whose happiness he prayed a thousand times daily, had never known the joys of love. Eugene was certainly (to make use of his own expression) one of the nicest young men that he had ever seen, and some prophetic instinct seemed to tell him that Eugene was to give her the happiness which had not been hers. These were the beginnings of a friendship that grew up between the old man and his neighbor; but for this friendship the catastrophe of the drama must have remained a mystery.

°°°°The affection with which Father Goriot regarded Eugene, by whom he seated himself at breakfast, the change in Goriot's face, which as a rule, looked as expressionless as a plaster cast, and a few words that passed between the two, surprised the other lodgers. Vautrin, who saw Eugene for the first time since their interview, seemed as if he would fain read the student's very soul. During the night Eugene had had some time in which to scan the vast field which lay before him; and now, as he remembered yesterday's proposal, the thought of Mlle. Taillefer's dowry came, of course, to his mind, and he could not help thinking of Victorine as the most exemplary youth may think of an heiress. It chanced that their eyes met. The poor girl did not fail to see that Eugene looked very handsome in his new clothes. So much was said in the glance, thus exchanged, that Eugene could not doubt but that he was associated in her mind with the vague hopes that lie dormant in a girl's heart and gather round the first attractive newcomer. "Eight hundred thousand francs!" a voice cried in his ears, but suddenly he took refuge in the memories of yesterday evening, thinking that his extemporized passion for Mme. de Nucingen was a talisman that would preserve him from this temptation.

°°°°"They gave Rossini's Barber of Seville at the Italiens yesterday evening," he remarked. "I never heard such delicious music. Good gracious! how lucky people are to have a box at the Italiens!"

°°°°Father Goriot drank in every word that Eugene let fall, and watched him as a dog watches his master's slightest movement.

°°°°"You men are like fighting cocks," said Mme. Vauquer; "you do what you like."

°°°°"How did you get back?" inquired Vautrin.

°°°°"I walked," answered Eugene.

°°°°"For my own part," remarked the tempter, "I do not care about doing things by halves. If I want to enjoy myself that way, I should prefer to go in my carriage, sit in my own box, and do the thing comfortably. Everything or nothing; that is my motto."

°°°°"And a good one, too," commented Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Perhaps you will see Mme. de Nucingen to-day," said Eugene, addressing Goriot in an undertone. "She will welcome you with open arms, I am sure; she would want to ask you for all sorts of little details about me. I have found out that she will do anything in the world to be known by my cousin Mme. de Beauseant; don't forget to tell her that I love her too well not to think of trying to arrange this."

°°°°Rastignac went at once to the Ecole de Droit. He had no mind to stay a moment longer than was necessary in that odious house. He wasted his time that day; he had fallen a victim to that fever of the brain that accompanies the too vivid hopes of youth. Vautrin's arguments had set him meditating on social life, and he was deep in these reflections when he happened on his friend Bianchon in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

°°°°"What makes you look so solemn?" said the medical student, putting an arm through Eugene's as they went towards the Palais.

°°°°"I am tormented by temptations."

°°°°"What kind? There is a cure for temptation."

°°°°"What?"

°°°°"Yielding to it."

°°°°"You laugh, but you don't know what it is all about. Have you read Rousseau?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Do you remember that he asks the reader somewhere what he would do if he could make a fortune by killing an old mandarin somewhere in China by mere force of wishing it, and without stirring from Paris?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Well, then?"

°°°°"Pshaw! I am at my thirty-third mandarin."

°°°°"Seriously, though. Look here, suppose you were sure that you could do it, and had only to give a nod. Would you do it?"

°°°°"Is he well stricken in years, this mandarin of yours? Pshaw! after all, young or old, paralytic, or well and sound, my word for it. . . . Well, then. Hang it, no!"

°°°°"You are a good fellow, Bianchon. But suppose you loved a woman well enough to lose your soul in hell for her, and that she wanted money for dresses and a carriage, and all her whims, in fact?"

°°°°"Why, here you are taking away my reason, and want me to reason!"

°°°°"Well, then, Bianchon, I am mad; bring me to my senses. I have two sisters as beautiful and innocent as angels, and I want them to be happy. How am I to find two hundred thousand francs apiece for them in the next five years? Now and then in life, you see, you must play for heavy stakes, and it is no use wasting your luck on low play."

°°°°"But you are only stating the problem that lies before every one at the outset of his life, and you want to cut the Gordian knot with a sword. If that is the way of it, dear boy, you must be an Alexander, or to the hulks you go. For my own part, I am quite contented with the little lot I mean to make for myself somewhere in the country, when I mean to step into my father's shoes and plod along. A man's affections are just as fully satisfied by the smallest circle as they can be by a vast circumference. Napoleon himself could only dine once, and he could not have more mistresses than a house student at the Capuchins. Happiness, old man, depends on what lies between the sole of your foot and the crown of your head; and whether it costs a million or a hundred louis, the actual amount of pleasure that you receive rests entirely with you, and is just exactly the same in any case. I am for letting that Chinaman live."

°°°°"Thank you, Bianchon; you have done me good. We will always be friends."

°°°°"I say," remarked the medical student, as they came to the end of a broad walk in the Jardin des Plantes, "I saw the Michonneau and Poiret a few minutes ago on a bench chatting with a gentleman whom I used to see in last year's troubles hanging about the Chamber of Deputies; he seems to me, in fact, to be a detective dressed up like a decent retired tradesman. Let us keep an eye on that couple; I will tell you why some time. Good-bye; it is nearly four o'clock, and I must be in to answer to my name."

°°°°When Eugene reached the lodging-house, he found Father Goriot waiting for him.

°°°°"Here," cried the old man, "here is a letter from her. Pretty handwriting, eh?"

°°°°Eugene broke the seal and read:--

°°°°"Sir,--I have heard from my father that you are fond of Italian music. I shall be delighted if you will do me the pleasure of accepting a seat in my box. La Fodor and Pellegrini will sing on Saturday, so I am sure that you will not refuse me. M. de Nucingen and I shall be pleased if you will dine with us; we shall be quite by ourselves. If you will come and be my escort, my husband will be glad to be relieved from his conjugal duties. Do not answer, but simply come.--Yours sincerely, D. DE N."

°°°°"Let me see it," said Father Goriot, when Eugene had read the letter. "You are going, aren't you?" he added, when he had smelled the writing-paper. "How nice it smells! Her fingers have touched it, that is certain."

°°°°"A woman does not fling herself at a man's head in this way," the student was thinking. "She wants to use me to bring back de Marsay; nothing but pique makes a woman do a thing like this."

°°°°"Well," said Father Goriot, "what are you thinking about?"

°°°°Eugene did not know the fever or vanity that possessed some women in those days; how should he imagine that to open a door in the Faubourg Saint-Germain a banker's wife would go to almost any length. For the coterie of the Faubourg Saint-Germain was a charmed circle, and the women who moved in it were at that time the queens of society; and among the greatest of these Dames du Petit-Chateau, as they were called, were Mme. de Beauseant and her friends the Duchesse de Langeais and the Duchesse de Maufrigneause. Rastignac was alone in his ignorance of the frantic efforts made by women who lived in the Chausee-d'Antin to enter this seventh heaven and shine among the brightest constellations of their sex. But his cautious disposition stood him in good stead, and kept his judgment cool, and the not altogether enviable power of imposing instead of accepting conditions.

°°°°"Yes, I am going," he replied.

°°°°So it was curiosity that drew him to Mme. de Nucingen; while, if she had treated him disdainfully, passion perhaps might have brought him to her feet. Still he waited almost impatiently for to-morrow, and the hour when he could go to her. There is almost as much charm for a young man in a first flirtation as there is in first love. The certainty of success is a source of happiness to which men do not confess, and all the charm of certain women lies in this. The desire of conquest springs no less from the easiness than from the difficulty of triumph, and every passion is excited or sustained by one or the other of these two motives which divide the empire of love. Perhaps this division is one result of the great question of temperaments; which, after all, dominates social life. The melancholic temperament may stand in need of the tonic of coquetry, while those of nervous or sanguine complexion withdraw if they meet with a too stubborn resistance. In other words, the lymphatic temperament is essentially despondent, and the rhapsodic is bilious.

°°°°Eugene lingered over his toilette with an enjoyment of all its little details that is grateful to a young man's self-love, though he will not own to it for fear of being laughed at. He thought, as he arranged his hair, that a pretty woman's glances would wander through the dark curls. He indulged in childish tricks like any young girl dressing for a dance, and gazed complacently at his graceful figure while he smoothed out the creases of his coat.

°°°°"There are worse figures, that is certain," he said to himself.

°°°°Then he went downstairs, just as the rest of the household were sitting down to dinner, and took with good humor the boisterous applause excited by his elegant appearance. The amazement with which any attention to dress is regarded in a lodging-house is a very characteristic trait. No one can put on a new coat but every one else must say his say about it.

°°°°"Clk! clk! clk!" cried Bianchon, making the sound with his tongue against the roof of his mouth, like a driver urging on a horse.

°°°°"He holds himself like a duke and a peer of France," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Are you going a-courting?" inquired Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" cried the artist.

°°°°"My compliments to my lady your wife," from the employe at the Museum.

°°°°"Your wife; have you a wife?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, in compartments, water-tight and floats, guaranteed fast color, all prices from twenty-five to forty sous, neat check patterns in the latest fashion and best taste, will wash, half- linen, half-cotton, half-wool; a certain cure for toothache and other complaints under the patronage of the Royal College of Physicians! children like it! a remedy for headache, indigestion, and all other diseases affecting the throat, eyes, and ears!" cried Vautrin, with a comical imitation of the volubility of a quack at a fair. "And how much shall we say for this marvel, gentlemen? Twopence? No. Nothing of the sort. All that is left in stock after supplying the Great Mogul. All the crowned heads of Europe, including the Gr-r-rand Duke of Baden, have been anxious to get a sight of it. Walk up! walk up! gentlemen! Pay at the desk as you go in! Strike up the music there! Brooum, la, la, trinn! la, la, boum! boum! Mister Clarinette, there you are out of tune!" he added gruffly; "I will rap your knuckles for you!"

°°°°"Goodness! what an amusing man!" said Mme. Vauquer to Mme. Couture; "I should never feel dull with him in the house."

°°°°This burlesque of Vautrin's was the signal for an outburst of merriment, and under cover of jokes and laughter Eugene caught a glance from Mlle. Taillefer; she had leaned over to say a few words in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"The cab is at the door," announced Sylvie.

°°°°"But where is he going to dine?" asked Bianchon.

°°°°"With Madame la Baronne de Nucingen."

°°°°"M. Goriot's daughter," said the law student.

°°°°At this, all eyes turned to the old vermicelli maker; he was gazing at Eugene with something like envy in his eyes.

°°°°Rastignac reached the house in the Rue Saint-Lazare, one of those many-windowed houses with a mean-looking portico and slender columns, which are considered the thing in Paris, a typical banker's house, decorated in the most ostentatious fashion; the walls lined with stucco, the landings of marble mosaic. Mme. de Nucingen was sitting in a little drawing-room; the room was painted in the Italian fashion, and decorated like a restaurant. The Baroness seemed depressed. The effort that she made to hide her feelings aroused Eugene's interest; it was plain that she was not playing a part. He had expected a little flutter of excitement at his coming, and he found her dispirited and sad. The disappointment piqued his vanity.

°°°°"My claim to your confidence is very small, madame," he said, after rallying her on her abstracted mood; "but if I am in the way, please tell me so frankly; I count on your good faith."

°°°°"No, stay with me," she said; "I shall be all alone if you go. Nucingen is dining in town, and I do not want to be alone; I want to be taken out of myself."

°°°°"But what is the matter?"

°°°°"You are the very last person whom I should tell," she exclaimed.

°°°°"Then I am connected in some way in this secret. I wonder what it is?"

°°°°"Perhaps. Yet, no," she went on; "it is a domestic quarrel, which ought to be buried in the depths of the heart. I am very unhappy; did I not tell you so the day before yesterday? Golden chains are the heaviest of all fetters."

°°°°When a woman tells a young man that she is very unhappy, and when the young man is clever, and well dressed, and has fifteen hundred francs lying idle in his pocket, he is sure to think as Eugene said, and he becomes a coxcomb.

°°°°"What can you have left to wish for?" he answered. "You are young, beautiful, beloved, and rich."

°°°°"Do not let us talk of my affairs," she said shaking her head mournfully. "We will dine together tete-a-tete, and afterwards we will go to hear the most exquisite music. Am I to your taste?" she went on, rising and displaying her gown of white cashmere, covered with Persian designs in the most superb taste.

°°°°"I wish that you were altogether mine," said Eugene; "you are charming."

°°°°"You would have a forlorn piece of property," she said, smiling bitterly. "There is nothing about me that betrays my wretchedness; and yet, in spite of appearances, I am in despair. I cannot sleep; my troubles have broken my night's rest; I shall grow ugly."

°°°°"Oh! that is impossible," cried the law student; "but I am curious to know what these troubles can be that a devoted love cannot efface."

°°°°"Ah! if I were to tell you about them, you would shun me," she said. "Your love for me is as yet only the conventional gallantry that men use to masquerade in; and, if you really loved me, you would be driven to despair. I must keep silence, you see. Let us talk of something else, for pity's sake," she added. "Let me show you my rooms."

°°°°"No; let us stay here," answered Eugene; he sat down on the sofa before the fire, and boldly took Mme. de Nucingen's hand in his. She surrendered it to him; he even felt the pressure of her fingers in one of the spasmodic clutches that betray terrible agitation.

°°°°"Listen," said Rastignac; "if you are in trouble, you ought to tell me about it. I want to prove to you that I love you for yourself alone. You must speak to me frankly about your troubles, so that I can put an end to them, even if I have to kill half-a- dozen men; or I shall go, never to return."

°°°°"Very well," she cried, putting her hand to her forehead in an agony of despair, "I will put you to the proof, and this very moment. Yes," she said to herself, "I have no other resource left."

°°°°She rang the bell.

°°°°"Are the horses put in for the master?" she asked of the servant.

°°°°"Yes, madame."

°°°°"I shall take his carriage myself. He can have mine and my horses. Serve dinner at seven o'clock."

°°°°"Now, come with me," she said to Eugene, who thought as he sat in the banker's carriage beside Mme. de Nucingen that he must surely be dreaming.

°°°°"To the Palais-Royal," she said to the coachman; "stop near the Theatre-Francais."

°°°°She seemed to be too troubled and excited to answer the innumerable questions that Eugene put to her. He was at a loss what to think of her mute resistance, her obstinate silence.

°°°°"Another moment and she will escape me," he said to himself.

°°°°When the carriage stopped at last, the Baroness gave the law student a glance that silenced his wild words, for he was almost beside himself.

°°°°"Is it true that you love me?" she asked.

°°°°"Yes," he answered, and in his manner and tone there was no trace of the uneasiness that he felt.

°°°°"You will not think ill of me, will you, whatever I may ask of you?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"Are you ready to do my bidding?"

°°°°"Blindly."

°°°°"Have you ever been to a gaming-house?" she asked in a tremulous voice.

°°°°"Never."

°°°°"Ah! now I can breathe. You will have luck. Here is my purse," she said. "Take it! there are a hundred francs in it, all that such a fortunate woman as I can call her own. Go up into one of the gaming-houses--I do not know where they are, but there are some near the Palais-Royal. Try your luck with the hundred francs at a game they call roulette; lose it all or bring me back six thousand francs. I will tell you about my troubles when you come back."

°°°°"Devil take me, I'm sure, if I have a glimmer of a notion of what I am about, but I will obey you," he added, with inward exultation, as he thought, "She has gone too far to draw back-- she can refuse me nothing now!"

°°°°Eugene took the dainty little purse, inquired the way of a second-hand clothes-dealer, and hurried to number 9, which happened to be the nearest gaming-house. He mounted the staircase, surrendered his hat, and asked the way to the roulette-table, whither the attendant took him, not a little to the astonishment of the regular comers. All eyes were fixed on Eugene as he asked, without bashfulness, where he was to deposit his stakes.

°°°°"If you put a louis on one only of those thirty-six numbers, and it turns up, you will win thirty-six louis," said a respectable- looking, white-haired old man in answer to his inquiry.

°°°°Eugene staked the whole of his money on the number 21 (his own age). There was a cry of surprise; before he knew what he had done, he had won.

°°°°"Take your money off, sir," said the old gentleman; "you don't often win twice running by that system."

°°°°Eugene took the rake that the old man handed to him, and drew in his three thousand six hundred francs, and, still perfectly ignorant of what he was about, staked again on the red. The bystanders watched him enviously as they saw him continue to play. The disc turned, and again he won; the banker threw him three thousand six hundred francs once more.

°°°°"You have seven thousand, two hundred francs of your own," the old gentleman said in his ear. "Take my advice and go away with your winnings; red has turned up eight times already. If you are charitable, you will show your gratitude for sound counsel by giving a trifle to an old prefect of Napoleon who is down on his luck."

°°°°Rastignac's head was swimming; he saw ten of his louis pass into the white-haired man's possession, and went down-stairs with his seven thousand francs; he was still ignorant of the game, and stupefied by his luck.

°°°°"So, that is over; and now where will you take me?" he asked, as soon as the door was closed, and he showed the seven thousand francs to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Delphine flung her arms about him, but there was no passion in that wild embrace.

°°°°"You have saved me!" she cried, and tears of joy flowed fast.

°°°°"I will tell you everything, my friend. For you will be my friend, will you not? I am rich, you think, very rich; I have everything I want, or I seem as if I had everything. Very well, you must know that M. de Nucingen does not allow me the control of a single penny; he pays all the bills for the house expenses; he pays for my carriages and opera box; he does not give me enough to pay for my dress, and he reduces me to poverty in secret on purpose. I am too proud to beg from him. I should be the vilest of women if I could take his money at the price at which he offers it. Do you ask how I, with seven hundred thousand francs of my own, could let myself be robbed? It is because I was proud, and scorned to speak. We are so young, so artless when our married life begins! I never could bring myself to ask my husband for money; the words would have made my lips bleed, I did not dare to ask; I spent my savings first, and then the money that my poor father gave me, then I ran into debt. Marriage for me is a hideous farce; I cannot talk about it, let it suffice to say that Nucingen and I have separate rooms, and that I would fling myself out of the window sooner than consent to any other manner of life. I suffered agonies when I had to confess to my girlish extravagance, my debts for jewelry and trifles (for our poor father had never refused us anything, and spoiled us), but at last I found courage to tell him about them. After all, I had a fortune of my own. Nucingen flew into a rage; he said that I should be the ruin of him, and used frightful language! I wished myself a hundred feet down in the earth. He had my dowry, so he paid my debts, but he stipulated at the same time that my expenses in future must not exceed a certain fixed sum, and I gave way for the sake of peace. And then," she went on, "I wanted to gratify the self-love of some one whom you know. He may have deceived me, but I should do him the justice to say that there was nothing petty in his character. But, after all, he threw me over disgracefully. If, at a woman's utmost need, SOMEBODY heaps gold upon her, he ought never to forsake her; that love should last for ever! But you, at one-and-twenty, you, the soul of honor, with the unsullied conscience of youth, will ask me how a woman can bring herself to accept money in such a way? MON DIEU! is it not natural to share everything with the one to whom we owe our happiness? When all has been given, why should we pause and hesitate over a part? Money is as nothing between us until the moment when the sentiment that bound us together ceases to exist. Were we not bound to each other for life? Who that believes in love foresees such an end to love? You swear to love us eternally; how, then, can our interests be separate?

°°°°"You do not know how I suffered to-day when Nucingen refused to give me six thousand francs; he spends as much as that every month on his mistress, an opera dancer! I thought of killing myself. The wildest thoughts came into my head. There have been moments in my life when I have envied my servants, and would have changed places with my maid. It was madness to think of going to our father, Anastasie and I have bled him dry; our poor father would have sold himself if he could have raised six thousand francs that way. I should have driven him frantic to no purpose. You have saved me from shame and death; I was beside myself with anguish. Ah! monsieur, I owed you this explanation after my mad ravings. When you left me just now, as soon as you were out of sight, I longed to escape, to run away . . . where, I did not know. Half the women in Paris lead such lives as mine; they live in apparent luxury, and in their souls are tormented by anxiety. I know of poor creatures even more miserable than I; there are women who are driven to ask their tradespeople to make out false bills, women who rob their husbands. Some men believe that an Indian shawl worth a thousand louis only cost five hundred francs, others that a shawl costing five hundred francs is worth a hundred louis. There are women, too, with narrow incomes, who scrape and save and starve their children to pay for a dress. I am innocent of these base meannesses. But this is the last extremity of my torture. Some women will sell themselves to their husbands, and so obtain their way, but I, at any rate, am free. If I chose, Nucingen would cover me with gold, but I would rather weep on the breast of a man whom I can respect. Ah! tonight, M. de Marsay will no longer have a right to think of me as a woman whom he has paid." She tried to conceal her tears from him, hiding her face in her hands; Eugene drew them away and looked at her; she seemed to him sublime at that moment.

°°°°"It is hideous, is it not," she cried, "to speak in a breath of money and affection. You cannot love me after this," she added.

°°°°The incongruity between the ideas of honor which make women so great, and the errors in conduct which are forced upon them by the constitution of society, had thrown Eugene's thoughts into confusion; he uttered soothing and consoling words, and wondered at the beautiful woman before him, and at the artless imprudence of her cry of pain.

°°°°"You will not remember this against me?" she asked; "promise me that you will not."

°°°°"Ah! madame, I am incapable of doing so," he said. She took his hand and held it to her heart, a movement full of grace that expressed her deep gratitude.

°°°°"I am free and happy once more, thanks to you," she said. "Oh! I have felt lately as if I were in the grasp of an iron hand. But after this I mean to live simply and to spend nothing. You will think me just as pretty, will you not, my friend? Keep this," she went on, as she took only six of the banknotes. "In conscience I owe you a thousand crowns, for I really ought to go halves with you."

°°°°Eugene's maiden conscience resisted; but when the Baroness said, "I am bound to look on you as an accomplice or as an enemy," he took the money.

°°°°"It shall be a last stake in reserve," he said, "in case of misfortune."

°°°°"That was what I was dreading to hear," she cried, turning pale. "Oh, if you would that I should be anything to you, swear to me that you will never re-enter a gaming-house. Great Heaven! that I should corrupt you! I should die of sorrow!"

°°°°They had reached the Rue Saint-Lazare by this time. The contrast between the ostentation of wealth in the house, and the wretched condition of its mistress, dazed the student; and Vautrin's cynical words began to ring in his ears.

°°°°"Seat yourself there," said the Baroness, pointing to a low chair beside the fire. "I have a difficult letter to write," she added. "Tell me what to say."

°°°°"Say nothing," Eugene answered her. "Put the bills in an envelope, direct it, and send it by your maid."

°°°°"Why, you are a love of a man," she said. "Ah! see what it is to have been well brought up. That is the Beauseant through and through," she went on, smiling at him.

°°°°"She is charming," thought Eugene, more and more in love. He looked round him at the room; there was an ostentatious character about the luxury, a meretricious taste in the splendor.

°°°°"Do you like it?" she asked, as she rang for the maid.

°°°°"Therese, take this to M. de Marsay, and give it into his hands yourself. If he is not at home, bring the letter back to me."

°°°°Therese went, but not before she had given Eugene a spiteful glance.

°°°°Dinner was announced. Rastignac gave his arm to Mme. de Nucingen, she led the way into a pretty dining-room, and again he saw the luxury of the table which he had admired in his cousin's house.

°°°°"Come and dine with me on opera evenings, and we will go to the Italiens afterwards," she said.

°°°°"I should soon grow used to the pleasant life if it could last, but I am a poor student, and I have my way to make."

°°°°"Oh! you will succeed," she said laughing. "You will see. All that you wish will come to pass. _I_ did not expect to be so happy."

°°°°It is the wont of women to prove the impossible by the possible, and to annihilate facts by presentiments. When Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac took their places in her box at the Bouffons, her face wore a look of happiness that made her so lovely that every one indulged in those small slanders against which women are defenceless; for the scandal that is uttered lightly is often seriously believed. Those who know Paris, believe nothing that is said, and say nothing of what is done there.

°°°°Eugene took the Baroness' hand in his, and by some light pressure of the fingers, or a closer grasp of the hand, they found a language in which to express the sensations which the music gave them. It was an evening of intoxicating delight for both; and when it ended, and they went out together, Mme. de Nucingen insisted on taking Eugene with her as far as the Pont Neuf, he disputing with her the whole of the way for a single kiss after all those that she had showered upon him so passionately at the Palais-Royal; Eugene reproached her with inconsistency.

°°°°"That was gratitude," she said, "for devotion that I did not dare to hope for, but now it would be a promise."

°°°°"And will you give me no promise, ingrate?"

°°°°He grew vexed. Then, with one of those impatient gestures that fill a lover with ecstasy, she gave him her hand to kiss, and he took it with a discontented air that delighted her.

°°°°"I shall see you at the ball on Monday," she said.

°°°°As Eugene went home in the moonlight, he fell to serious reflections. He was satisfied, and yet dissatisfied. He was pleased with an adventure which would probably give him his desire, for in the end one of the prettiest and best-dressed women in Paris would be his; but, as a set-off, he saw his hopes of fortune brought to nothing; and as soon as he realized this fact, the vague thoughts of yesterday evening began to take a more decided shape in his mind. A check is sure to reveal to us the strength of our hopes. The more Eugene learned of the pleasures of life in Paris, the more impatient he felt of poverty and obscurity. He crumpled the banknote in his pocket, and found any quantity of plausible excuses for appropriating it.

°°°°He reached the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve at last, and from the stairhead he saw a light in Goriot's room; the old man had lighted a candle, and set the door ajar, lest the student should pass him by, and go to his room without "telling him all about his daughter," to use his own expression. Eugene, accordingly, told him everything without reserve.

°°°°"Then they think that I am ruined!" cried Father Goriot, in an agony of jealousy and desperation. "Why, I have still thirteen hundred livres a year! MON DIEU! Poor little girl! why did she not come to me? I would have sold my rentes; she should have had some of the principal, and I would have bought a life-annuity with the rest. My good neighbor, why did not YOU come to tell me of her difficulty? How had you the heart to go and risk her poor little hundred francs at play? This is heart-breaking work. You see what it is to have sons-in-law. Oh! if I had hold of them, I would wring their necks. MON DIEU! CRYING! Did you say she was crying?"

°°°°"With her head on my waistcoat," said Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! give it to me," said Father Goriot. "What! my daughter's tears have fallen there--my darling Delphine, who never used to cry when she was a little girl! Oh! I will buy you another; do not wear it again; let me have it. By the terms of her marriage- contract, she ought to have the use of her property. To-morrow morning I will go and see Derville; he is an attorney. I will demand that her money should be invested in her own name. I know the law. I am an old wolf, I will show my teeth."

°°°°"Here, father; this is a banknote for a thousand francs that she wanted me to keep out of our winnings. Keep them for her, in the pocket of the waistcoat."

°°°°Goriot looked hard at Eugene, reached out and took the law student's hand, and Eugene felt a tear fall on it.

°°°°"You will succeed," the old man said. "God is just, you see. I know an honest man when I see him, and I can tell you, there are not many men like you. I am to have another dear child in you, am I? There, go to sleep; you can sleep; you are not yet a father. She was crying! and I have to be told about it!--and I was quietly eating my dinner, like an idiot, all the time--I, who would sell the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to save one tear to either of them."

°°°°"An honest man!" said Eugene to himself as he lay down. "Upon my word, I think I will be an honest man all my life; it is so pleasant to obey the voice of conscience." Perhaps none but believers in God do good in secret; and Eugene believed in a God.

°°°°The next day Rastignac went at the appointed time to Mme. de Beauseant, who took him with her to the Duchesse de Carigliano's ball. The Marechale received Eugene most graciously. Mme. de Nucingen was there. Delphine's dress seemed to suggest that she wished for the admiration of others, so that she might shine the more in Eugene's eyes; she was eagerly expecting a glance from him, hiding, as she thought, this eagerness from all beholders. This moment is full of charm for one who can guess all that passes in a woman's mind. Who has not refrained from giving his opinion, to prolong her suspense, concealing his pleasure from a desire to tantalize, seeking a confession of love in her uneasiness, enjoying the fears that he can dissipate by a smile? In the course of the evening the law student suddenly comprehended his position; he saw that, as the cousin of Mme. de Beauseant, he was a personage in this world. He was already credited with the conquest of Mme. de Nucingen, and for this reason was a conspicuous figure; he caught the envious glances of other young men, and experienced the earliest pleasures of coxcombry. People wondered at his luck, and scraps of these conversations came to his ears as he went from room to room; all the women prophesied his success; and Delphine, in her dread of losing him, promised that this evening she would not refuse the kiss that all his entreaties could scarcely win yesterday.

°°°°Rastignac received several invitations. His cousin presented him to other women who were present; women who could claim to be of the highest fashion; whose houses were looked upon as pleasant; and this was the loftiest and most fashionable society in Paris into which he was launched. So this evening had all the charm of a brilliant debut; it was an evening that he was to remember even in old age, as a woman looks back upon her first ball and the memories of her girlish triumphs.

°°°°The next morning, at breakfast, he related the story of his success for the benefit of Father Goriot and the lodgers. Vautrin began to smile in a diabolical fashion.

°°°°"And do you suppose," cried that cold-blooded logician, "that a young man of fashion can live here in the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve, in the Maison Vauquer--an exceedingly respectable boarding-house in every way, I grant you, but an establishment that, none the less, falls short of being fashionable? The house is comfortable, it is lordly in its abundance; it is proud to be the temporary abode of a Rastignac; but, after all, it is in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and luxury would be out of place here, where we only aim at the purely patriarchalorama. If you mean to cut a figure in Paris, my young friend," Vautrin continued, with half-paternal jocularity, "you must have three horses, a tilbury for the mornings, and a closed carriage for the evening; you should spend altogether about nine thousand francs on your stables. You would show yourself unworthy of your destiny if you spent no more than three thousand francs with your tailor, six hundred in perfumery, a hundred crowns to your shoemaker, and a hundred more to your hatter. As for your laundress, there goes another thousand francs; a young man of fashion must of necessity make a great point of his linen; if your linen comes up to the required standard, people often do not look any further. Love and the Church demand a fair altar-cloth. That is fourteen thousand francs. I am saying nothing of losses at play, bets, and presents; it is impossible to allow less than two thousand francs for pocket money. I have led that sort of life, and I know all about these expenses. Add the cost of necessaries next; three hundred louis for provender, a thousand francs for a place to roost in. Well, my boy, for all these little wants of ours we had need to have twenty-five thousand francs every year in our purse, or we shall find ourselves in the kennel, and people laughing at us, and our career is cut short, good-bye to success, and good- bye to your mistress! I am forgetting your valet and your groom! Is Christophe going to carry your billets-doux for you? Do you mean to employ the stationery you use at present? Suicidal policy! Hearken to the wisdom of your elders!" he went on, his bass voice growing louder at each syllable. "Either take up your quarters in a garret, live virtuously, and wed your work, or set about the thing in a different way."

°°°°Vautrin winked and leered in the direction of Mlle. Taillefer to enforce his remarks by a look which recalled the late tempting proposals by which he had sought to corrupt the student's mind.

°°°°Several days went by, and Rastignac lived in a whirl of gaiety. He dined almost every day with Mme. de Nucingen, and went wherever she went, only returning to the Rue Neuve-Sainte- Genevieve in the small hours. He rose at mid-day, and dressed to go into the Bois with Delphine if the day was fine, squandering in this way time that was worth far more than he knew. He turned as eagerly to learn the lessons of luxury, and was as quick to feel its fascination, as the flowers of the date palm to receive the fertilizing pollen. He played high, lost and won large sums of money, and at last became accustomed to the extravagant life that young men lead in Paris. He sent fifteen hundred francs out of his first winnings to his mother and sisters, sending handsome presents as well as the money. He had given out that he meant to leave the Maison Vauquer; but January came and went, and he was still there, still unprepared to go.

°°°°One rule holds good of most young men--whether rich or poor. They never have money for the necessaries of life, but they have always money to spare for their caprices--an anomaly which finds its explanation in their youth and in the almost frantic eagerness with which youth grasps at pleasure. They are reckless with anything obtained on credit, while everything for which they must pay in ready money is made to last as long as possible; if they cannot have all that they want, they make up for it, it would seem, by squandering what they have. To state the matter simply--a student is far more careful of his hat than of his coat, because the latter being a comparatively costly article of dress, it is in the nature of things that a tailor should be a creditor; but it is otherwise with the hatter; the sums of money spent with him are so modest, that he is the most independent and unmanageable of his tribe, and it is almost impossible to bring him to terms. The young man in the balcony of a theatre who displays a gorgeous waistcoat for the benefit of the fair owners of opera glasses, has very probably no socks in his wardrobe, for the hosier is another of the genus of weevils that nibble at the purse. This was Rastignac's condition. His purse was always empty for Mme. Vauquer, always full at the demand of vanity; there was a periodical ebb and flow in his fortunes, which was seldom favorable to the payment of just debts. If he was to leave that unsavory and mean abode, where from time to time his pretensions met with humiliation, the first step was to pay his hostess for a month's board and lodging, and the second to purchase furniture worthy of the new lodgings he must take in his quality of dandy, a course that remained impossible. Rastignac, out of his winnings at cards, would pay his jeweler exorbitant prices for gold watches and chains, and then, to meet the exigencies of play, would carry them to the pawnbroker, that discreet and forbidding- looking friend of youth; but when it was a question of paying for board or lodging, or for the necessary implements for the cultivation of his Elysian fields, his imagination and pluck alike deserted him. There was no inspiration to be found in vulgar necessity, in debts contracted for past requirements. Like most of those who trust to their luck, he put off till the last moment the payment of debts that among the bourgeoisie are regarded as sacred engagements, acting on the plan of Mirabeau, who never settled his baker's bill until it underwent a formidable transformation into a bill of exchange.

°°°°It was about this time when Rastignac was down on his luck and fell into debt, that it became clear to the law student's mind that he must have some more certain source of income if he meant to live as he had been doing. But while he groaned over the thorny problems of his precarious situation, he felt that he could not bring himself to renounce the pleasures of this extravagant life, and decided that he must continue it at all costs. His dreams of obtaining a fortune appeared more and more chimerical, and the real obstacles grew more formidable. His initiation into the secrets of the Nucingen household had revealed to him that if he were to attempt to use this love affair as a means of mending his fortunes, he must swallow down all sense of decency, and renounce all the generous ideas which redeem the sins of youth. He had chosen this life of apparent splendor, but secretly gnawed by the canker worm of remorse, a life of fleeting pleasure dearly paid for by persistent pain; like Le Distrait of La Bruyere, he had descended so far as to make his bed in a ditch; but (also like Le Distrait) he himself was uncontaminated as yet by the mire that stained his garments.

°°°°"So we have killed our mandarin, have we?" said Bianchon one day as they left the dinner table.

°°°°"Not yet," he answered, "but he is at his last gasp."

°°°°The medical student took this for a joke, but it was not a jest. Eugene had dined in the house that night for the first time for a long while, and had looked thoughtful during the meal. He had taken his place beside Mlle. Taillefer, and stayed through the dessert, giving his neighbor an expressive glance from time to time. A few of the boarders discussed the walnuts at the table, and others walked about the room, still taking part in the conversation which had begun among them. People usually went when they chose; the amount of time that they lingered being determined by the amount of interest that the conversation possessed for them, or by the difficulty of the process of digestion. In winter-time the room was seldom empty before eight o'clock, when the four women had it all to themselves, and made up for the silence previously imposed upon them by the preponderating masculine element. This evening Vautrin had noticed Eugene's abstractedness, and stayed in the room, though he had seemed to be in a hurry to finish his dinner and go. All through the talk afterwards he had kept out of the sight of the law student, who quite believed that Vautrin had left the room. He now took up his position cunningly in the sitting-room instead of going when the last boarders went. He had fathomed the young man's thoughts, and felt that a crisis was at hand. Rastignac was, in fact, in a dilemma, which many another young man must have known.

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen might love him, or might merely be playing with him, but in either case Rastignac had been made to experience all the alternations of hope and despair of genuine passion, and all the diplomatic arts of a Parisienne had been employed on him. After compromising herself by continually appearing in public with Mme. de Beauseant's cousin she still hesitated, and would not give him the lover's privileges which he appeared to enjoy. For a whole month she had so wrought on his senses, that at last she had made an impression on his heart. If in the earliest days the student had fancied himself to be master, Mme. de Nucingen had since become the stronger of the two, for she had skilfully roused and played upon every instinct, good or bad, in the two or three men comprised in a young student in Paris. This was not the result of deep design on her part, nor was she playing a part, for women are in a manner true to themselves even through their grossest deceit, because their actions are prompted by a natural impulse. It may have been that Delphine, who had allowed this young man to gain such an ascendency over her, conscious that she had been too demonstrative, was obeying a sentiment of dignity, and either repented of her concessions, or it pleased her to suspend them. It is so natural to a Parisienne, even when passion has almost mastered her, to hesitate and pause before taking the plunge; to probe the heart of him to whom she intrusts her future. And once already Mme. de Nucingen's hopes had been betrayed, and her loyalty to a selfish young lover had been despised. She had good reason to be suspicious. Or it may have been that something in Eugene's manner (for his rapid success was making a coxcomb of him) had warned her that the grotesque nature of their position had lowered her somewhat in his eyes. She doubtless wished to assert her dignity; he was young, and she would be great in his eyes; for the lover who had forsaken her had held her so cheap that she was determined that Eugene should not think her an easy conquest, and for this very reason--he knew that de Marsay had been his predecessor. Finally, after the degradation of submission to the pleasure of a heartless young rake, it was so sweet to her to wander in the flower-strewn realms of love, that it was not wonderful that she should wish to dwell a while on the prospect, to tremble with the vibrations of love, to feel the freshness of the breath of its dawn. The true lover was suffering for the sins of the false. This inconsistency is unfortunately only to be expected so long as men do not know how many flowers are mown down in a young woman's soul by the first stroke of treachery.

°°°°Whatever her reasons may have been, Delphine was playing with Rastignac, and took pleasure in playing with him, doubtless because she felt sure of his love, and confident that she could put an end to the torture as soon as it was her royal pleasure to do so. Eugene's self-love was engaged; he could not suffer his first passage of love to end in a defeat, and persisted in his suit like a sportsman determined to bring down at least one partridge to celebrate his first Feast of Saint-Hubert. The pressure of anxiety, his wounded self-love, his despair, real or feigned, drew him nearer and nearer to this woman. All Paris credited him with this conquest, and yet he was conscious that he had made no progress since the day when he saw Mme. de Nucingen for the first time. He did not know as yet that a woman's coquetry is sometimes more delightful than the pleasure of secure possession of her love, and was possessed with helpless rage. If, at this time, while she denied herself to love, Eugene gathered the springtide spoils of his life, the fruit, somewhat sharp and green, and dearly bought, was no less delicious to the taste. There were moments when he had not a sou in his pockets, and at such times he thought in spite of his conscience of Vautrin's offer and the possibility of fortune by a marriage with Mlle. Taillefer. Poverty would clamor so loudly that more than once he was on the point of yielding to the cunning temptations of the terrible sphinx, whose glance had so often exerted a strange spell over him.

°°°°Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau went up to their rooms; and Rastignac, thinking that he was alone with the women in the dining-room, sat between Mme. Vauquer and Mme. Couture, who was nodding over the woolen cuffs that she was knitting by the stove, and looked at Mlle. Taillefer so tenderly that she lowered her eyes.

°°°°"Can you be in trouble, M. Eugene?" Victorine said after a pause.

°°°°"Who has not his troubles?" answered Rastignac. "If we men were sure of being loved, sure of a devotion which would be our reward for the sacrifices which we are always ready to make, then perhaps we should have no troubles."

°°°°For answer Mlle. Taillefer only gave him a glance but it was impossible to mistake its meaning.

°°°°"You, for instance, mademoiselle; you feel sure of your heart to- day, but are you sure that it will never change?"

°°°°A smile flitted over the poor girl's lips; it seemed as if a ray of light from her soul had lighted up her face. Eugene was dismayed at the sudden explosion of feeling caused by his words.

°°°°"Ah! but suppose," he said, "that you should be rich and happy to-morrow, suppose that a vast fortune dropped down from the clouds for you, would you still love the man whom you loved in your days of poverty?"

°°°°A charming movement of the head was her only answer.

°°°°"Even if he were very poor?"

°°°°Again the same mute answer.

°°°°"What nonsense are you talking, you two?" exclaimed Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"Never mind," answered Eugene; "we understand each other."

°°°°"So there is to be an engagement of marriage between M. le Chevalier Eugene de Rastignac and Mlle. Victorine Taillefer, is there?" The words were uttered in Vautrin's deep voice, and Vautrin appeared at the door as he spoke.

°°°°"Oh! how you startled me!" Mme. Couture and Mme. Vauquer exclaimed together.

°°°°"I might make a worse choice," said Rastignac, laughing. Vautrin's voice had thrown him into the most painful agitation that he had yet known.

°°°°"No bad jokes, gentlemen!" said Mme. Couture. "My dear, let us go upstairs."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer followed the two ladies, meaning to pass the evening in their room, an arrangement that economized fire and candlelight. Eugene and Vautrin were left alone.

°°°°"I felt sure you would come round to it," said the elder man with the coolness that nothing seemed to shake. "But stay a moment! I have as much delicacy as anybody else. Don't make up your mind on the spur of the moment; you are a little thrown off your balance just now. You are in debt, and I want you to come over to my way of thinking after sober reflection, and not in a fit of passion or desperation. Perhaps you want a thousand crowns. There, you can have them if you like."

°°°°The tempter took out a pocketbook, and drew thence three banknotes, which he fluttered before the student's eyes. Eugene was in a most painful dilemma. He had debts, debts of honor. He owed a hundred louis to the Marquis d'Ajuda and to the Count de Trailles; he had not the money, and for this reason had not dared to go to Mme. de Restaud's house, where he was expected that evening. It was one of those informal gatherings where tea and little cakes are handed round, but where it is possible to lose six thousand francs at whist in the course of a night.

°°°°"You must see," said Eugene, struggling to hide a convulsive tremor, "that after what has passed between us, I cannot possibly lay myself under any obligation to you."

°°°°"Quite right; I should be sorry to hear you speak otherwise," answered the tempter. "You are a fine young fellow, honorable, brave as a lion, and as gentle as a young girl. You would be a fine haul for the devil! I like youngsters of your sort. Get rid of one or two more prejudices, and you will see the world as it is. Make a little scene now and then, and act a virtuous part in it, and a man with a head on his shoulders can do exactly as he likes amid deafening applause from the fools in the gallery. Ah! a few days yet, and you will be with us; and if you would only be tutored by me, I would put you in the way of achieving all your ambitions. You should no sooner form a wish than it should be realized to the full; you should have all your desires--honors, wealth, or women. Civilization should flow with milk and honey for you. You should be our pet and favorite, our Benjamin. We would all work ourselves to death for you with pleasure; every obstacle should be removed from your path. You have a few prejudices left; so you think that I am a scoundrel, do you? Well, M. de Turenne, quite as honorable a man as you take yourself to be, had some little private transactions with bandits, and did not feel that his honor was tarnished. You would rather not lie under any obligation to me, eh? You need not draw back on that account," Vautrin went on, and a smile stole over his lips. "Take these bits of paper and write across this," he added, producing a piece of stamped paper, "Accepted the sum of three thousand five hundred francs due this day twelvemonth, and fill in the date. The rate of interest is stiff enough to silence any scruples on your part; it gives you the right to call me a Jew. You can call quits with me on the score of gratitude. I am quite willing that you should despise me to-day, because I am sure that you will have a kindlier feeling towards me later on. You will find out fathomless depths in my nature, enormous and concentrated forces that weaklings call vices, but you will never find me base or ungrateful. In short, I am neither a pawn nor a bishop, but a castle, a tower of strength, my boy."

°°°°"What manner of man are you?" cried Eugene. "Were you created to torment me?"

°°°°"Why no; I am a good-natured fellow, who is willing to do a dirty piece of work to put you high and dry above the mire for the rest of your days. Do you ask the reason of this devotion? All right; I will tell you that some of these days. A word or two in your ear will explain it. I have begun by shocking you, by showing you the way to ring the changes, and giving you a sight of the mechanism of the social machine; but your first fright will go off like a conscript's terror on the battlefield. You will grow used to regarding men as common soldiers who have made up their minds to lose their lives for some self-constituted king. Times have altered strangely. Once you could say to a bravo, 'Here are a hundred crowns; go and kill Monsieur So-and-so for me,' and you could sup quietly after turning some one off into the dark for the least thing in the world. But nowadays I propose to put you in the way of a handsome fortune; you have only to nod your head, it won't compromise you in any way, and you hesitate. 'Tis an effeminate age."

°°°°Eugene accepted the draft, and received the banknotes in exchange for it.

°°°°"Well, well. Come, now, let us talk rationally," Vautrin continued. "I mean to leave this country in a few months' time for America, and set about planting tobacco. I will send you the cigars of friendship. If I make money at it, I will help you in your career. If I have no children--which will probably be the case, for I have no anxiety to raise slips of myself here--you shall inherit my fortune. That is what you may call standing by a man; but I myself have a liking for you. I have a mania, too, for devoting myself to some one else. I have done it before. You see, my boy, I live in a loftier sphere than other men do; I look on all actions as means to an end, and the end is all that I look at. What is a man's life to me? Not THAT," he said, and he snapped his thumb-nail against his teeth. "A man, in short, is everything to me, or just nothing at all. Less than nothing if his name happens to be Poiret; you can crush him like a bug, he is flat and he is offensive. But a man is a god when he is like you; he is not a machine covered with a skin, but a theatre in which the greatest sentiments are displayed--great thoughts and feelings--and for these, and these only, I live. A sentiment-- what is that but the whole world in a thought? Look at Father Goriot. For him, his two girls are the whole universe; they are the clue by which he finds his way through creation. Well, for my own part, I have fathomed the depths of life, there is only one real sentiment--comradeship between man and man. Pierre and Jaffier, that is my passion. I knew Venice Preserved by heart. Have you met many men plucky enough when a comrade says, 'Let us bury a dead body!' to go and do it without a word or plaguing him by taking a high moral tone? I have done it myself. I should not talk like this to just everybody, but you are not like an ordinary man; one can talk to you, you can understand things. You will not dabble about much longer among the tadpoles in these swamps. Well, then, it is all settled. You will marry. Both of us carry our point. Mine is made of iron, and will never soften, he! he!"

°°°°Vautrin went out. He would not wait to hear the student's repudiation, he wished to put Eugene at his ease. He seemed to understand the secret springs of the faint resistance still made by the younger man; the struggles in which men seek to preserve their self-respect by justifying their blameworthy actions to themselves.

°°°°"He may do as he likes; I shall not marry Mlle. Taillefer, that is certain," said Eugene to himself.

°°°°He regarded this man with abhorrence, and yet the very cynicism of Vautrin's ideas, and the audacious way in which he used other men for his own ends, raised him in the student's eyes; but the thought of a compact threw Eugene into a fever of apprehension, and not until he had recovered somewhat did he dress, call for a cab, and go to Mme. de Restaud's.

°°°°For some days the Countess had paid more and more attention to a young man whose every step seemed a triumphal progress in the great world; it seemed to her that he might be a formidable power before long. He paid Messieurs de Trailles and d'Ajuda, played at whist for part of the evening, and made good his losses. Most men who have their way to make are more or less of fatalists, and Eugene was superstitious; he chose to consider that his luck was heaven's reward for his perseverance in the right way. As soon as possible on the following morning he asked Vautrin whether the bill he had given was still in the other's possession; and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, he repaid the three thousand francs with a not unnatural relief.

°°°°"Everything is going on well," said Vautrin.

°°°°"But I am not your accomplice," said Eugene.

°°°°"I know, I know," Vautrin broke in. "You are still acting like a child. You are making mountains out of molehills at the outset."

°°°°Two days later, Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau were sitting together on a bench in the sun. They had chosen a little frequented alley in the Jardin des Plantes, and a gentleman was chatting with them, the same person, as a matter of fact, about whom the medical student had, not without good reason, his own suspicions.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," this M. Gondureau was saying, "I do not see any cause for your scruples. His Excellency, Monseigneur the Minister of Police----"

°°°°"Yes, his Excellency is taking a personal interest in the matter," said Gondureau.

°°°°Who would think it probable that Poiret, a retired clerk, doubtless possessed of some notions of civic virtue, though there might be nothing else in his head--who would think it likely that such a man would continue to lend an ear to this supposed independent gentleman of the Rue de Buffon, when the latter dropped the mask of a decent citizen by that word "police," and gave a glimpse of the features of a detective from the Rue de Jerusalem? And yet nothing was more natural. Perhaps the following remarks from the hitherto unpublished records made by certain observers will throw a light on the particular species to which Poiret belonged in the great family of fools. There is a race of quill-drivers, confined in the columns of the budget between the first degree of latitude (a kind of administrative Greenland where the salaries begin at twelve hundred francs) to the third degree, a more temperate zone, where incomes grow from three to six thousand francs, a climate where the BONUS flourishes like a half-hardy annual in spite of some difficulties of culture. A characteristic trait that best reveals the feeble narrow-mindedness of these inhabitants of petty officialdom is a kind of involuntary, mechanical, and instinctive reverence for the Grand Lama of every Ministry, known to the rank and file only by his signature (an illegible scrawl) and by his title--"His Excellency Monseigneur le Ministre," five words which produce as much effect as the il Bondo Cani of the Calife de Bagdad, five words which in the eyes of this low order of intelligence represent a sacred power from which there is no appeal. The Minister is administratively infallible for the clerks in the employ of the Government, as the Pope is infallible for good Catholics. Something of this peculiar radiance invests everything he does or says, or that is said or done in his name; the robe of office covers everything and legalizes everything done by his orders; does not his very title--His Excellency--vouch for the purity of his intentions and the righteousness of his will, and serve as a sort of passport and introduction to ideas that otherwise would not be entertained for a moment? Pronounce the words "His Excellency," and these poor folk will forthwith proceed to do what they would not do for their own interests. Passive obedience is as well known in a Government department as in the army itself; and the administrative system silences consciences, annihilates the individual, and ends (give it time enough) by fashioning a man into a vise or a thumbscrew, and he becomes part of the machinery of Government. Wherefore, M. Gondureau, who seemed to know something of human nature, recognized Poiret at once as one of those dupes of officialdom, and brought out for his benefit, at the proper moment, the deus ex machina, the magical words "His Excellency," so as to dazzle Poiret just as he himself unmasked his batteries, for he took Poiret and the Michonneau for the male and female of the same species.

°°°°"If his Excellency himself, his Excellency the Minister . . . Ah! that is quite another thing," said Poiret.

°°°°"You seem to be guided by this gentleman's opinion, and you hear what he says," said the man of independent means, addressing Mlle. Michonneau. "Very well, his Excellency is at this moment absolutely certain that the so-called Vautrin, who lodges at the Maison Vauquer, is a convict who escaped from penal servitude at Toulon, where he is known by the nickname Trompe-la-Mort."

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort?" said Pioret. "Dear me, he is very lucky if he deserves that nickname."

°°°°"Well, yes," said the detective. "They call him so because he has been so lucky as not to lose his life in the very risky businesses that he has carried through. He is a dangerous man, you see! He has qualities that are out of the common; the thing he is wanted for, in fact, was a matter which gained him no end of credit with his own set----"

°°°°"Then is he a man of honor?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Yes, according to his notions. He agreed to take another man's crime upon himself--a forgery committed by a very handsome young fellow that he had taken a great fancy to, a young Italian, a bit of a gambler, who has since gone into the army, where his conduct has been unexceptionable."

°°°°"But if his Excellency the Minister of Police is certain that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, why should he want me?" asked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Oh yes," said Poiret, "if the Minister, as you have been so obliging as to tell us, really knows for a certainty----"

°°°°"Certainty is not the word; he only suspects. You will soon understand how things are. Jacques Collin, nicknamed Trompe-la- Mort, is in the confidence of every convict in the three prisons; he is their man of business and their banker. He makes a very good thing out of managing their affairs, which want a MAN OF MARK to see about them."

°°°°"Ha! ha! do you see the pun, mademoiselle?" asked Poiret. "This gentleman calls himself a MAN OF MARK because he is a MARKED MAN-- branded, you know."

°°°°"This so-called Vautrin," said the detective, "receives the money belonging to my lords the convicts, invests it for them, and holds it at the disposal of those who escape, or hands it over to their families if they leave a will, or to their mistresses when they draw upon him for their benefit."

°°°°"Their mistresses! You mean their wives," remarked Poiret.

°°°°"No, sir. A convict's wife is usually an illegitimate connection. We call them concubines."

°°°°"Then they all live in a state of concubinage?"

°°°°"Naturally."

°°°°"Why, these are abominations that his Excellency ought not to allow. Since you have the honor of seeing his Excellency, you, who seem to have philanthropic ideas, ought really to enlighten him as to their immoral conduct--they are setting a shocking example to the rest of society."

°°°°"But the Government does not hold them up as models of all the virtues, my dear sir----"

°°°°"Of course not, sir; but still----"

°°°°"Just let the gentleman say what he has to say, dearie," said Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"You see how it is, mademoiselle," Gondureau continued. "The Government may have the strongest reasons for getting this illicit hoard into its hands; it mounts up to something considerable, by all that we can make out. Trompe-la-Mort not only holds large sums for his friends the convicts, but he has other amounts which are paid over to him by the Society of the Ten Thousand----"

°°°°"Ten Thousand Thieves!" cried Pioret in alarm.

°°°°"No. The Society of the Ten Thousand is not an association of petty offenders, but of people who set about their work on a large scale--they won't touch a matter unless there are ten thousand francs in it. It is composed of the most distinguished of the men who are sent straight to the Assize Courts when they come up for trial. They know the Code too well to risk their necks when they are nabbed. Collin is their confidential agent and legal adviser. By means of the large sums of money at his disposal he has established a sort of detective system of his own; it is widespread and mysterious in its workings. We have had spies all about him for a twelvemonth, and yet we could not manage to fathom his games. His capital and his cleverness are at the service of vice and crime; this money furnishes the necessary funds for a regular army of blackguards in his pay who wage incessant war against society. If we can catch Trompe-la-Mort, and take possession of his funds, we should strike at the root of this evil. So this job is a kind of Government affair--a State secret--and likely to redound to the honor of those who bring the thing to a successful conclusion. You, sir, for instance, might very well be taken into a Government department again; they might make you secretary to a Commissary of Police; you could accept that post without prejudice to your retiring pension."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau interposed at this point with, "What is there to hinder Trompe-la-Mort from making off with the money?"

°°°°"Oh!" said the detective, "a man is told off to follow him everywhere he goes, with orders to kill him if he were to rob the convicts. Then it is not quite as easy to make off with a lot of money as it is to run away with a young lady of family. Besides, Collin is not the sort of fellow to play such a trick; he would be disgraced, according to his notions."

°°°°"You are quite right, sir," said Poiret, "utterly disgraced he would be."

°°°°"But none of all this explains why you do not come and take him without more ado," remarked Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Very well, mademoiselle, I will explain--but," he added in her ear, "keep your companion quiet, or I shall never have done. The old boy ought to pay people handsomely for listening to him.-- Trompe-la-Mort, when he came back here," he went on aloud "slipped into the skin of an honest man; he turned up disguised as a decent Parisian citizen, and took up his quarters in an unpretending lodging-house. He is cunning, that he is! You don't catch him napping. Then M. Vautrin is a man of consequence, who transacts a good deal of business."

°°°°"Naturally," said Poiret to himself.

°°°°"And suppose that the Minister were to make a mistake and get hold of the real Vautrin, he would put every one's back up among the business men in Paris, and public opinion would be against him. M. le Prefet de Police is on slippery ground; he has enemies. They would take advantage of any mistake. There would be a fine outcry and fuss made by the Opposition, and he would be sent packing. We must set about this just as we did about the Coignard affair, the sham Comte de Sainte-Helene; if he had been the real Comte de Sainte-Helene, we should have been in the wrong box. We want to be quite sure what we are about."

°°°°"Yes, but what you want is a pretty woman," said Mlle. Michonneau briskly.

°°°°"Trompe-la-Mort would not let a woman come near him," said the detective. "I will tell you a secret--he does not like them."

°°°°"Still, I do not see what I can do, supposing that I did agree to identify him for two thousand francs."

°°°°"Nothing simpler," said the stranger. "I will send you a little bottle containing a dose that will send a rush of blood to the head; it will do him no harm whatever, but he will fall down as if he were in a fit. The drug can be put into wine or coffee; either will do equally well. You carry your man to bed at once, and undress him to see that he is not dying. As soon as you are alone, you give him a slap on the shoulder, and PRESTO! the letters will appear."

°°°°"Why, that is just nothing at all," said Poiret.

°°°°"Well, do you agree?" said Gondureau, addressing the old maid.

°°°°"But, my dear sir, suppose there are no letters at all," said Mlle. Michonneau; "am I to have the two thousand francs all the same?"

°°°°"No."

°°°°"What will you give me then?"

°°°°"Five hundred francs."

°°°°"It is such a thing to do for so little! It lies on your conscience just the same, and I must quiet my conscience, sir."

°°°°"I assure you," said Poiret, "that mademoiselle has a great deal of conscience, and not only so, she is a very amiable person, and very intelligent."

°°°°"Well, now," Mlle. Michonneau went on, "make it three thousand francs if he is Trompe-la-Mort, and nothing at all if he is an ordinary man."

°°°°"Done!" said Gondureau, "but on the condition that the thing is settled to-morrow."

°°°°"Not quite so soon, my dear sir; I must consult my confessor first."

°°°°"You are a sly one," said the detective as he rose to his feet. "Good-bye till to-morrow, then. And if you should want to see me in a hurry, go to the Petite Rue Saint-Anne at the bottom of the Cour de la Sainte-Chapelle. There is one door under the archway. Ask there for M. Gondureau."

°°°°Bianchon, on his way back from Cuvier's lecture, overheard the sufficiently striking nickname of Trompe-la-Mort, and caught the celebrated chief detective's "Done!"

°°°°"Why didn't you close with him? It would be three hundred francs a year," said Poiret to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Why didn't I?" she asked. "Why, it wants thinking over. Suppose that M. Vautrin is this Trompe-la-Mort, perhaps we might do better for ourselves with him. Still, on the other hand, if you ask him for money, it would put him on his guard, and he is just the man to clear out without paying, and that would be an abominable sell."

°°°°"And suppose you did warn him," Poiret went on, "didn't that gentleman say that he was closely watched? You would spoil everything."

°°°°"Anyhow," thought Mlle. Michonneau, "I can't abide him. He says nothing but disagreeable things to me."

°°°°"But you can do better than that," Poiret resumed. "As that gentleman said (and he seemed to me to be a very good sort of man, besides being very well got up), it is an act of obedience to the laws to rid society of a criminal, however virtuous he may be. Once a thief, always a thief. Suppose he were to take it into his head to murder us all? The deuce! We should be guilty of manslaughter, and be the first to fall victims into the bargain!"

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau's musings did not permit her to listen very closely to the remarks that fell one by one from Poiret's lips like water dripping from a leaky tap. When once this elderly babbler began to talk, he would go on like clockwork unless Mlle. Michonneau stopped him. He started on some subject or other, and wandered on through parenthesis after parenthesis, till he came to regions as remote as possible from his premises without coming to any conclusions by the way.

°°°°By the time they reached the Maison Vauquer he had tacked together a whole string of examples and quotations more or less irrelevant to the subject in hand, which led him to give a full account of his own deposition in the case of the Sieur Ragoulleau versus Dame Morin, when he had been summoned as a witness for the defence.

°°°°As they entered the dining-room, Eugene de Rastignac was talking apart with Mlle. Taillefer; the conversation appeared to be of such thrilling interest that the pair never noticed the two older lodgers as they passed through the room. None of this was thrown away on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"I knew how it would end," remarked that lady, addressing Poiret. "They have been making eyes at each other in a heartrending way for a week past."

°°°°"Yes," he answered. "So she was found guilty."

°°°°"Who?"

°°°°"Mme. Morin."

°°°°"I am talking about Mlle. Victorine," said Mlle, Michonneau, as she entered Poiret's room with an absent air, "and you answer, 'Mme. Morin.' Who may Mme. Morin be?"

°°°°"What can Mlle. Victorine be guilty of?" demanded Poiret.

°°°°"Guilty of falling in love with M. Eugene de Rastignac and going further and further without knowing exactly where she is going, poor innocent!"

°°°°That morning Mme. de Nucingen had driven Eugene to despair. In his own mind he had completely surrendered himself to Vautrin, and deliberately shut his eyes to the motive for the friendship which that extraordinary man professed for him, nor would he look to the consequences of such an alliance. Nothing short of a miracle could extricate him now out of the gulf into which he had walked an hour ago, when he exchanged vows in the softest whispers with Mlle. Taillefer. To Victorine it seemed as if she heard an angel's voice, that heaven was opening above her; the Maison Vauquer took strange and wonderful hues, like a stage fairy-palace. She loved and she was loved; at any rate, she believed that she was loved; and what woman would not likewise have believed after seeing Rastignac's face and listening to the tones of his voice during that hour snatched under the Argus eyes of the Maison Vauquer? He had trampled on his conscience; he knew that he was doing wrong, and did it deliberately; he had said to himself that a woman's happiness should atone for this venial sin. The energy of desperation had lent new beauty to his face; the lurid fire that burned in his heart shone from his eyes. Luckily for him, the miracle took place. Vautrin came in in high spirits, and at once read the hearts of these two young creatures whom he had brought together by the combinations of his infernal genius, but his deep voice broke in upon their bliss.

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity,"

°°°°he sang mockingly.

°°°°Victorine fled. Her heart was more full than it had ever been, but it was full of joy, and not of sorrow. Poor child! A pressure of the hand, the light touch of Rastignac's hair against her cheek, a word whispered in her ear so closely that she felt the student's warm breath on her, the pressure of a trembling arm about her waist, a kiss upon her throat--such had been her betrothal. The near neighborhood of the stout Sylvie, who might invade that glorified room at any moment, only made these first tokens of love more ardent, more eloquent, more entrancing than the noblest deeds done for love's sake in the most famous romances. This plain-song of love, to use the pretty expression of our forefathers, seemed almost criminal to the devout young girl who went to confession every fortnight. In that one hour she had poured out more of the treasures of her soul than she could give in later days of wealth and happiness, when her whole self followed the gift.

°°°°"The thing is arranged," Vautrin said to Eugene, who remained. "Our two dandies have fallen out. Everything was done in proper form. It is a matter of opinion. Our pigeon has insulted my hawk. They will meet to-morrow in the redoubt at Clignancourt. By half- past eight in the morning Mlle. Taillefer, calmly dipping her bread and butter in her coffee cup, will be sole heiress of her father's fortune and affections. A funny way of putting it, isn't it? Taillefer's youngster is an expert swordsman, and quite cocksure about it, but he will be bled; I have just invented a thrust for his benefit, a way of raising your sword point and driving it at the forehead. I must show you that thrust; it is an uncommonly handy thing to know."

°°°°Rastignac heard him in dazed bewilderment; he could not find a word in reply. Just then Goriot came in, and Bianchon and a few of the boarders likewise appeared.

°°°°"That is just as I intended." Vautrin said. "You know quite well what you are about. Good, my little eaglet! You are born to command, you are strong, you stand firm on your feet, you are game! I respect you."

°°°°He made as though he would take Eugene's hand, but Rastignac hastily withdrew it, sank into a chair, and turned ghastly pale; it seemed to him that there was a sea of blood before his eyes.

°°°°"Oh! so we still have a few dubious tatters of the swaddling clothes of virtue about us!" murmured Vautrin. "But Papa Doliban has three millions; I know the amount of his fortune. Once have her dowry in your hands, and your character will be as white as the bride's white dress, even in your own eyes."

°°°°Rastignac hesitated no longer. He made up his mind that he would go that evening to warn the Taillefers, father and son. But just as Vautrin left him, Father Goriot came up and said in his ear, "You look melancholy, my boy; I will cheer you up. Come with me."

°°°°The old vermicelli dealer lighted his dip at one of the lamps as he spoke. Eugene went with him, his curiosity had been aroused.

°°°°"Let us go up to your room," the worthy soul remarked, when he had asked Sylvie for the law student's key. "This morning," he resumed, "you thought that SHE did not care about you, did you not? Eh? She would have nothing to say to you, and you went away out of humor and out of heart. Stuff and rubbish! She wanted you to go because she was expecting ME! Now do you understand? We were to complete the arrangements for taking some chambers for you, a jewel of a place, you are to move into it in three days' time. Don't split upon me. She wants it to be a surprise; but I couldn't bear to keep the secret from you. You will be in the Rue d'Artois, only a step or two from the Rue Saint-Lazare, and you are to be housed like a prince! Any one might have thought we were furnishing the house for a bride. Oh! we have done a lot of things in the last month, and you knew nothing about it. My attorney has appeared on the scene, and my daughter is to have thirty-six thousand francs a year, the interest on her money, and I shall insist on having her eight hundred thousand invested in sound securities, landed property that won't run away."

°°°°Eugene was dumb. He folded his arms and paced up and down in his cheerless, untidy room. Father Goriot waited till the student's back was turned, and seized the opportunity to go to the chimney- piece and set upon it a little red morocco case with Rastignac's arms stamped in gold on the leather.

°°°°"My dear boy," said the kind soul, "I have been up to the eyes in this business. You see, there was plenty of selfishness on my part; I have an interested motive in helping you to change lodgings. You will not refuse me if I ask you something; will you, eh?"

°°°°"What is it?"

°°°°"There is a room on the fifth floor, up above your rooms, that is to let along with them; that is where I am going to live, isn't that so? I am getting old: I am too far from my girls. I shall not be in the way, but I shall be there, that is all. You will come and talk to me about her every evening. It will not put you about, will it? I shall have gone to bed before you come in, but I shall hear you come up, and I shall say to myself, 'He has just seen my little Delphine. He has been to a dance with her, and she is happy, thanks to him.' If I were ill, it would do my heart good to hear you moving about below, to know when you leave the house and when you come in. It is only a step to the Champs- Elysees, where they go every day, so I shall be sure of seeing them, whereas now I am sometimes too late. And then--perhaps she may come to see you! I shall hear her, I shall see her in her soft quilted pelisse tripping about as daintily as a kitten. In this one month she has become my little girl again, so light- hearted and gay. Her soul is recovering, and her happiness is owing to you! Oh! I would do impossibilities for you. Only just now she said to me, 'I am very happy, papa!' When they say 'father' stiffly, it sends a chill through me; but when they call me 'papa,' it brings all the old memories back. I feel most their father then; I even believe that they belong to me, and to no one else."

°°°°The good man wiped his eyes, he was crying.

°°°°"It is a long while since I have heard them talk like that, a long, long time since she took my arm as she did to-day. Yes, indeed, it must be quite ten years since I walked side by side with one of my girls. How pleasant it was to keep step with her, to feel the touch of her gown, the warmth of her arm! Well, I took Delphine everywhere this morning; I went shopping with her, and I brought her home again. Oh! you must let me live near you. You may want some one to do you a service some of these days, and I shall be on the spot to do it. Oh! if only that great dolt of an Alsatian would die, if his gout would have the sense to attack his stomach, how happy my poor child would be! You would be my son-in-law; you would be her husband in the eyes of the world. Bah! she has known no happiness, that excuses everything. Our Father in heaven is surely on the side of fathers on earth who love their children. How fond of you she is!" he said, raising his head after a pause. "All the time we were going about together she chatted away about you. 'He is so nice-looking, papa; isn't he? He is kind-hearted! Does he talk to you about me?' Pshaw! she said enough about you to fill whole volumes; between the Rue d'Artois and the Passage des Panoramas she poured her heart out into mine. I did not feel old once during that delightful morning; I felt as light as a feather. I told her how you had given the banknote to me; it moved my darling to tears. But what can this be on your chimney-piece?" said Father Goriot at last. Rastignac had showed no sign, and he was dying of impatience.

°°°°Eugene stared at his neighbor in dumb and dazed bewilderment. He thought of Vautrin, of that duel to be fought to-morrow morning, and of this realization of his dearest hopes, and the violent contrast between the two sets of ideas gave him all the sensations of nightmare. He went to the chimney-piece, saw the little square case, opened it, and found a watch of Breguet's make wrapped in paper, on which these words were written:

°°°°"I want you to think of me every hour, BECAUSE . . .   "DELPHINE."

°°°°That last word doubtless contained an allusion to some scene that had taken place between them. Eugene felt touched. Inside the gold watch-case his arms had been wrought in enamel. The chain, the key, the workmanship and design of the trinket were all such as he had imagined, for he had long coveted such a possession. Father Goriot was radiant. Of course he had promised to tell his daughter every little detail of the scene and of the effect produced upon Eugene by her present; he shared in the pleasure and excitement of the young people, and seemed to be not the least happy of the three. He loved Rastignac already for his own as well as for his daughter's sake.

°°°°"You must go and see her; she is expecting you this evening. That great lout of an Alsatian is going to have supper with his opera- dancer. Aha! he looked very foolish when my attorney let him know where he was. He says he idolizes my daughter, does he? He had better let her alone, or I will kill him. To think that my Delphine is his"--he heaved a sigh--"it is enough to make me murder him, but it would not be manslaughter to kill that animal; he is a pig with a calf's brains.--You will take me with you, will you not?"

°°°°"Yes, dear Father Goriot; you know very well how fond I am of you----"

°°°°"Yes, I do know very well. You are not ashamed of me, are you? Not you! Let me embrace you," and he flung his arms around the student's neck.

°°°°"You will make her very happy; promise me that you will! You will go to her this evening, will you not?"

°°°°"Oh! yes. I must go out; I have some urgent business on hand."

°°°°"Can I be of any use?"

°°°°"My word, yes! Will you go to old Taillefer's while I go to Mme. de Nucingen? Ask him to make an appointment with me some time this evening; it is a matter of life and death."

°°°°"Really, young man!" cried Father Goriot, with a change of countenance; "are you really paying court to his daughter, as those simpletons were saying down below? . . . TONNERRE DE DIEU! you have no notion what a tap A LA GORIOT is like, and if you are playing a double game, I shall put a stop to it by one blow of the fist. . . Oh! the thing is impossible!"

°°°°"I swear to you that I love but one woman in the world," said the student. "I only knew it a moment ago."

°°°°"Oh! what happiness!" cried Goriot.

°°°°"But young Taillefer has been called out; the duel comes off to- morrow morning, and I have heard it said that he may lose his life in it."

°°°°"But what business is it of yours?" said Goriot.

°°°°"Why, I ought to tell him so, that he may prevent his son from putting in an appearance----"

°°°°Just at that moment Vautrin's voice broke in upon them; he was standing at the threshold of his door and singing:

°°°°"Oh! Richard, oh my king!   All the world abandons thee!   Broum! broum! broum! broum! broum!

°°°°The same old story everywhere,   A roving heart and a . . . tra la la."

°°°°"Gentlemen!" shouted Christophe, "the soup is ready, and every one is waiting for you."

°°°°"Here," Vautrin called down to him, "come and take a bottle of my Bordeaux."

°°°°"Do you think your watch is pretty?" asked Goriot. "She has good taste, hasn't she? Eh?"

°°°°Vautrin, Father Goriot, and Rastignac came downstairs in company, and, all three of them being late, were obliged to sit together.

°°°°Eugene was as distant as possible in his manner to Vautrin during dinner; but the other, so charming in Mme. Vauquer's opinion, had never been so witty. His lively sallies and sparkling talk put the whole table in good humor. His assurance and coolness filled Eugene with consternation.

°°°°"Why, what has come to you to-day?" inquired Mme. Vauquer. "You are as merry as a skylark."

°°°°"I am always in spirits after I have made a good bargain."

°°°°"Bargain?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, yes, bargain. I have just delivered a lot of goods, and I shall be paid a handsome commission on them--Mlle. Michonneau," he went on, seeing that the elderly spinster was scrutinizing him intently, "have you any objection to some feature in my face, that you are making those lynx eyes at me? Just let me know, and I will have it changed to oblige you . . . We shall not fall out about it, Poiret, I dare say?" he added, winking at the superannuated clerk.

°°°°"Bless my soul, you ought to stand as model for a burlesque Hercules," said the young painter.

°°°°"I will, upon my word! if Mlle. Michonneau will consent to sit as the Venus of Pere-Lachaise," replied Vautrin.

°°°°"There's Poiret," suggested Bianchon.

°°°°"Oh! Poiret shall pose as Poiret. He can be a garden god!" cried Vautrin; "his name means a pear----"

°°°°"A sleepy pear!" Bianchon put in. "You will come in between the pear and the cheese."

°°°°"What stuff are you all talking!" said Mme. Vauquer; "you would do better to treat us to your Bordeaux; I see a glimpse of a bottle there. It would keep us all in a good humor, and it is good for the stomach besides."

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Vautrin, "the Lady President calls us to order. Mme. Couture and Mlle. Victorine will take your jokes in good part, but respect the innocence of the aged Goriot. I propose a glass or two of Bordeauxrama, rendered twice illustrious by the name of Laffite, no political allusions intended.--Come, you Turk!" he added, looking at Christophe, who did not offer to stir. "Christophe! Here! What, you don't answer to your own name? Bring us some liquor, Turk!"

°°°°"Here it is, sir," said Christophe, holding out the bottle.

°°°°Vautrin filled Eugene's glass and Goriot's likewise, then he deliberately poured out a few drops into his own glass, and sipped it while his two neighbors drank their wine. All at once he made a grimace.

°°°°"Corked!" he cried. "The devil! You can drink the rest of this, Christophe, and go and find another bottle; take from the right- hand side, you know. There are sixteen of us; take down eight bottles."

°°°°"If you are going to stand treat," said the painter, "I will pay for a hundred chestnuts."

°°°°"Oh! oh!"

°°°°"Booououh!"

°°°°"Prrr!"

°°°°These exclamations came from all parts of the table like squibs from a set firework.

°°°°"Come, now, Mama Vauquer, a couple of bottles of champagne," called Vautrin.

°°°°"Quien! just like you! Why not ask for the whole house at once. A couple of bottles of champagne; that means twelve francs! I shall never see the money back again, I know! But if M. Eugene has a mind to pay for it, I have some currant cordial."

°°°°"That currant cordial of hers is as bad as a black draught," muttered the medical student.

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon," exclaimed Rastignac; "the very mention of black draught makes me feel----. Yes, champagne, by all means; I will pay for it," he added.

°°°°"Sylvie," called Mme. Vauquer, "bring in some biscuits, and the little cakes."

°°°°"Those little cakes are mouldy graybeards," said Vautrin. "But trot out the biscuits."

°°°°The Bordeaux wine circulated; the dinner table became a livelier scene than ever, and the fun grew fast and furious. Imitations of the cries of various animals mingled with the loud laughter; the Museum official having taken it into his head to mimic a cat-call rather like the caterwauling of the animal in question, eight voices simultaneously struck up with the following variations:

°°°°"Scissors to grind!"

°°°°"Chick-weeds for singing bir-ds!"

°°°°"Brandy-snaps, ladies!"

°°°°"China to mend!"

°°°°"Boat ahoy!"

°°°°"Sticks to beat your wives or your clothes!"

°°°°"Old clo'!"

°°°°"Cherries all ripe!"

°°°°But the palm was awarded to Bianchon for the nasal accent with which he rendered the cry of "Umbrellas to me-end!"

°°°°A few seconds later, and there was a head-splitting racket in the room, a storm of tomfoolery, a sort of cats' concert, with Vautrin as conductor of the orchestra, the latter keeping an eye the while on Eugene and Father Goriot. The wine seemed to have gone to their heads already. They leaned back in their chairs, looking at the general confusion with an air of gravity, and drank but little; both of them were absorbed in the thought of what lay before them to do that evening, and yet neither of them felt able to rise and go. Vautrin gave a side glance at them from time to time, and watched the change that came over their faces, choosing the moment when their eyes drooped and seemed about to close, to bend over Rastignac and to say in his ear:--

°°°°"My little lad, you are not quite shrewd enough to outwit Papa Vautrin yet, and he is too fond of you to let you make a mess of your affairs. When I have made up my mind to do a thing, no one short of Providence can put me off. Aha! we were for going round to warn old Taillefer, telling tales out of school! The oven is hot, the dough is kneaded, the bread is ready for the oven; to- morrow we will eat it up and whisk away the crumbs; and we are not going to spoil the baking? . . . No, no, it is all as good as done! We may suffer from a few conscientious scruples, but they will be digested along with the bread. While we are having our forty winks, Colonel Count Franchessini will clear the way to Michel Taillefer's inheritance with the point of his sword. Victorine will come in for her brother's money, a snug fifteen thousand francs a year. I have made inquiries already, and I know that her late mother's property amounts to more than three hundred thousand----"

°°°°Eugene heard all this, and could not answer a word; his tongue seemed to be glued to the roof of his mouth, an irresistible drowsiness was creeping over him. He still saw the table and the faces round it, but it was through a bright mist. Soon the noise began to subside, one by one the boarders went. At last, when their numbers had so dwindled that the party consisted of Mme. Vauquer, Mme. Couture, Mlle. Victorine, Vautrin, and Father Goriot, Rastignac watched as though in a dream how Mme. Vauquer busied herself by collecting the bottles, and drained the remainder of the wine out of each to fill others.

°°°°"Oh! how uproarious they are! what a thing it is to be young!" said the widow.

°°°°These were the last words that Eugene heard and understood.

°°°°"There is no one like M. Vautrin for a bit of fun like this," said Sylvie. "There, just hark at Christophe, he is snoring like a top."

°°°°"Good-bye, mamma," said Vautrin; "I am going to a theatre on the boulevard to see M. Marty in Le Mont Sauvage, a fine play taken from Le Solitaire. . . . If you like, I will take you and these two ladies----"

°°°°"Thank you; I must decline," said Mme. Couture.

°°°°"What! my good lady!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "decline to see a play founded on the Le Solitaire, a work by Atala de Chateaubriand? We were so fond of that book that we cried over it like Magdalens under the line-trees last summer, and then it is an improving work that might edify your young lady."

°°°°"We are forbidden to go to the play," answered Victorine.

°°°°"Just look, those two yonder have dropped off where they sit," said Vautrin, shaking the heads of the two sleepers in a comical way.

°°°°He altered the sleeping student's position, settled his head more comfortably on the back of his chair, kissed him warmly on the forehead, and began to sing:

°°°°"Sleep, little darlings;   I watch while you slumber."

°°°°"I am afraid he may be ill," said Victorine.

°°°°"Then stop and take care of him," returned Vautrin. " 'Tis your duty as a meek and obedient wife," he whispered in her ear. "the young fellow worships you, and you will be his little wife-- there's your fortune for you. In short," he added aloud, "they lived happily ever afterwards, were much looked up to in all the countryside, and had a numerous family. That is how all the romances end.--Now, mamma," he went on, as he turned to Madame Vauquer and put his arm round her waist, "put on your bonnet, your best flowered silk, and the countess' scarf, while I go out and call a cab--all my own self."

°°°°And he started out, singing as he went:

°°°°"Oh! sun! divine sun!   Ripening the pumpkins every one."

°°°°"My goodness! Well, I'm sure! Mme. Couture, I could live happily in a garret with a man like that.--There, now!" she added, looking round for the old vermicelli maker, "there is that Father Goriot half seas over. HE never thought of taking me anywhere, the old skinflint. But he will measure his length somewhere. My word! it is disgraceful to lose his senses like that, at his age! You will be telling me that he couldn't lose what he hadn't got-- Sylvie, just take him up to his room!"

°°°°Sylvie took him by the arm, supported him upstairs, and flung him just as he was, like a package, across the bed.

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" said Mme. Couture, putting back Eugene's hair that had fallen over his eyes; "he is like a young girl, he does not know what dissipation is."

°°°°"Well, I can tell you this, I know," said Mme. Vauquer, "I have taken lodgers these thirty years, and a good many have passed through my hands, as the saying is, but I have never seen a nicer nor a more aristocratic looking young man than M. Eugene. How handsome he looks sleeping! Just let his head rest on your shoulder, Mme. Couture. Pshaw! he falls over towards Mlle. Victorine. There's a special providence for young things. A little more, and he would have broken his head against the knob of the chair. They'd make a pretty pair those two would!"

°°°°"Hush, my good neighbor," cried Mme. Couture, "you are saying such things----"

°°°°"Pooh!" put in Mme. Vauquer, "he does not hear.--Here, Sylvie! come and help me to dress. I shall put on my best stays."

°°°°"What! your best stays just after dinner, madame?" said Sylvie. "No, you can get some one else to lace you. I am not going to be your murderer. It's a rash thing to do, and might cost you your life."

°°°°"I don't care, I must do honor to M. Vautrin."

°°°°"Are you so fond of your heirs as all that?"

°°°°"Come, Sylvie, don't argue," said the widow, as she left the room.

°°°°"At her age, too!" said the cook to Victorine, pointing to her mistress as she spoke.

°°°°Mme. Couture and her ward were left in the dining-room, and Eugene slept on Victorine's shoulder. The sound of Christophe's snoring echoed through the silent house; Eugene's quiet breathing seemed all the quieter by force of contrast, he was sleeping as peacefully as a child. Victorine was very happy; she was free to perform one of those acts of charity which form an innocent outlet for all the overflowing sentiments of a woman's nature; he was so close to her that she could feel the throbbing of his heart; there was a look of almost maternal protection and conscious pride in Victorine's face. Among the countless thoughts that crowded up in her young innocent heart, there was a wild flutter of joy at this close contact.

°°°°"Poor, dear child!" said Mme. Couture, squeezing her hand.

°°°°The old lady looked at the girl. Victorine's innocent, pathetic face, so radiant with the new happiness that had befallen her, called to mind some naive work of mediaeval art, when the painter neglected the accessories, reserving all the magic of his brush for the quiet, austere outlines and ivory tints of the face, which seems to have caught something of the golden glory of heaven.

°°°°"After all, he only took two glasses, mamma," said Victorine, passing her fingers through Eugene's hair.

°°°°"Indeed, if he had been a dissipated young man, child, he would have carried his wine like the rest of them. His drowsiness does him credit."

°°°°There was a sound of wheels outside in the street.

°°°°"There is M. Vautrin, mamma," said the girl. "Just take M. Eugene. I would rather not have that man see me like this; there are some ways of looking at you that seem to sully your soul and make you feel as though you had nothing on."

°°°°"Oh, no, you are wrong!" said Mme. Couture. "M. Vautrin is a worthy man; he reminds me a little of my late husband, poor dear M. Couture, rough but kind-hearted; his bark is worse than his bite."

°°°°Vautrin came in while she was speaking; he did not make a sound, but looked for a while at the picture of the two young faces--the lamplight falling full upon them seemed to caress them.

°°°°"Well," he remarked, folding his arms, "here is a picture! It would have suggested some pleasing pages to Bernardin de Saint- Pierre (good soul), who wrote Paul et Virginie. Youth is very charming, Mme. Couture!--Sleep on, poor boy," he added, looking at Eugene, "luck sometimes comes while you are sleeping.--There is something touching and attractive to me about this young man, madame," he continued; "I know that his nature is in harmony with his face. Just look, the head of a cherub on an angel's shoulder! He deserves to be loved. If I were a woman, I would die (no--not such a fool), I would live for him." He bent lower and spoke in the widow's ear. "When I see those two together, madame, I cannot help thinking that Providence meant them for each other; He works by secret ways, and tries the reins and the heart," he said in a loud voice. "And when I see you, my children, thus united by a like purity and by all human affections, I say to myself that it is quite impossible that the future should separate you. God is just."--He turned to Victorine. "It seems to me," he said, "that I have seen the line of success in your hand. Let me look at it, Mlle. Victorine; I am well up in palmistry, and I have told fortunes many a time. Come, now, don't be frightened. Ah! what do I see? Upon my word, you will be one of the richest heiresses in Paris before very long. You will heap riches on the man who loves you. Your father will want you to go and live with him. You will marry a young and handsome man with a title, and he will idolize you."

°°°°The heavy footsteps of the coquettish widow, who was coming down the stairs, interrupted Vautrin's fortune-telling. "Here is Mamma Vauquerre, fair as a starr-r-r, dressed within an inch of her life.--Aren't we a trifle pinched for room?" he inquired, with his arm round the lady; "we are screwed up very tightly about the bust, mamma! If we are much agitated, there may be an explosion; but I will pick up the fragments with all the care of an antiquary."

°°°°"There is a man who can talk the language of French gallantry!" said the widow, bending to speak in Mme. Couture's ear.

°°°°"Good-bye, little ones!" said Vautrin, turning to Eugene and Victorine. "Bless you both!" and he laid a hand on either head. "Take my word for it, young lady, an honest man's prayers are worth something; they should bring you happiness, for God hears them."

°°°°"Good-bye, dear," said Mme. Vauquer to her lodger. "Do you think that M. Vautrin means to run away with me?" she added, lowering her voice.

°°°°"Lack-a-day!" said the widow.

°°°°"Oh! mamma dear, suppose it should really happen as that kind M. Vautrin said!" said Victorine with a sigh as she looked at her hands. The two women were alone together.

°°°°"Why, it wouldn't take much to bring it to pass," said the elderly lady; "just a fall from his horse, and your monster of a brother----"

°°°°"Oh! mamma."

°°°°"Good Lord! Well, perhaps it is a sin to wish bad luck to an enemy," the widow remarked. "I will do penance for it. Still, I would strew flowers on his grave with the greatest pleasure, and that is the truth. Black-hearted, that he is! The coward couldn't speak up for his own mother, and cheats you out of your share by deceit and trickery. My cousin had a pretty fortune of her own, but unluckily for you, nothing was said in the marriage-contract about anything that she might come in for."

°°°°"It would be very hard if my fortune is to cost some one else his life," said Victorine. "If I cannot be happy unless my brother is to be taken out of the world, I would rather stay here all my life."

°°°°"MON DIEU! it is just as that good M. Vautrin says, and he is full of piety, you see," Mme. Couture remarked. "I am very glad to find that he is not an unbeliever like the rest of them that talk of the Almighty with less respect than they do of the Devil. Well, as he was saying, who can know the ways by which it may please Providence to lead us?"

°°°°With Sylvie's help the two women at last succeeded in getting Eugene up to his room; they laid him on the bed, and the cook unfastened his clothes to make him more comfortable. Before they left the room, Victorine snatched an opportunity when her guardian's back was turned, and pressed a kiss on Eugene's forehead, feeling all the joy that this stolen pleasure could give her. Then she looked round the room, and gathering up, as it were, into one single thought all the untold bliss of that day, she made a picture of her memories, and dwelt upon it until she slept, the happiest creature in Paris.

°°°°That evening's merry-making, in the course of which Vautrin had given the drugged wine to Eugene and Father Goriot, was his own ruin. Bianchon, flustered with wine, forgot to open the subject of Trompe-la-Mort with Mlle. Michonneau. The mere mention of the name would have set Vautrin on his guard; for Vautrin, or, to give him his real name, Jacques Collin, was in fact the notorious escaped convict.

°°°°But it was the joke about the Venus of Pere-Lachaise that finally decided his fate. Mlle. Michonneau had very nearly made up her mind to warn the convict and to throw herself on his generosity, with the idea of making a better bargain for herself by helping him to escape that night; but as it was, she went out escorted by Poiret in search of the famous chief of detectives in the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, still thinking that it was the district superintendent--one Gondureau--with whom she had to do. The head of the department received his visitors courteously. There was a little talk, and the details were definitely arranged. Mlle. Michonneau asked for the draught that she was to administer in order to set about her investigation. But the great man's evident satisfaction set Mlle. Michonneau thinking; and she began to see that this business involved something more than the mere capture of a runaway convict. She racked her brains while he looked in a drawer in his desk for the little phial, and it dawned upon her that in consequence of treacherous revelations made by the prisoners the police were hoping to lay their hands on a considerable sum of money. But on hinting her suspicions to the old fox of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, that officer began to smile, and tried to put her off the scent.

°°°°"A delusion," he said. "Collin's sorbonne is the most dangerous that has yet been found among the dangerous classes. That is all, and the rascals are quite aware of it. They rally round him; he is the backbone of the federation, its Bonaparte, in short; he is very popular with them all. The rogue will never leave his chump in the Place de Greve."

°°°°As Mlle. Michonneau seemed mystified, Gondureau explained the two slang words for her benefit. Sorbonne and chump are two forcible expressions borrowed from thieves' Latin, thieves, of all people, being compelled to consider the human head in its two aspects. A sorbonne is the head of a living man, his faculty of thinking-- his council; a chump is a contemptuous epithet that implies how little a human head is worth after the axe has done its work.

°°°°"Collin is playing us off," he continued. "When we come across a man like a bar of steel tempered in the English fashion, there is always one resource left--we can kill him if he takes it into his head to make the least resistance. We are reckoning on several methods of killing Collin to-morrow morning. It saves a trial, and society is rid of him without all the expense of guarding and feeding him. What with getting up the case, summoning witnesses, paying their expenses, and carrying out the sentence, it costs a lot to go through all the proper formalities before you can get quit of one of these good-for-nothings, over and above the three thousand francs that you are going to have. There is a saving in time as well. One good thrust of the bayonet into Trompe-la- Mort's paunch will prevent scores of crimes, and save fifty scoundrels from following his example; they will be very careful to keep themselves out of the police courts. That is doing the work of the police thoroughly, and true philanthropists will tell you that it is better to prevent crime than to punish it."

°°°°"And you do a service to our country," said Poiret.

°°°°"Really, you are talking in a very sensible manner tonight, that you are," said the head of the department. "Yes, of course, we are serving our country, and we are very hardly used too. We do society very great services that are not recognized. In fact, a superior man must rise above vulgar prejudices, and a Christian must resign himself to the mishaps that doing right entails, when right is done in an out-of-the-way style. Paris is Paris, you see! That is the explanation of my life.--I have the honor to wish you a good-evening, mademoiselle. I shall bring my men to the Jardin du Roi in the morning. Send Christophe to the Rue du Buffon, tell him to ask for M. Gondureau in the house where you saw me before.--Your servant, sir. If you should ever have anything stolen from you, come to me, and I will do my best to get it back for you."

°°°°"Well, now," Poiret remarked to Mlle. Michonneau, "there are idiots who are scared out of their wits by the word police. That was a very pleasant-spoken gentleman, and what he wants you to do is as easy as saying 'Good-day.' "

°°°°The next day was destined to be one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Maison Vauquer. Hitherto the most startling occurrence in its tranquil existence had been the portentous, meteor-like apparition of the sham Comtesse de l'Ambermesnil. But the catastrophes of this great day were to cast all previous events into the shade, and supply an inexhaustible topic of conversation for Mme. Vauquer and her boarders so long as she lived.

°°°°In the first place, Goriot and Eugene de Rastignac both slept till close upon eleven o'clock. Mme. Vauquer, who came home about midnight from the Gaite, lay a-bed till half-past ten. Christophe, after a prolonged slumber (he had finished Vautrin's first bottle of wine), was behindhand with his work, but Poiret and Mlle. Michonneau uttered no complaint, though breakfast was delayed. As for Victorine and Mme. Couture, they also lay late. Vautrin went out before eight o'clock, and only came back just as breakfast was ready. Nobody protested, therefore, when Sylvie and Christophe went up at a quarter past eleven, knocked at all the doors, and announced that breakfast was waiting. While Sylvie and the man were upstairs, Mlle. Michonneau, who came down first, poured the contents of the phial into the silver cup belonging to Vautrin--it was standing with the others in the bain-marie that kept the cream hot for the morning coffee. The spinster had reckoned on this custom of the house to do her stroke of business. The seven lodgers were at last collected together, not without some difficulty. Just as Eugene came downstairs, stretching himself and yawning, a commissionaire handed him a letter from Mme. de Nucingen. It ran thus:--

°°°°"I feel neither false vanity nor anger where you are concerned, my friend. Till two o'clock this morning I waited for you. Oh, that waiting for one whom you love! No one that had passed through that torture could inflict it on another. I know now that you have never loved before. What can have happened? Anxiety has taken hold of me. I would have come myself to find out what had happened, if I had not feared to betray the secrets of my heart. How can I walk out or drive out at this time of day? Would it not be ruin? I have felt to the full how wretched it is to be a woman. Send a word to reassure me, and explain how it is that you have not come after what my father told you. I shall be angry, but I will forgive you. One word, for pity's sake. You will come to me soon, will you not? If you are busy, a line will be enough. Say, 'I will hasten to you,' or else, 'I am ill.' But if you were ill my father would have come to tell me so. What can have happened? . . ."

°°°°"Yes, indeed, what has happened?" exclaimed Eugene, and, hurrying down to the dining-room, he crumpled up the letter without reading any more. "What time is it?"

°°°°"Half-past eleven," said Vautrin, dropping a lump of sugar into his coffee.

°°°°The escaped convict cast a glance at Eugene, a cold and fascinating glance; men gifted with this magnetic power can quell furious lunatics in a madhouse by such a glance, it is said. Eugene shook in every limb. There was the sound of wheels in the street, and in another moment a man with a scared face rushed into the room. It was one of M. Taillefer's servants; Mme. Couture recognized the livery at once.

°°°°"Mademoiselle," he cried, "your father is asking for you-- something terrible has happened! M. Frederic has had a sword thrust in the forehead in a duel, and the doctors have given him up. You will scarcely be in time to say good-bye to him! he is unconscious."

°°°°"Poor young fellow!" exclaimed Vautrin. "How can people brawl when they have a certain income of thirty thousand livres? Young people have bad manners, and that is a fact."

°°°°"Sir!" cried Eugene.

°°°°"Well, what then, you big baby!" said Vautrin, swallowing down his coffee imperturbably, an operation which Mlle. Michonneau watched with such close attention that she had no emotion to spare for the amazing news that had struck the others dumb with amazement. "Are there not duels every morning in Paris?" added Vautrin.

°°°°"I will go with you, Victorine," said Mme. Couture, and the two women hurried away at once without either hats or shawls. But before she went, Victorine, with her eyes full of tears, gave Eugene a glance that said--"How little I thought that our happiness should cost me tears!"

°°°°"Dear me, you are a prophet, M. Vautrin," said Mme. Vauquer.

°°°°"I am all sorts of things," said Vautrin.

°°°°"Queer, isn't it?" said Mme. Vauquer, stringing together a succession of commonplaces suited to the occasion. "Death takes us off without asking us about it. The young often go before the old. It is a lucky thing for us women that we are not liable to fight duels, but we have other complaints that men don't suffer from. We bear children, and it takes a long time to get over it. What a windfall for Victorine! Her father will have to acknowledge her now!"

°°°°"There!" said Vautrin, looking at Eugene, "yesterday she had not a penny; this morning she has several millions to her fortune."

°°°°"I say, M. Eugene!" cried Mme. Vauquer, "you have landed on your feet!"

°°°°At this exclamation, Father Goriot looked at the student, and saw the crumpled letter still in his hand.

°°°°"You have not read it through! What does this mean? Are you going to be like the rest of them?" he asked.

°°°°"Madame, I shall never marry Mlle. Victorine," said Eugene, turning to Mme. Vauquer with an expression of terror and loathing that surprised the onlookers at this scene.

°°°°Father Goriot caught the student's hand and grasped it warmly. He could have kissed it.

°°°°"Oh, ho!" said Vautrin, "the Italians have a good proverb--Col tempo."

°°°°"Is there any answer?" said Mme. de Nucingen's messenger, addressing Eugene.

°°°°"Say that I will come directly."

°°°°The man went. Eugene was in a state of such violent excitement that he could not be prudent.

°°°°"What is to be done?" he exclaimed aloud. "There are no proofs!"

°°°°Vautrin began to smile. Though the drug he had taken was doing its work, the convict was so vigorous that he rose to his feet, gave Rastignac a look, and said in hollow tones, "Luck comes to us while we sleep, young man," and fell stiff and stark, as if he were struck dead.

°°°°"So there is a Divine Justice!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Well, if ever! What has come to that poor dear M. Vautrin?"

°°°°"A stroke!" cried Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Here, Sylvie! girl, run for the doctor," called the widow. "Oh, M. Rastignac, just go for M. Bianchon, and be as quick as you can; Sylvie might not be in time to catch our doctor, M. Grimprel."

°°°°Rastignac was glad of an excuse to leave that den of horrors, his hurry for the doctor was nothing but a flight.

°°°°"Here, Christophe, go round to the chemist's and ask for something that's good for the apoplexy."

°°°°Christophe likewise went.

°°°°"Father Goriot, just help us to get him upstairs."

°°°°Vautrin was taken up among them, carried carefully up the narrow staircase, and laid upon his bed.

°°°°"I can do no good here, so I shall go to see my daughter," said M. Goriot.

°°°°"Selfish old thing!" cried Mme. Vauquer. "Yes, go; I wish you may die like a dog."

°°°°"Just go and see if you can find some ether," said Mlle. Michonneau to Mme. Vauquer; the former, with some help from Poiret, had unfastened the sick man's clothes.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer went down to her room, and left Mlle. Michonneau mistress of the situation.

°°°°"Now! just pull down his shirt and turn him over, quick! You might be of some use in sparing my modesty," she said to Poiret, "instead of standing there like a stock."

°°°°Vautrin was turned over; Mlle. Michonneau gave his shoulder a sharp slap, and the two portentous letters appeared, white against the red.

°°°°"There, you have earned your three thousand francs very easily," exclaimed Poiret, supporting Vautrin while Mlle. Michonneau slipped on the shirt again.--"Ouf! How heavy he is," he added, as he laid the convict down.

°°°°"Hush! Suppose there is a strong-box here!" said the old maid briskly; her glances seemed to pierce the walls, she scrutinized every article of the furniture with greedy eyes. "Could we find some excuse for opening that desk?"

°°°°"It mightn't be quite right," responded Poiret to this.

°°°°"Where is the harm? It is money stolen from all sorts of people, so it doesn't belong to any one now. But we haven't time, there is the Vauquer."

°°°°"Here is the ether," said that lady. "I must say that this is an eventful day. Lord! that man can't have had a stroke; he is as white as curds."

°°°°"White as curds?" echoed Poiret.

°°°°"And his pulse is steady," said the widow, laying her hand on his breast.

°°°°"Steady?" said the astonished Poiret.

°°°°"He is all right."

°°°°"Do you think so?" asked Poiret.

°°°°"Lord! Yes, he looks as if he were sleeping. Sylvie has gone for a doctor. I say, Mlle. Michonneau, he is sniffing the ether. Pooh! it is only a spasm. His pulse is good. He is as strong as a Turk. Just look, mademoiselle, what a fur tippet he has on his chest; that is the sort of man to live till he is a hundred. His wig holds on tightly, however. Dear me! it is glued on, and his own hair is red; that is why he wears a wig. They say that red- haired people are either the worst or the best. Is he one of the good ones, I wonder?"

°°°°"Good to hang," said Poiret.

°°°°"Round a pretty woman's neck, you mean," said Mlle Michonneau, hastily. "Just go away, M. Poiret. It is a woman's duty to nurse you men when you are ill. Besides, for all the good you are doing, you may as well take yourself off," she added. "Mme. Vauquer and I will take great care of dear M. Vautrin.

°°°°Poiret went out on tiptoe without a murmur, like a dog kicked out of the room by his master.

°°°°Rastignac had gone out for the sake of physical exertion; he wanted to breathe the air, he felt stifled. Yesterday evening he had meant to prevent the murder arranged for half-past eight that morning. What had happened? What ought he to do now? He trembled to think that he himself might be implicated. Vautrin's coolness still further dismayed him.

°°°°"Yet, how if Vautrin should die without saying a word?" Rastignac asked himself.

°°°°He hurried along the alleys of the Luxembourg Gardens as if the hounds of justice were after him, and he already heard the baying of the pack.

°°°°"Well?" shouted Bianchon, "you have seen the Pilote?"

°°°°The Pilote was a Radical sheet, edited by M. Tissot. It came out several hours later than the morning papers, and was meant for the benefit of country subscribers; for it brought the morning news into provincial districts twenty-four hours sooner than the ordinary local journals.

°°°°"There is a wonderful history in it," said the house student of the Hopital Cochin. "Young Taillefer called out Count Franchessini, of the Old Guard, and the Count put a couple of inches of steel into his forehead. And here is little Victorine one of the richest heiresses in Paris! If we had known that, eh? What a game of chance death is! They say Victorine was sweet on you; was there any truth in it?"

°°°°"Shut up, Bianchon; I shall never marry her. I am in love with a charming woman, and she is in love with me, so----"

°°°°"You said that as if you were screwing yourself up to be faithful to her. I should like to see the woman worth the sacrifice of Master Taillefer's money!"

°°°°"Are all the devils of hell at my heels?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"What is the matter with you? Are you mad? Give us your hand," said Bianchon, "and let me feel your pulse. You are feverish."

°°°°"Just go to Mother Vauquer's," said Rastignac; "that scoundrel Vautrin has dropped down like one dead."

°°°°"Aha!" said Bianchon, leaving Rastignac to his reflections, "you confirm my suspicions, and now I mean to make sure for myself."

°°°°The law student's long walk was a memorable one for him. He made in some sort a survey of his conscience. After a close scrutiny, after hesitation and self-examination, his honor at any rate came out scatheless from this sharp and terrible ordeal, like a bar of iron tested in the English fashion. He remembered Father Goriot's confidences of the evening before; he recollected the rooms taken for him in the Rue d'Artois, so that he might be near Delphine; and then he thought of his letter, and read it again and kissed it.

°°°°"Such a love is my anchor of safety," he said to himself. "How the old man's heart must have been wrung! He says nothing about all that he has been through; but who could not guess? Well, then, I will be like a son to him; his life shall be made happy. If she cares for me, she will often come to spend the day with him. That grand Comtesse de Restaud is a heartless thing; she would make her father into her hall porter. Dear Delphine! she is kinder to the old man; she is worthy to be loved. Ah! this evening I shall be very happy!"

°°°°He took out his watch and admired it.

°°°°"I have had nothing but success! If two people mean to love each other for ever, they may help each other, and I can take this. Besides, I shall succeed, and I will pay her a hundredfold. There is nothing criminal in this liaison; nothing that could cause the most austere moralist to frown. How many respectable people contract similar unions! We deceive nobody; it is deception that makes a position humiliating. If you lie, you lower yourself at once. She and her husband have lived apart for a long while. Besides, how if I called upon that Alsatian to resign a wife whom he cannot make happy?"

°°°°Rastignac's battle with himself went on for a long while; and though the scruples of youth inevitably gained the day, an irresistible curiosity led him, about half-past four, to return to the Maison Vauquer through the gathering dusk.

°°°°Bianchon had given Vautrin an emetic, reserving the contents of the stomach for chemical analysis at the hospital. Mlle. Michonneau's officious alacrity had still further strengthened his suspicions of her. Vautrin, moreover, had recovered so quickly that it was impossible not to suspect some plot against the leader of all frolics at the lodging-house. Vautrin was standing in front of the stove in the dining-room when Rastignac came in. All the lodgers were assembled sooner than usual by the news of young Taillefer's duel. They were anxious to hear any detail about the affair, and to talk over the probable change in Victorine's prospects. Father Goriot alone was absent, but the rest were chatting. No sooner did Eugene come into the room, than his eyes met the inscrutable gaze of Vautrin. It was the same look that had read his thoughts before--the look that had such power to waken evil thoughts in his heart. He shuddered.

°°°°"Well, dear boy," said the escaped convict, "I am likely to cheat death for a good while yet. According to these ladies, I have had a stroke that would have felled an ox, and come off with flying colors."

°°°°"A bull you might say," cried the widow.

°°°°"You really might be sorry to see me still alive," said Vautrin in Rastignac's ear, thinking that he guessed the student's thoughts. "You must be mighty sure of yourself."

°°°°"Mlle. Michonneau was talking the day before yesterday about a gentleman named Trompe-la-Mort," said Bianchon; "and, upon my word, that name would do very well for you."

°°°°Vautrin seemed thunderstruck. He turned pale, and staggered back. He turned his magnetic glance, like a ray of vivid light, on Mlle. Michonneau; the old maid shrank and trembled under the influence of that strong will, and collapsed into a chair. The mask of good-nature had dropped from the convict's face; from the unmistakable ferocity of that sinister look, Poiret felt that the old maid was in danger, and hastily stepped between them. None of the lodgers understood this scene in the least, they looked on in mute amazement. There was a pause. Just then there was a sound of tramping feet outside; there were soldiers there, it seemed, for there was a ring of several rifles on the pavement of the street. Collin was mechanically looking round the walls for a way of escape, when four men entered by way of the sitting-room.

°°°°"In the name of the King and the Law!" said an officer, but the words were almost lost in a murmur of astonishment.

°°°°Silence fell on the room. The lodgers made way for three of the men, who had each a hand on a cocked pistol in a side pocket. Two policemen, who followed the detectives, kept the entrance to the sitting-room, and two more men appeared in the doorway that gave access to the staircase. A sound of footsteps came from the garden, and again the rifles of several soldiers rang on the cobblestones under the window. All chance of salvation by flight was cut off for Trompe-la-Mort, to whom all eyes instinctively turned. The chief walked straight up to him, and commenced operations by giving him a sharp blow on the head, so that the wig fell off, and Collin's face was revealed in all its ugliness. There was a terrible suggestion of strength mingled with cunning in the short, brick-red crop of hair, the whole head was in harmony with his powerful frame, and at that moment the fires of hell seemed to gleam from his eyes. In that flash the real Vautrin shone forth, revealed at once before them all; they understood his past, his present, and future, his pitiless doctrines, his actions, the religion of his own good pleasure, the majesty with which his cynicism and contempt for mankind invested him, the physical strength of an organization proof against all trials. The blood flew to his face, and his eyes glared like the eyes of a wild cat. He started back with savage energy and a fierce growl that drew exclamations of alarm from the lodgers. At that leonine start the police caught at their pistols under cover of the general clamor. Collin saw the gleaming muzzles of the weapons, saw his danger, and instantly gave proof of a power of the highest order. There was something horrible and majestic in the spectacle of the sudden transformation in his face; he could only be compared to a cauldron full of the steam that can send mountains flying, a terrific force dispelled in a moment by a drop of cold water. The drop of water that cooled his wrathful fury was a reflection that flashed across his brain like lightning. He began to smile, and looked down at his wig.

°°°°"You are not in the politest of humors to-day," he remarked to the chief, and he held out his hands to the policemen with a jerk of his head.

°°°°"Gentlemen," he said, "put on the bracelets or the handcuffs. I call on those present to witness that I make no resistance."

°°°°A murmur of admiration ran through the room at the sudden outpouring like fire and lava flood from this human volcano, and its equally sudden cessation.

°°°°"There's a sell for you, master crusher," the convict added, looking at the famous director of police.

°°°°"Come, strip!" said he of the Petite Rue Saint-Anne, contemptuously.

°°°°"Why?" asked Collin. "There are ladies present; I deny nothing, and surrender."

°°°°He paused, and looked round the room like an orator who is about to overwhelm his audience.

°°°°"Take this down, Daddy Lachapelle," he went on, addressing a little, white-haired old man who had seated himself at the end of the table; and after drawing a printed form from the portfolio, was proceeding to draw up a document. "I acknowledge myself to be Jacques Collin, otherwise known as Trompe-la-Mort, condemned to twenty years' penal servitude, and I have just proved that I have come fairly by my nickname.--If I had as much as raised my hand," he went on, addressing the other lodgers, "those three sneaking wretches yonder would have drawn claret on Mamma Vauquer's domestic hearth. The rogues have laid their heads together to set a trap for me."

°°°°Mme. Vauquer felt sick and faint at these words.

°°°°"Good Lord!" she cried, "this does give one a turn; and me at the Gaite with him only last night!" she said to Sylvie.

°°°°"Summon your philosophy, mamma," Collin resumed. "Is it a misfortune to have sat in my box at the Gaite yesterday evening? After all, are you better than we are? The brand upon our shoulders is less shameful than the brand set on your hearts, you flabby members of a society rotten to the core. Not the best man among you could stand up to me." His eyes rested upon Rastignac, to whom he spoke with a pleasant smile that seemed strangely at variance with the savage expression in his eyes.--"Our little bargain still holds good, dear boy; you can accept any time you like! Do you understand?" And he sang:

°°°°"A charming girl is my Fanchette   In her simplicity."

°°°°"Don't you trouble yourself," he went on; "I can get in my money. They are too much afraid of me to swindle me."

°°°°The convicts' prison, its language and customs, its sudden sharp transitions from the humorous to the horrible, its appalling grandeur, its triviality and its dark depths, were all revealed in turn by the speaker's discourse; he seemed to be no longer a man, but the type and mouthpiece of a degenerate race, a brutal, supple, clear-headed race of savages. In one moment Collin became the poet of an inferno, wherein all thoughts and passions that move human nature (save repentance) find a place. He looked about him like a fallen archangel who is for war to the end. Rastignac lowered his eyes, and acknowledged this kinship claimed by crime as an expiation of his own evil thoughts.

°°°°"Who betrayed me?" said Collin, and his terrible eyes traveled round the room. Suddenly they rested on Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"It was you, old cat!" he said. "That sham stroke of apoplexy was your doing, lynx eyes! . . . Two words from me, and your throat would be cut in less than a week, but I forgive you, I am a Christian. You did not sell me either. But who did?----Aha! you may rummage upstairs," he shouted, hearing the police officers opening his cupboards and taking possession of his effects. "The nest is empty, the birds flew away yesterday, and you will be none the wiser. My ledgers are here," he said tapping his forehead. "Now I know who sold me! It could only be that blackguard Fil-de-Soie. That is who it was, old catchpoll, eh?" he said, turning to the chief. "It was timed so neatly to get the banknotes up above there. There is nothing left for you--spies! As for Fil-de-Soie, he will be under the daisies in less than a fortnight, even if you were to tell off the whole force to protect him. How much did you give the Michonnette?" he asked of the police officers. "A thousand crowns? Oh you Ninon in decay, Pompadour in tatters, Venus of the graveyard, I was worth more than that! If you had given me warning, you should have had six thousand francs. Ah! you had no suspicion of that, old trafficker in flesh and blood, or I should have had the preference. Yes, I would have given six thousand francs to save myself an inconvenient journey and some loss of money," he said, as they fastened the handcuffs on his wrists. "These folks will amuse themselves by dragging out this business till the end of time to keep me idle. If they were to send me straight to jail, I should soon be back at my old tricks in spite of the duffers at the Quai des Orfevres. Down yonder they will all turn themselves inside out to help their general--their good Trompe-la-Mort--to get clear away. Is there a single one among you that can say, as I can, that he has ten thousand brothers ready to do anything for him?" he asked proudly. "There is some good there," he said tapping his heart; "I have never betrayed any one!--Look you here, you slut," he said to the old maid, "they are all afraid of me, do you see? but the sight of you turns them sick. Rake in your gains."

°°°°He was silent for a moment, and looked round at the lodgers' faces.

°°°°"What dolts you are, all of you! Have you never seen a convict before? A convict of Collin's stamp, whom you see before you, is a man less weak-kneed than others; he lifts up his voice against the colossal fraud of the Social Contract, as Jean Jacques did, whose pupil he is proud to declare himself. In short, I stand here single-handed against a Government and a whole subsidized machinery of tribunals and police, and I am a match for them all."

°°°°"Ye gods!" cried the painter, "what a magnificent sketch one might make of him!"

°°°°"Look here, you gentlemen-in-waiting to his highness the gibbet, master of ceremonies to the widow" (a nickname full of sombre poetry, given by prisoners to the guillotine), "be a good fellow, and tell me if it really was Fil-de-Soie who sold me. I don't want him to suffer for some one else, that would not be fair."

°°°°But before the chief had time to answer, the rest of the party returned from making their investigations upstairs. Everything had been opened and inventoried. A few words passed between them and the chief, and the official preliminaries were complete.

°°°°"Gentlemen," said Collin, addressing the lodgers, "they will take me away directly. You have all made my stay among you very agreeable, and I shall look back upon it with gratitude. Receive my adieux, and permit me to send you figs from Provence."

°°°°He advanced a step or two, and then turned to look once more at Rastignac.

°°°°"Good-bye, Eugene," he said, in a sad and gentle tone, a strange transition from his previous rough and stern manner. "If you should be hard up, I have left you a devoted friend," and, in spite of his shackles, he managed to assume a posture of defence, called, "One, two!" like a fencing-master, and lunged. "If anything goes wrong, apply in that quarter. Man and money, all at your service."

°°°°The strange speaker's manner was sufficiently burlesque, so that no one but Rastignac knew that there was a serious meaning underlying the pantomime.

°°°°As soon as the police, soldiers, and detectives had left the house, Sylvie, who was rubbing her mistress' temples with vinegar, looked round at the bewildered lodgers.

°°°°"Well," said she, "he was a man, he was, for all that."

°°°°Her words broke the spell. Every one had been too much excited, too much moved by very various feelings to speak. But now the lodgers began to look at each other, and then all eyes were turned at once on Mlle. Michonneau, a thin, shriveled, dead- alive, mummy-like figure, crouching by the stove; her eyes were downcast, as if she feared that the green eye-shade could not shut out the expression of those faces from her. This figure and the feeling of repulsion she had so long excited were explained all at once. A smothered murmur filled the room; it was so unanimous, that it seemed as if the same feeling of loathing had pitched all the voices in one key. Mlle. Michonneau heard it, and did not stir. It was Bianchon who was the first to move; he bent over his neighbor, and said in a low voice, "If that creature is going to stop here, and have dinner with us, I shall clear out."

°°°°In the twinkling of an eye it was clear that every one in the room, save Poiret, was of the medical student's opinion, so that the latter, strong in the support of the majority, went up to that elderly person.

°°°°"You are more intimate with Mlle. Michonneau than the rest of us," he said; "speak to her, make her understand that she must go, and go at once."

°°°°"At once!" echoed Poiret in amazement.

°°°°Then he went across to the crouching figure, and spoke a few words in her ear.

°°°°"I have paid beforehand for the quarter; I have as much right to be here as any one else," she said, with a viperous look at the boarders.

°°°°"Never mind that! we will club together and pay you the money back," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Monsieur is taking Collin's part" she said, with a questioning, malignant glance at the law student; "it is not difficult to guess why."

°°°°Eugene started forward at the words, as if he meant to spring upon her and wring her neck. That glance, and the depths of treachery that it revealed, had been a hideous enlightenment.

°°°°"Let her alone!" cried the boarders.

°°°°Rastignac folded his arms and was silent.

°°°°"Let us have no more of Mlle. Judas," said the painter, turning to Mme. Vauquer. "If you don't show the Michonneau the door, madame, we shall all leave your shop, and wherever we go we shall say that there are only convicts and spies left there. If you do the other thing, we will hold our tongues about the business; for when all is said and done, it might happen in the best society until they brand them on the forehead, when they send them to the hulks. They ought not to let convicts go about Paris disguised like decent citizens, so as to carry on their antics like a set of rascally humbugs, which they are."

°°°°At this Mme. Vauquer recovered miraculously. She sat up and folded her arms; her eyes were wide open now, and there was no sign of tears in them.

°°°°"Why, do you really mean to be the ruin of my establishment, my dear sir? There is M. Vautrin----Goodness," she cried, interrupting herself, "I can't help calling him by the name he passed himself off by for an honest man! There is one room to let already, and you want me to turn out two more lodgers in the middle of the season, when no one is moving----"

°°°°"Gentlemen, let us take our hats and go and dine at Flicoteaux's in the Place Sorbonne," cried Bianchon.

°°°°Mme. Vauquer glanced round, and saw in a moment on which side her interest lay. She waddled across to Mlle. Michonneau.

°°°°"Come, now," she said; "you would not be the ruin of my establishment, would you, eh? There's a dear, kind soul. You see what a pass these gentlemen have brought me to; just go up to your room for this evening."

°°°°"Never a bit of it!" cried the boarders. "She must go, and go this minute!"

°°°°"But the poor lady has had no dinner," said Poiret, with piteous entreaty.

°°°°"She can go and dine where she likes," shouted several voices.

°°°°"Turn her out, the spy!"

°°°°"Turn them both out! Spies!"

°°°°"Gentlemen," cried Poiret, his heart swelling with the courage that love gives to the ovine male, "respect the weaker sex."

°°°°"Spies are of no sex!" said the painter.

°°°°"A precious sexorama!"

°°°°"Turn her into the streetorama!"

°°°°"Gentlemen, this is not manners! If you turn people out of the house, it ought not to be done so unceremoniously and with no notice at all. We have paid our money, and we are not going," said Poiret, putting on his cap, and taking a chair beside Mlle. Michonneau, with whom Mme. Vauquer was remonstrating.

°°°°"Naughty boy!" said the painter, with a comical look; "run away, naughty little boy!"

°°°°"Look here," said Bianchon; "if you do not go, all the rest of us will," and the boarders, to a man, made for the sitting-room- door.

°°°°"Oh! mademoiselle, what is to be done?" cried Mme. Vauquer. "I am a ruined woman. You can't stay here; they will go further, do something violent."

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau rose to her feet.

°°°°"She is going!--She is not going!--She is going!--No, she isn't."

°°°°These alternate exclamations, and a suggestion of hostile intentions, borne out by the behavior of the insurgents, compelled Mlle. Michonneau to take her departure. She made some stipulations, speaking in a low voice in her hostess' ear, and then--"I shall go to Mme. Buneaud's," she said, with a threatening look.

°°°°"Go where you please, mademoiselle," said Mme. Vauquer, who regarded this choice of an opposition establishment as an atrocious insult. "Go and lodge with the Buneaud; the wine would give a cat the colic, and the food is cheap and nasty."

°°°°The boarders stood aside in two rows to let her pass; not a word was spoken. Poiret looked so wistfully after Mlle. Michonneau, and so artlessly revealed that he was in two minds whether to go or stay, that the boarders, in their joy at being quit of Mlle. Michonneau, burst out laughing at the sight of him.

°°°°"Hist!--st!--st! Poiret," shouted the painter. "Hallo! I say, Poiret, hallo!" The employe from the Museum began to sing:

°°°°"Partant pour la Syrie,   Le jeune et beau Dunois . . ."

°°°°"Get along with you; you must be dying to go, trahit sua quemque voluptas!" said Bianchon.

°°°°"Every one to his taste--free rendering from Virgil," said the tutor.

°°°°Mlle. Michonneau made a movement as if to take Poiret's arm, with an appealing glance that he could not resist. The two went out together, the old maid leaning upon him, and there was a burst of applause, followed by peals of laughter.

°°°°"Bravo, Poiret!"

°°°°"Who would have thought it of old Poiret!"

°°°°"Apollo Poiret!"

°°°°"Mars Poiret!"

°°°°"Intrepid Poiret!"

°°°°A messenger came in at that moment with a letter for Mme. Vauquer, who read it through, and collapsed in her chair.

°°°°"The house might as well be burned down at once," cried she, "if there are to be any more of these thunderbolts! Young Taillefer died at three o'clock this afternoon. It serves me right for wishing well to those ladies at that poor man's expense. Mme. Couture and Victorine want me to send their things, because they are going to live with her father. M. Taillefer allows his daughter to keep old Mme. Couture as her lady companion. Four rooms to let! and five lodgers gone! . . ."

°°°°She sat up, and seemed about to burst into tears.

°°°°"Bad luck has come to lodge here, I think," she cried.

°°°°Once more there came a sound of wheels from the street outside.

°°°°"What! another windfall for somebody!" was Sylvie's comment.

°°°°But it was Goriot who came in, looking so radiant, so flushed with happiness, that he seemed to have grown young again.

°°°°"Goriot in a cab!" cried the boarders; "the world is coming to an end."

°°°°The good soul made straight for Eugene, who was standing wrapped in thought in a corner, and laid a hand on the young man's arm.

°°°°"Come," he said, with gladness in his eyes.

°°°°"Then you haven't heard the news?" said Eugene. "Vautrin was an escaped convict; they have just arrested him; and young Taillefer is dead."

°°°°"Very well, but what business is it of ours?" replied Father Goriot. "I am going to dine with my daughter in YOUR HOUSE, do you understand? She is expecting you. Come!"

°°°°He carried off Rastignac with him by main force, and they departed in as great a hurry as a pair of eloping lovers.

°°°°"Now, let us have dinner," cried the painter, and every one drew his chair to the table.

°°°°"Well, I never," said the portly Sylvie. "Nothing goes right to- day! The haricot mutton has caught! Bah! you will have to eat it, burned as it is, more's the pity!"

°°°°Mme. Vauquer was so dispirited that she could not say a word as she looked round the table and saw only ten people where eighteen should be; but every one tried to comfort and cheer her. At first the dinner contingent, as was natural, talked about Vautrin and the day's events; but the conversation wound round to such topics of interest as duels, jails, justice, prison life, and alterations that ought to be made in the laws. They soon wandered miles away from Jacques Collin and Victorine and her brother. There might be only ten of them, but they made noise enough for twenty; indeed, there seemed to be more of them than usual; that was the only difference between yesterday and to-day. Indifference to the fate of others is a matter of course in this selfish world, which, on the morrow of tragedy, seeks among the events of Paris for a fresh sensation for its daily renewed appetite, and this indifference soon gained the upper hand. Mme. Vauquer herself grew calmer under the soothing influence of hope, and the mouthpiece of hope was the portly Sylvie.

°°°°That day had gone by like a dream for Eugene, and the sense of unreality lasted into the evening; so that, in spite of his energetic character and clear-headedness, his ideas were a chaos as he sat beside Goriot in the cab. The old man's voice was full of unwonted happiness, but Eugene had been shaken by so many emotions that the words sounded in his ears like words spoken in a dream.

°°°°"It was finished this morning! All three of us are going to dine there together, together! Do you understand? I have not dined with my Delphine, my little Delphine, these four years, and I shall have her for a whole evening! We have been at your lodging the whole time since morning. I have been working like a porter in my shirt sleeves, helping to carry in the furniture. Aha! you don't know what pretty ways she has; at table she will look after me, 'Here, papa, just try this, it is nice.' And I shall not be able to eat. Oh, it is a long while since I have been with her in quiet every-day life as we shall have her."

°°°°"It really seems as if the world has been turned upside down."

°°°°"Upside down?" repeated Father Goriot. "Why, the world has never been so right-side up. I see none but smiling faces in the streets, people who shake hands cordially and embrace each other, people who all look as happy as if they were going to dine with their daughter, and gobble down a nice little dinner that she went with me to order of the chef at the Cafe des Anglais. But, pshaw! with her beside you gall and wormwood would be as sweet as honey."

°°°°"I feel as if I were coming back to life again," said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, hurry up there!" cried Father Goriot, letting down the window in front. "Get on faster; I will give you five francs if you get to the place I told you of in ten minutes time."

°°°°With this prospect before him the cabman crossed Paris with miraculous celerity.

°°°°"How that fellow crawls!" said Father Goriot.

°°°°"But where are you taking me?" Eugene asked him.

°°°°"To your own house," said Goriot.

°°°°The cab stopped in the Rue d'Artois. Father Goriot stepped out first and flung ten francs to the man with the recklessness of a widower returning to bachelor ways.

°°°°"Come along upstairs," he said to Rastignac. They crossed a courtyard, and climbed up to the third floor of a new and handsome house. There they stopped before a door; but before Goriot could ring, it was opened by Therese, Mme. de Nucingen's maid. Eugene found himself in a charming set of chambers; an ante-room, a little drawing-room, a bedroom, and a study, looking out upon a garden. The furniture and the decorations of the little drawing-room were of the most daintily charming description, the room was full of soft light, and Delphine rose up from a low chair by the fire and stood before him. She set her fire-screen down on the chimney-piece, and spoke with tenderness in every tone of her voice.

°°°°"So we had to go in search of you, sir, you who are so slow to understand!"

°°°°Therese left the room. The student took Delphine in his arms and held her in a tight clasp, his eyes filled with tears of joy. This last contrast between his present surroundings and the scenes he had just witnessed was too much for Rastignac's over- wrought nerves, after the day's strain and excitement that had wearied heart and brain; he was almost overcome by it.

°°°°"I felt sure myself that he loved you," murmured Father Goriot, while Eugene lay back bewildered on the sofa, utterly unable to speak a word or to reason out how and why the magic wand had been waved to bring about this final transformation scene.

°°°°"But you must see your rooms," said Mme. de Nucingen. She took his hand and led him into a room carpeted and furnished like her own; indeed, down to the smallest details, it was a reproduction in miniature of Delphine's apartment.

°°°°"There is no bed," said Rastignac.

°°°°"No, monsieur," she answered, reddening, and pressing his hand. Eugene, looking at her, understood, young though he yet was, how deeply modesty is implanted in the heart of a woman who loves.

°°°°"You are one of those beings whom we cannot choose but to adore for ever," he said in her ear. "Yes, the deeper and truer love is, the more mysterious and closely veiled it should be; I can dare to say so, since we understand each other so well. No one shall learn our secret."

°°°°"Oh! so I am nobody, I suppose," growled the father.

°°°°"You know quite well that 'we' means you."

°°°°"Ah! that is what I wanted. You will not mind me, will you? I shall go and come like a good fairy who makes himself felt everywhere without being seen, shall I not? Eh, Delphinette, Ninette, Dedel--was it not a good idea of mine to say to you, 'There are some nice rooms to let in the Rue d'Artois; let us furnish them for him?' And she would not hear of it! Ah! your happiness has been all my doing. I am the author of your happiness and of your existence. Fathers must always be giving if they would be happy themselves; always giving--they would not be fathers else."

°°°°"Was that how it happened?" asked Eugene.

°°°°"Yes. She would not listen to me. She was afraid that people would talk, as if the rubbish that they say about you were to be compared with happiness! Why, all women dream of doing what she has done----"

°°°°Father Goriot found himself without an audience, for Mme. de Nucingen had led Rastignac into the study; he heard a kiss given and taken, low though the sound was.

°°°°The study was furnished as elegantly as the other rooms, and nothing was wanting there.

°°°°"Have we guessed your wishes rightly?" she asked, as they returned to the drawing-room for dinner.

°°°°"Yes," he said, "only too well, alas! For all this luxury so well carried out, this realization of pleasant dreams, the elegance that satisfies all the romantic fancies of youth, appeals to me so strongly that I cannot but feel that it is my rightful possession, but I cannot accept it from you, and I am too poor as yet to----"

°°°°"Ah! ah! you say me nay already," she said with arch imperiousness, and a charming little pout of the lips, a woman's way of laughing away scruples.

°°°°But Eugene had submitted so lately to that solemn self- questioning, and Vautrin's arrest had so plainly shown him the depths of the pit that lay ready to his feet, that the instincts of generosity and honor had been strengthened in him, and he could not allow himself to be coaxed into abandoning his high- minded determinations. Profound melancholy filled his mind.

°°°°"Do you really mean to refuse?" said Mme. de Nucingen. "And do you know what such a refusal means? That you are not sure of yourself, that you do not dare to bind yourself to me. Are you really afraid of betraying my affection? If you love me, if I-- love you, why should you shrink back from such a slight obligation? If you but knew what a pleasure it has been to see after all the arrangements of this bachelor establishment, you would not hesitate any longer, you would ask me to forgive you for your hesitation. I had some money that belonged to you, and I have made good use of it, that is all. You mean this for magnanimity, but it is very little of you. You are asking me for far more than this. . . . Ah!" she cried, as Eugene's passionate glance was turned on her, "and you are making difficulties about the merest trifles. Of, if you feel no love whatever for me, refuse, by all means. My fate hangs on a word from you. Speak!-- Father," she said after a pause, "make him listen to reason. Can he imagine that I am less nice than he is on the point of honor?"

°°°°Father Goriot was looking on and listening to this pretty quarrel with a placid smile, as if he had found some balm for all the sorrows of life.

°°°°"Child that you are!" she cried again, catching Eugene's hand. "You are just beginning life; you find barriers at the outset that many a man finds insurmountable; a woman's hand opens the way and you shrink back! Why, you are sure to succeed! You will have a brilliant future. Success is written on that broad forehead of yours, and will you not be able to repay me my loan of today? Did not a lady in olden times arm her knight with sword and helmet and coat of mail, and find him a charger, so that he might fight for her in the tournament? Well, then, Eugene, these things that I offer you are the weapons of this age; every one who means to be something must have such tools as these. A pretty place your garret must be if it is like papa's room! See, dinner is waiting all this time. Do you want to make me unhappy?--Why don't you answer?" she said, shaking his hand. "MON DIEU! papa, make up his mind for him, or I will go away and never see him any more."

°°°°"I will make up your mind," said Goriot, coming down from the clouds. "Now, my dear M. Eugene, the next thing is to borrow money of the Jews, isn't it?"

°°°°"There is positively no help for it," said Eugene.

°°°°"All right, I will give you credit," said the other, drawing out a cheap leather pocket-book, much the worse for wear. "I have turned Jew myself; I paid for everything; here are the invoices. You do not owe a penny for anything here. It did not come to very much--five thousand francs at most, and I am going to lend you the money myself. I am not a woman--you can refuse me. You shall give me a receipt on a scrap of paper, and you can return it some time or other."

°°°°Delphine and Eugene looked at each other in amazement, tears sprang to their eyes. Rastignac held out his hand and grasped Goriot's warmly.

°°°°"Well, what is all this about? Are you not my children?"

°°°°"Oh! my poor father," said Mme. de Nucingen, "how did you do it?"

°°°°"Ah! now you ask me. When I made up my mind to move him nearer to you, and saw you buying things as if they were wedding presents, I said to myself, 'She will never be able to pay for them.' The attorney says that those law proceedings will last quite six months before your husband can be made to disgorge your fortune. Well and good. I sold out my property in the funds that brought in thirteen hundred and fifty livres a year, and bought a safe annuity of twelve hundred francs a year for fifteen thousand francs. Then I paid your tradesmen out of the rest of the capital. As for me, children, I have a room upstairs for which I pay fifty crowns a year; I can live like a prince on two francs a day, and still have something left over. I shall not have to spend anything much on clothes, for I never wear anything out. This fortnight past I have been laughing in my sleeve, thinking to myself, 'How happy they are going to be!' and--well, now, are you not happy?"

°°°°"Oh papa! papa!" cried Mme. de Nucingen, springing to her father, who took her on his knee. She covered him with kisses, her fair hair brushed his cheek, her tears fell on the withered face that had grown so bright and radiant.

°°°°"Dear father, what a father you are! No, there is not another father like you under the sun. If Eugene loved you before, what must he feel for you now?"

°°°°"Why, children, why Delphinette!" cried Goriot, who had not felt his daughter's heart beat against his breast for ten years, "do you want me to die of joy? My poor heart will break! Come, Monsieur Eugene, we are quits already." And the old man strained her to his breast with such fierce and passionate force that she cried out.

°°°°"Oh! you are hurting me!" she said.

°°°°"I am hurting you!" He grew pale at the words. The pain expressed in his face seemed greater than it is given to humanity to know. The agony of this Christ of paternity can only be compared with the masterpieces of those princes of the palette who have left for us the record of their visions of an agony suffered for a whole world by the Saviour of men. Father Goriot pressed his lips very gently against the waist than his fingers had grasped too roughly.

°°°°"Oh! no, no," he cried. "I have not hurt you, have I?" and his smile seemed to repeat the question. "YOU have hurt me with that cry just now.--The things cost rather more than that," he said in her ear, with another gentle kiss, "but I had to deceive him about it, or he would have been angry."

°°°°Eugene sat dumb with amazement in the presence of this inexhaustible love; he gazed at Goriot, and his face betrayed the artless admiration which shapes the beliefs of youth.

°°°°"I will be worthy of all this," he cried.

°°°°"Oh! my Eugene, that is nobly said," and Mme. de Nucingen kissed the law student on the forehead.

°°°°"He gave up Mlle. Taillefer and her millions for you," said Father Goriot. "Yes, the little thing was in love with you, and now that her brother is dead she is as rich as Croesus."

°°°°"Oh! why did you tell her?" cried Rastignac.

°°°°"Eugene," Delphine said in his ear, "I have one regret now this evening. Ah! how I will love you! and for ever!"

°°°°"This is the happiest day I have had since you two were married!" cried Goriot. "God may send me any suffering, so long as I do not suffer through you, and I can still say, 'In this short month of February I had more happiness than other men have in their whole lives.'--Look at me, Fifine!" he said to his daughter. "She is very beautiful, is she not? Tell me, now, have you seen many women with that pretty soft color--that little dimple of hers? No, I thought not. Ah, well, and but for me this lovely woman would never have been. And very soon happiness will make her a thousand times lovelier, happiness through you. I could give up my place in heaven to you, neighbor, if needs be, and go down to hell instead. Come, let us have dinner," he added, scarcely knowing what he said, "everything is ours."

°°°°"Poor dear father!"

°°°°He rose and went over to her, and took her face in his hands, and set a kiss on the plaits of hair. "If you only knew, little one, how happy you can make me--how little it takes to make me happy! Will you come and see me sometimes? I shall be just above, so it is only a step. Promise me, say that you will!"

°°°°"Yes, dear father."

°°°°"Say it again."

°°°°"Yes, I will, my kind father."

°°°°"Hush! hush! I should make you say it a hundred times over if I followed my own wishes. Let us have dinner."

°°°°The three behaved like children that evening, and Father Goriot's spirits were certainly not the least wild. He lay at his daughter's feet, kissed them, gazed into her eyes, rubbed his head against her dress; in short, no young lover could have been more extravagant or more tender.

°°°°"You see!" Delphine said with a look at Eugene, "so long as my father is with us, he monopolizes me. He will be rather in the way sometimes."

°°°°Eugene had himself already felt certain twinges of jealousy, and could not blame this speech that contained the germ of all ingratitude.

°°°°"And when will the rooms be ready?" asked Eugene, looking round. "We must all leave them this evening, I suppose."

°°°°"Yes, but to-morrow you must come and dine with me," she answered, with an eloquent glance. "It is our night at the Italiens."

°°°°"I shall go to the pit," said her father.

°°°°It was midnight. Mme. de Nucingen's carriage was waiting for her, and Father Goriot and the student walked back to the Maison Vauquer, talking of Delphine, and warming over their talk till there grew up a curious rivalry between the two violent passions. Eugene could not help seeing that the father's self-less love was deeper and more steadfast than his own. For this worshiper Delphine was always pure and fair, and her father's adoration drew its fervor from a whole past as well as a future of love.

°°°°They found Mme. Vauquer by the stove, with Sylvie and Christophe to keep her company; the old landlady, sitting like Marius among the ruins of Carthage, was waiting for the two lodgers that yet remained to her, and bemoaning her lot with the sympathetic Sylvie. Tasso's lamentations as recorded in Byron's poem are undoubtedly eloquent, but for sheer force of truth they fall far short of the widow's cry from the depths.

°°°°"Only three cups of coffee in the morning, Sylvie! Oh dear! to have your house emptied in this way is enough to break your heart. What is life, now my lodgers are gone? Nothing at all. Just think of it! It is just as if all the furniture had been taken out of the house, and your furniture is your life. How have I offended heaven to draw down all this trouble upon me? And haricot beans and potatoes laid in for twenty people! The police in my house too! We shall have to live on potatoes now, and Christophe will have to go!"

°°°°The Savoyard, who was fast asleep, suddenly woke up at this, and said, "Madame," questioningly.

°°°°"Poor fellow!" said Sylvie, "he is like a dog."

°°°°"In the dead season, too! Nobody is moving now. I would like to know where the lodgers are to drop down from. It drives me distracted. And that old witch of a Michonneau goes and takes Poiret with her! What can she have done to make him so fond of her? He runs about after her like a little dog."

°°°°"Lord!" said Sylvie, flinging up her head, "those old maids are up to all sorts of tricks."

°°°°"There's that poor M. Vautrin that they made out to be a convict," the widow went on. "Well, you know that is too much for me, Sylvie; I can't bring myself to believe it. Such a lively man as he was, and paid fifteen francs a month for his coffee of an evening, paid you very penny on the nail too."

°°°°"And open-handed he was!" said Christophe.

°°°°"There is some mistake," said Sylvie.

°°°°"Why, no there isn't! he said so himself!" said Mme. Vauquer. "And to think that all these things have happened in my house, and in a quarter where you never see a cat go by. On my word as an honest woman, it's like a dream. For, look here, we saw Louis XVI. meet with his mishap; we saw the fall of the Emperor; and we saw him come back and fall again; there was nothing out of the way in all that, but lodging-houses are not liable to revolutions. You can do without a king, but you must eat all the same; and so long as a decent woman, a de Conflans born and bred, will give you all sorts of good things for dinner, nothing short of the end of the world ought to--but there, it is the end of the world, that is just what it is!"

°°°°"And to think that Mlle. Michonneau who made all this mischief is to have a thousand crowns a year for it, so I hear," cried Sylvie.

°°°°"Don't speak of her, she is a wicked woman!" said Mme. Vauquer. "She is going to the Buneaud, who charges less than cost. But the Buneaud is capable of anything; she must have done frightful things, robbed and murdered people in her time. SHE ought to be put in jail for life instead of that poor dear----"

°°°°Eugene and Goriot rang the door-bell at that moment.

°°°°"Ah! here are my two faithful lodgers," said the widow, sighing.

°°°°But the two faithful lodgers, who retained but shadowy recollections of the misfortunes of their lodging-house, announced to their hostess without more ado that they were about to remove to the Chaussee d'Antin.

°°°°"Sylvie!" cried the widow, "this is the last straw.--Gentlemen, this will be the death of me! It has quite upset me! There's a weight on my chest! I am ten years older for this day! Upon my word, I shall go out of my senses! And what is to be done with the haricots!--Oh, well, if I am to be left here all by myself, you shall go to-morrow, Christophe.--Good-night, gentlemen," and she went.

°°°°"What is the matter now?" Eugene inquired of Sylvie.

°°°°"Lord! everybody is going about his business, and that has addled her wits. There! she is crying upstairs. It will do her good to snivel a bit. It's the first time she has cried since I've been with her."

°°°°By the morning, Mme. Vauquer, to use her own expression, had "made up her mind to it." True, she still wore a doleful countenance, as might be expected of a woman who had lost all her lodgers, and whose manner of life had been suddenly revolutionized, but she had all her wits about her. Her grief was genuine and profound; it was real pain of mind, for her purse had suffered, the routine of her existence had been broken. A lover's farewell glance at his lady-love's window is not more mournful than Mme. Vauquer's survey of the empty places round her table. Eugene administered comfort, telling the widow that Bianchon, whose term of residence at the hospital was about to expire, would doubtless take his (Rastignac's) place; that the official from the Museum had often expressed a desire to have Mme. Couture's rooms; and that in a very few days her household would be on the old footing.

°°°°"God send it may, my dear sir! but bad luck has come to lodge here. There'll be a death in the house before ten days are out, you'll see," and she gave a lugubrious look round the dining- room. "Whose turn will it be, I wonder?"

°°°°"It is just as well that we are moving out," said Eugene to Father Goriot in a low voice.

°°°°"Madame," said Sylvie, running in with a scared face, "I have not seen Mistigris these three days."

°°°°"Ah! well, if my cat is dead, if HE has gone and left us, I----"

°°°°The poor woman could not finish her sentence; she clasped her hands and hid her face on the back of her armchair, quite overcome by this dreadful portent.

°°°°By twelve o'clock, when the postman reaches that quarter, Eugene received a letter. The dainty envelope bore the Beauseant arms on the seal, and contained an invitation to the Vicomtesse's great ball, which had been talked of in Paris for a month. A little note for Eugene was slipped in with the card.

°°°°"I think, monsieur, that you will undertake with pleasure to   interpret my sentiments to Mme. de Nucingen, so I am sending the   card for which you asked me to you. I shall be delighted to make   the acquaintance of Mme. de Restaud's sister. Pray introduce that   charming lady to me, and do not let her monopolize all your   affection, for you owe me not a little in return for mine.   "VICOMTESSE DE BEAUSEANT."

°°°°"Well," said Eugene to himself, as he read the note a second time, "Mme. de Beauseant says pretty plainly that she does not want the Baron de Nucingen."

°°°°He went to Delphine at once in his joy. He had procured this pleasure for her, and doubtless he would receive the price of it. Mme. de Nucingen was dressing. Rastignac waited in her boudoir, enduring as best he might the natural impatience of an eager temperament for the reward desired and withheld for a year. Such sensations are only known once in a life. The first woman to whom a man is drawn, if she is really a woman--that is to say, if she appears to him amid the splendid accessories that form a necessary background to life in the world of Paris--will never have a rival.

°°°°Love in Paris is a thing distinct and apart; for in Paris neither men nor women are the dupes of the commonplaces by which people seek to throw a veil over their motives, or to parade a fine affectation of disinterestedness in their sentiments. In this country within a country, it is not merely required of a woman that she should satisfy the senses and the soul; she knows perfectly well that she has still greater obligations to discharge, that she must fulfil the countless demands of a vanity that enters into every fibre of that living organism called society. Love, for her, is above all things, and by its very nature, a vainglorious, brazen-fronted, ostentatious, thriftless charlatan. If at the Court of Louis XIV. there was not a woman but envied Mlle. de la Valliere the reckless devotion of passion that led the grand monarch to tear the priceless ruffles at his wrists in order to assist the entry of a Duc de Vermandois into the world--what can you expect of the rest of society? You must have youth and wealth and rank; nay, you must, if possible, have more than these, for the more incense you bring with you to burn at the shrine of the god, the more favorably will he regard the worshiper. Love is a religion, and his cult must in the nature of things be more costly than those of all other deities; Love the Spoiler stays for a moment, and then passes on; like the urchin of the streets, his course may be traced by the ravages that he has made. The wealth of feeling and imagination is the poetry of the garret; how should love exist there without that wealth?

°°°°If there are exceptions who do not subscribe to these Draconian laws of the Parisian code, they are solitary examples. Such souls live so far out of the main current that they are not borne away by the doctrines of society; they dwell beside some clear spring of everflowing water, without seeking to leave the green shade; happy to listen to the echoes of the infinite in everything around them and in their own souls, waiting in patience to take their flight for heaven, while they look with pity upon those of earth.

°°°°Rastignac, like most young men who have been early impressed by the circumstances of power and grandeur, meant to enter the lists fully armed; the burning ambition of conquest possessed him already; perhaps he was conscious of his powers, but as yet he knew neither the end to which his ambition was to be directed, nor the means of attaining it. In default of the pure and sacred love that fills a life, ambition may become something very noble, subduing to itself every thought of personal interest, and setting as the end--the greatness, not of one man, but of a whole nation.

°°°°But the student had not yet reached the time of life when a man surveys the whole course of existence and judges it soberly. Hitherto he had scarcely so much as shaken off the spell of the fresh and gracious influences that envelop a childhood in the country, like green leaves and grass. He had hesitated on the brink of the Parisian Rubicon, and in spite of the prickings of ambition, he still clung to a lingering tradition of an old ideal--the peaceful life of the noble in his chateau. But yesterday evening, at the sight of his rooms, those scruples had vanished. He had learned what it was to enjoy the material advantages of fortune, as he had already enjoyed the social advantages of birth; he ceased to be a provincial from that moment, and slipped naturally and easily into a position which opened up a prospect of a brilliant future.

°°°°So, as he waited for Delphine, in the pretty boudoir, where he felt that he had a certain right to be, he felt himself so far away from the Rastignac who came back to Paris a year ago, that, turning some power of inner vision upon this latter, he asked himself whether that past self bore any resemblance to the Rastignac of that moment.

°°°°"Madame is in her room," Therese came to tell him. The woman's voice made him start.

°°°°He found Delphine lying back in her low chair by the fireside, looking fresh and bright. The sight of her among the flowing draperies of muslin suggested some beautiful tropical flower, where the fruit is set amid the blossom.

°°°°"Well," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "here you are."

°°°°"Guess what I bring for you," said Eugene, sitting down beside her. He took possession of her arm to kiss her hand

°°°°Mme. de Nucingen gave a joyful start as she saw the card. She turned to Eugene; there were tears in her eyes as she flung her arms about his neck, and drew him towards her in a frenzy of gratified vanity.

°°°°"And I owe this happiness to you--to THEE" (she whispered the more intimate word in his ear); "but Therese is in my dressing- room, let us be prudent.--This happiness--yes, for I may call it so, when it comes to me through YOU--is surely more than a triumph for self-love? No one has been willing to introduce me into that set. Perhaps just now I may seem to you to be frivolous, petty, shallow, like a Parisienne, but remember, my friend, that I am ready to give up all for you; and that if I long more than ever for an entrance into the Faubourg Saint- Germain, it is because I shall meet you there."

°°°°"Mme. de Beauseant's note seems to say very plainly that she does not expect to see the BARON de Nucingen at her ball; don't you think so?" said Eugene.

°°°°"Why, yes," said the Baroness as she returned the letter. "Those women have a talent for insolence. But it is of no consequence, I shall go. My sister is sure to be there, and sure to be very beautifully dressed.--Eugene," she went on, lowering her voice, "she will go to dispel ugly suspicions. You do not know the things that people are saying about her. Only this morning Nucingen came to tell me that they had been discussing her at the club. Great heavens! on what does a woman's character and the honor of a whole family depend! I feel that I am nearly touched and wounded in my poor sister. According to some people, M. de Trailles must have put his name to bills for a hundred thousand francs, nearly all of them are overdue, and proceedings are threatened. In this predicament, it seems that my sister sold her diamonds to a Jew--the beautiful diamonds that belonged to her husband's mother, Mme. de Restaud the elder,--you have seen her wearing them. In fact, nothing else has been talked about for the last two days. So I can see that Anastasie is sure to come to Mme. de Beauseant's ball in tissue of gold, and ablaze with diamonds, to draw all eyes upon her; and I will not be outshone. She has tried to eclipse me all her life, she has never been kind to me, and I have helped her so often, and always had money for her when she had none.--But never mind other people now, to-day I mean to be perfectly happy."

°°°°At one o'clock that morning Eugene was still with Mme. de Nucingen. In the midst of their lovers' farewell, a farewell full of hope of bliss to come, she said in a troubled voice, "I am very fearful, superstitious. Give what name you like to my presentiments, but I am afraid that my happiness will be paid for by some horrible catastrophe."

°°°°"Child!" said Eugene.

°°°°"Ah! have we changed places, and am I the child to-night?" she asked, laughingly.

°°°°Eugene went back to the Maison Vauquer, never doubting but that he should leave it for good on the morrow; and on the way he fell to dreaming the bright dreams of youth, when the cup of happiness has left its sweetness on the lips.

°°°°"Well?" cried Goriot, as Rastignac passed by his door.

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene; "I will tell you everything to-morrow."

°°°°"Everything, will you not?" cried the old man. "Go to bed. To- morrow our happy life will begin."

°°°°Next day, Goriot and Rastignac were ready to leave the lodging- house, and only awaited the good pleasure of a porter to move out of it; but towards noon there was a sound of wheels in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve, and a carriage stopped before the door of the Maison Vauquer. Mme. de Nucingen alighted, and asked if her father was still in the house, and, receiving an affirmative reply from Sylvie, ran lightly upstairs.

°°°°It so happened that Eugene was at home all unknown to his neighbor. At breakfast time he had asked Goriot to superintend the removal of his goods, saying that he would meet him in the Rue d'Artois at four o'clock; but Rastignac's name had been called early on the list at the Ecole de Droit, and he had gone back at once to the Rue Nueve-Sainte-Genevieve. No one had seen him come in, for Goriot had gone to find a porter, and the mistress of the house was likewise out. Eugene had thought to pay her himself, for it struck him that if he left this, Goriot in his zeal would probably pay for him. As it was, Eugene went up to his room to see that nothing had been forgotten, and blessed his foresight when he saw the blank bill bearing Vautrin's signature lying in the drawer where he had carelessly thrown it on the day when he had repaid the amount. There was no fire in the grate, so he was about to tear it into little pieces, when he heard a voice speaking in Goriot's room, and the speaker was Delphine! He made no more noise, and stood still to listen, thinking that she should have no secrets from him; but after the first few words, the conversation between the father and daughter was so strange and interesting that it absorbed all his attention.

°°°°"Ah! thank heaven that you thought of asking him to give an account of the money settled on me before I was utterly ruined, father. Is it safe to talk?" she added.

°°°°"Yes, there is no one in the house," said her father faintly.

°°°°"What is the matter with you?" asked Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"God forgive you! you have just dealt me a staggering blow, child!" said the old man. "You cannot know how much I love you, or you would not have burst in upon me like this, with such news, especially if all is not lost. Has something so important happened that you must come here about it? In a few minutes we should have been in the Rue d'Artois."

°°°°"Eh! does one think what one is doing after a catastrophe? It has turned my head. Your attorney has found out the state of things now, but it was bound to come out sooner or later. We shall want your long business experience; and I come to you like a drowning man who catches at a branch. When M. Derville found that Nucingen was throwing all sorts of difficulties in his way, he threatened him with proceedings, and told him plainly that he would soon obtain an order from the President of the Tribunal. So Nucingen came to my room this morning, and asked if I meant to ruin us both. I told him that I knew nothing whatever about it, that I had a fortune, and ought to be put into possession of my fortune, and that my attorney was acting for me in the matter; I said again that I knew absolutely nothing about it, and could not possibly go into the subject with him. Wasn't that what you told me to tell him?"

°°°°"Yes, quite right," answered Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then," Delphine continued, "he told me all about his affairs. He had just invested all his capital and mine in business speculations; they have only just been started, and very large sums of money are locked up. If I were to compel him to refund my dowry now, he would be forced to file his petition; but if I will wait a year, he undertakes, on his honor, to double or treble my fortune, by investing it in building land, and I shall be mistress at last of the whole of my property. He was speaking the truth, father dear; he frightened me! He asked my pardon for his conduct; he has given me my liberty; I am free to act as I please on condition that I leave him to carry on my business in my name. To prove his sincerity, he promised that M. Derville might inspect the accounts as often as I pleased, so that I might be assured that everything was being conducted properly. In short, he put himself in my power, bound hand and foot. He wishes the present arrangements as to the expenses of housekeeping to continue for two more years, and entreated me not to exceed my allowance. He showed me plainly that it was all that he could do to keep up appearances; he has broken with his opera dancer; he will be compelled to practise the most strict economy (in secret) if he is to bide his time with unshaken credit. I scolded, I did all I could to drive him to desperation, so as to find out more. He showed me his ledgers--he broke down and cried at last. I never saw a man in such a state. He lost his head completely, talked of killing himself, and raved till I felt quite sorry for him."

°°°°"Do you really believe that silly rubbish?" . . . cried her father. "It was all got up for your benefit! I have had to do with Germans in the way of business, honest and straightforward they are pretty sure to be, but when with their simplicity and frankness they are sharpers and humbugs as well, they are the worst rogues of all. Your husband is taking advantage of you. As soon as pressure is brought to bear on him he shams dead; he means to be more the master under your name than in his own. He will take advantage of the position to secure himself against the risks of business. He is as sharp as he is treacherous; he is a bad lot! No, no; I am not going to leave my girls behind me without a penny when I go to Pere-Lachaise. I know something about business still. He has sunk his money in speculation, he says; very well then, there is something to show for it--bills, receipts, papers of some sort. Let him produce them, and come to an arrangement with you. We will choose the most promising of his speculations, take them over at our own risk, and have the securities transferred into your name; they shall represent the separate estate of Delphine Goriot, wife of the Baron de Nucingen. Does that fellow really take us for idiots? Does he imagine that I could stand the idea of your being without fortune, without bread, for forty-eight hours? I would not stand it a day--no, not a night, not a couple of hours! If there had been any foundation for the idea, I should never get over it. What! I have worked hard for forty years, carried sacks on my back, and sweated and pinched and saved all my life for you, my darlings, for you who made the toil and every burden borne for you seem light; and now, my fortune, my whole life, is to vanish in smoke! I should die raving mad if I believed a word of it. By all that's holiest in heaven and earth, we will have this cleared up at once; go through the books, have the whole business looked thoroughly into! I will not sleep, nor rest, nor eat until I have satisfied myself that all your fortune is in existence. Your money is settled upon you, God be thanked! and, luckily, your attorney, Maitre Derville, is an honest man. Good Lord! you shall have your snug little million, your fifty thousand francs a year, as long as you live, or I will raise a racket in Paris, I will so! If the Tribunals put upon us, I will appeal to the Chambers. If I knew that you were well and comfortably off as far as money is concerned, that thought would keep me easy in spite of bad health and troubles. Money? why, it is life! Money does everything. That great dolt of an Alsatian shall sing to another tune! Look here, Delphine, don't give way, don't make a concession of half a quarter of a farthing to that fathead, who has ground you down and made you miserable. If he can't do without you, we will give him a good cudgeling, and keep him in order. Great heavens! my brain is on fire; it is as if there were something redhot inside my head. My Delphine lying on straw! You! my Fifine! Good gracious! Where are my gloves? Come, let us go at once; I mean to see everything with my own eyes--books, cash, and correspondence, the whole business. I shall have no peace until I know for certain that your fortune is secure."

°°°°"Oh! father dear, be careful how you set about it! If there is the least hint of vengeance in the business, if you show yourself openly hostile, it will be all over with me. He knows whom he has to deal with; he thinks it quite natural that if you put the idea into my head, I should be uneasy about my money; but I swear to you that he has it in his own hands, and that he had meant to keep it. He is just the man to abscond with all the money and leave us in the lurch, the scoundrel! He knows quite well that I will not dishonor the name I bear by bringing him into a court of law. His position is strong and weak at the same time. If we drive him to despair, I am lost."

°°°°"Why, then, the man is a rogue?"

°°°°"Well, yes, father," she said, flinging herself into a chair, "I wanted to keep it from you to spare your feelings," and she burst into tears; "I did not want you to know that you had married me to such a man as he is. He is just the same in private life--body and soul and conscience--the same through and through--hideous! I hate him; I despise him! Yes, after all that that despicable Nucingen has told me, I cannot respect him any longer. A man capable of mixing himself up in such affairs, and of talking about them to me as he did, without the slightest scruple,--it is because I have read him through and through that I am afraid of him. He, my husband, frankly proposed to give me my liberty, and do you know what that means? It means that if things turn out badly for him, I am to play into his hands, and be his stalking- horse."

°°°°"But there is law to be had! There is a Place de Greve for sons- in-law of that sort," cried her father; "why, I would guillotine him myself if there was no headsman to do it."

°°°°"No, father, the law cannot touch him. Listen, this is what he says, stripped of all his circumlocutions--'Take your choice, you and no one else can be my accomplice; either everything is lost, you are ruined and have not a farthing, or you will let me carry this business through myself.' Is that plain speaking? He MUST have my assistance. He is assured that his wife will deal fairly by him; he knows that I shall leave his money to him and be content with my own. It is an unholy and dishonest compact, and he holds out threats of ruin to compel me to consent to it. He is buying my conscience, and the price is liberty to be Eugene's wife in all but name. 'I connive at your errors, and you allow me to commit crimes and ruin poor families!' Is that sufficiently explicit? Do you know what he means by speculations? He buys up land in his own name, then he finds men of straw to run up houses upon it. These men make a bargain with a contractor to build the houses, paying them by bills at long dates; then in consideration of a small sum they leave my husband in possession of the houses, and finally slip through the fingers of the deluded contractors by going into bankruptcy. The name of the firm of Nucingen has been used to dazzle the poor contractors. I saw that. I noticed, too, that Nucingen had sent bills for large amounts to Amsterdam, London, Naples, and Vienna, in order to prove if necessary that large sums had been paid away by the firm. How could we get possession of those bills?"

°°°°Eugene heard a dull thud on the floor; Father Goriot must have fallen on his knees.

°°°°"Great heavens! what have I done to you? Bound my daughter to this scoundrel who does as he likes with her!--Oh! my child, my child! forgive me!" cried the old man.

°°°°"Yes, if I am in the depths of despair, perhaps you are to blame," said Delphine. "We have so little sense when we marry! What do we know of the world, of business, or men, or life? Our fathers should think for us! Father dear, I am not blaming you in the least, forgive me for what I said. This is all my own fault. Nay, do not cry, papa," she said, kissing him.

°°°°"Do not cry either, my little Delphine. Look up and let me kiss away the tears. There! I shall find my wits and unravel this skein of your husband's winding."

°°°°"No, let me do that; I shall be able to manage him. He is fond of me, well and good; I shall use my influence to make him invest my money as soon as possible in landed property in my own name. Very likely I could get him to buy back Nucingen in Alsace in my name; that has always been a pet idea of his. Still, come to-morrow and go through the books, and look into the business. M. Derville knows little of mercantile matters. No, not to-morrow though. I do not want to be upset. Mme. de Beauseant's ball will be the day after to-morrow, and I must keep quiet, so as to look my best and freshest, and do honor to my dear Eugene! . . . Come, let us see his room."

°°°°But as she spoke a carriage stopped in the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve, and the sound of Mme. de Restaud's voice came from the staircase. "Is my father in?" she asked of Sylvie.

°°°°This accident was luckily timed for Eugene, whose one idea had been to throw himself down on the bed and pretend to be asleep.

°°°°"Oh, father, have you heard about Anastasie?" said Delphine, when she heard her sister speak. "It looks as though some strange things had happened in that family."

°°°°"What sort of things?" asked Goriot. "This is like to be the death of me. My poor head will not stand a double misfortune."

°°°°"Good-morning, father," said the Countess from the threshold. "Oh! Delphine, are you here?"

°°°°Mme. de Restaud seemed taken aback by her sister's presence.

°°°°"Good-morning, Nasie," said the Baroness. "What is there so extraordinary in my being here? _I_ see our father every day."

°°°°"Since when?"

°°°°"If you came yourself you would know."

°°°°"Don't tease, Delphine," said the Countess fretfully. "I am very miserable, I am lost. Oh! my poor father, it is hopeless this time!"

°°°°"What is it, Nasie?" cried Goriot. "Tell us all about it, child! How white she is! Quick, do something, Delphine; be kind to her, and I will love you even better, if that were possible."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Mme. de Nucingen, drawing her sister to a chair. "We are the only two people in the world whose love is always sufficient to forgive you everything. Family affection is the surest, you see."

°°°°The Countess inhaled the salts and revived.

°°°°"This will kill me!" said their father. "There," he went on, stirring the smouldering fire, "come nearer, both of you. It is cold. What is it, Nasie? Be quick and tell me, this is enough to----"

°°°°"Well, then, my husband knows everything," said the Countess. "Just imagine it; do you remember, father, that bill of Maxime's some time ago? Well, that was not the first. I had paid ever so many before that. About the beginning of January M. de Trailles seemed very much troubled. He said nothing to me; but it is so easy to read the hearts of those you love, a mere trifle is enough; and then you feel things instinctively. Indeed, he was more tender and affectionate than ever, and I was happier than I had ever been before. Poor Maxime! in himself he was really saying good-bye to me, so he has told me since; he meant to blow his brains out! At last I worried him so, and begged and implored so hard; for two hours I knelt at his knees and prayed and entreated, and at last he told me--that he owed a hundred thousand francs. Oh! papa! a hundred thousand francs! I was beside myself! You had not the money, I knew, I had eaten up all that you had----"

°°°°"No," said Goriot; "I could not have got it for you unless I had stolen it. But I would have done that for you, Nasie! I will do it yet."

°°°°The words came from him like a sob, a hoarse sound like the death rattle of a dying man; it seemed indeed like the agony of death when the father's love was powerless. There was a pause, and neither of the sisters spoke. It must have been selfishness indeed that could hear unmoved that cry of anguish that, like a pebble thrown over a precipice, revealed the depths of his despair.

°°°°"I found the money, father, by selling what was not mine to sell," and the Countess burst into tears.

°°°°Delphine was touched; she laid her head on her sister's shoulder, and cried too.

°°°°"Then it is all true," she said.

°°°°Anastasie bowed her head, Mme. de Nucingen flung her arms about her, kissed her tenderly, and held her sister to her heart.

°°°°"I shall always love you and never judge you, Nasie," she said.

°°°°"My angels," murmured Goriot faintly. "Oh, why should it be trouble that draws you together?"

°°°°This warm and palpitating affection seemed to give the Countess courage.

°°°°"To save Maxime's life," she said, "to save all my own happiness, I went to the money-lender you know of, a man of iron forged in hell-fire; nothing can melt him; I took all the family diamonds that M. de Restaud is so proud of--his and mine too--and sold them to that M. Gobseck. SOLD THEM! Do you understand? I saved Maxime, but I am lost. Restaud found it all out."

°°°°"How? Who told him? I will kill him," cried Goriot.

°°°°"Yesterday he sent to tell me to come to his room. I went. . . . 'Anastasie,' he said in a voice--oh! such a voice; that was enough, it told me everything--'where are your diamonds?'--'In my room----'--'No,' he said, looking straight at me, 'there they are on that chest of drawers----' and he lifted his handkerchief and showed me the casket. 'Do you know where they came from?' he said. I fell at his feet. . . . I cried; I besought him to tell me the death he wished to see me die."

°°°°"You said that!" cried Goriot. "By God in heaven, whoever lays a hand on either of you so long as I am alive may reckon on being roasted by slow fires! Yes, I will cut him in pieces like . . ."

°°°°Goriot stopped; the words died away in his throat.

°°°°"And then, dear, he asked something worse than death of me. Oh! heaven preserve all other women from hearing such words as I heard then!"

°°°°"I will murder that man," said Goriot quietly. "But he has only one life, and he deserves to die twice.--And then, what next?" he added, looking at Anastasie.

°°°°"Then," the Countess resumed, "there was a pause, and he looked at me. 'Anastasie,' he said, 'I will bury this in silence; there shall be no separation; there are the children. I will not kill M. de Trailles. I might miss him if we fought, and as for other ways of getting rid of him, I should come into collision with the law. If I killed him in your arms, it would bring dishonor on THOSE children. But if you do not want to see your children perish, nor their father nor me, you must first of all submit to two conditions. Answer me. Have I a child of my own?' I answered, 'Yes,'--'Which?'--'Ernest, our eldest boy.'--'Very well,' he said, 'and now swear to obey me in this particular from this time forward.' I swore. 'You will make over your property to me when I require you to do so.' "

°°°°"Do nothing of the kind!" cried Goriot. "Aha! M. de Restaud, you could not make your wife happy; she has looked for happiness and found it elsewhere, and you make her suffer for your own ineptitude? He will have to reckon with me. Make yourself easy, Nasie. Aha! he cares about his heir! Good, very good. I will get hold of the boy; isn't he my grandson? What the blazes! I can surely go to see the brat! I will stow him away somewhere; I will take care of him, you may be quite easy. I will bring Restaud to terms, the monster! I shall say to him, 'A word or two with you! If you want your son back again, give my daughter her property, and leave her to do as she pleases.' "

°°°°"Father!"

°°°°"Yes. I am your father, Nasie, a father indeed! That rogue of a great lord had better not ill-treat my daughter. Tonnerre! What is it in my veins? There is the blood of a tiger in me; I could tear those two men to pieces! Oh! children, children! so this is what your lives are! Why, it is death! . . . What will become of you when I shall be here no longer? Fathers ought to live as long as their children. Ah! Lord God in heaven! how ill Thy world is ordered! Thou hast a Son, if what they tell us is true, and yet Thou leavest us to suffer so through our children. My darlings, my darlings! to think that trouble only should bring you to me, that I should only see you with tears on your faces! Ah! yes, yes, you love me, I see that you love me. Come to me and pour out your griefs to me; my heart is large enough to hold them all. Oh! you might rend my heart in pieces, and every fragment would make a father's heart. If only I could bear all your sorrows for you! . . . Ah! you were so happy when you were little and still with me. . . ."

°°°°"We have never been happy since," said Delphine. "Where are the old days when we slid down the sacks in the great granary?"

°°°°"That is not all, father," said Anastasie in Goriot's ear. The old man gave a startled shudder. "The diamonds only sold for a hundred thousand francs. Maxime is hard pressed. There are twelve thousand francs still to pay. He has given me his word that he will be steady and give up play in future. His love is all that I have left in the world. I have paid such a fearful price for it that I should die if I lose him now. I have sacrificed my fortune, my honor, my peace of mind, and my children for him. Oh! do something, so that at the least Maxime may be at large and live undisgraced in the world, where he will assuredly make a career for himself. Something more than my happiness is at stake; the children have nothing, and if he is sent to Sainte-Pelagie all his prospects will be ruined."

°°°°"I haven't the money, Nasie. I have NOTHING--nothing left. This is the end of everything. Yes, the world is crumbling into ruin, I am sure. Fly! Save yourselves! Ah!--I have still my silver buckles left, and half-a-dozen silver spoons and forks, the first I ever had in my life. But I have nothing else except my life annuity, twelve hundred francs . . ."

°°°°"Then what has become of your money in the funds?"

°°°°"I sold out, and only kept a trifle for my wants. I wanted twelve thousand francs to furnish some rooms for Delphine."

°°°°"In your own house?" asked Mme. de Restaud, looking at her sister.

°°°°"What does it matter where they were?" asked Goriot. "The money is spent now."

°°°°"I see how it is," said the Countess. "Rooms for M. de Rastignac. Poor Delphine, take warning by me!"

°°°°"M. de Rastignac is incapable of ruining the woman he loves, dear."

°°°°"Thanks! Delphine. I thought you would have been kinder to me in my troubles, but you never did love me."

°°°°"Yes, yes, she loves you, Nasie," cried Goriot; "she was saying so only just now. We were talking about you, and she insisted that you were beautiful, and that she herself was only pretty!"

°°°°"Pretty!" said the Countess. "She is as hard as a marble statue."

°°°°"And if I am?" cried Delphine, flushing up, "how have you treated me? You would not recognize me; you closed the doors of every house against me; you have never let an opportunity of mortifying me slip by. And when did I come, as you were always doing, to drain our poor father, a thousand francs at a time, till he is left as you see him now? That is all your doing, sister! I myself have seen my father as often as I could. I have not turned him out of the house, and then come and fawned upon him when I wanted money. I did not so much as know that he had spent those twelve thousand francs on me. I am economical, as you know; and when papa has made me presents, it has never been because I came and begged for them."

°°°°"You were better off than I. M. de Marsay was rich, as you have reason to know. You always were as slippery as gold. Good-bye; I have neither sister nor----"

°°°°"Oh! hush, hush, Nasie!" cried her father.

°°°°"Nobody else would repeat what everybody has ceased to believe. You are an unnatural sister!" cried Delphine.

°°°°"Oh, children, children! hush! hush! or I will kill myself before your eyes."

°°°°"There, Nasie, I forgive you," said Mme. de Nucingen; "you are very unhappy. But I am kinder than you are. How could you say THAT just when I was ready to do anything in the world to help you, even to be reconciled with my husband, which for my own sake I---- Oh! it is just like you; you have behaved cruelly to me all through these nine years."

°°°°"Children, children, kiss each other!" cried the father. "You are angels, both of you."

°°°°"No. Let me alone," cried the Countess shaking off the hand that her father had laid on her arm. "She is more merciless than my husband. Any one might think she was a model of all the virtues herself!"

°°°°"I would rather have people think that I owed money to M. de Marsay than own that M. de Trailles had cost me more than two hundred thousand francs," retorted Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°"DELPHINE!" cried the Countess, stepping towards her sister.

°°°°"I shall tell you the truth about yourself if you begin to slander me," said the Baroness coldly.

°°°°"Delphine! you are a ----"

°°°°Father Goriot sprang between them, grasped the Countess' hand, and laid his own over her mouth.

°°°°"Good heavens, father! What have you been handling this morning?" said Anastasie.

°°°°"Ah! well, yes, I ought not to have touched you," said the poor father, wiping his hands on his trousers, "but I have been packing up my things; I did not know that you were coming to see me."

°°°°He was glad that he had drawn down her wrath upon himself.

°°°°"Ah!" he sighed, as he sat down, "you children have broken my heart between you. This is killing me. My head feels as if it were on fire. Be good to each other and love each other! This will be the death of me! Delphine! Nasie! come, be sensible; you are both in the wrong. Come, Dedel," he added, looking through his tears at the Baroness, "she must have twelve thousand francs, you see; let us see if we can find them for her. Oh, my girls, do not look at each other like that!" and he sank on his knees beside Delphine. "Ask her to forgive you--just to please me," he said in her ear. "She is more miserable than you are. Come now, Dedel."

°°°°"Poor Nasie!" said Delphine, alarmed at the wild extravagant grief in her father's face, "I was in the wrong, kiss me----"

°°°°"Ah! that is like balm to my heart," cried Father Goriot. "But how are we to find twelve thousand francs? I might offer myself as a substitute in the army----"

°°°°"Oh! father dear!" they both cried, flinging their arms about him. "No, no!"

°°°°"God reward you for the thought. We are not worth it, are we, Nasie?" asked Delphine.

°°°°"And besides, father dear, it would only be a drop in the bucket," observed the Countess.

°°°°"But is flesh and blood worth nothing?" cried the old man in his despair. "I would give body and soul to save you, Nasie. I would do a murder for the man who would rescue you. I would do, as Vautrin did, go to the hulks, go----" he stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and put both hands to his head. "Nothing left!" he cried, tearing his hair. "If I only knew of a way to steal money, but it is so hard to do it, and then you can't set to work by yourself, and it takes time to rob a bank. Yes, it is time I was dead; there is nothing left me to do but to die. I am no good in the world; I am no longer a father! No. She has come to me in her extremity, and, wretch that I am, I have nothing to give her. Ah! you put your money into a life annuity, old scoundrel; and had you not daughters? You did not love them. Die, die in a ditch, like the dog that you are! Yes, I am worse than a dog; a beast would not have done as I have done! Oh! my head . . . it throbs as if it would burst."

°°°°"Papa!" cried both the young women at once, "do, pray, be reasonable!" and they clung to him to prevent him from dashing his head against the wall. There was a sound of sobbing.

°°°°Eugene, greatly alarmed, took the bill that bore Vautrin's signature, saw that the stamp would suffice for a larger sum, altered the figures, made it into a regular bill for twelve thousand francs, payable to Goriot's order, and went to his neighbor's room.

°°°°"Here is the money, madame," he said, handing the piece of paper to her. "I was asleep; your conversation awoke me, and by this means I learned all that I owed to M. Goriot. This bill can be discounted, and I shall meet it punctually at the due date."

°°°°The Countess stood motionless and speechless, but she held the bill in her fingers.

°°°°"Delphine," she said, with a white face, and her whole frame quivering with indignation, anger, and rage, "I forgave you everything; God is my witness that I forgave you, but I cannot forgive this! So this gentleman was there all the time, and you knew it! Your petty spite has let you to wreak your vengeance on me by betraying my secrets, my life, my children's lives, my shame, my honor! There, you are nothing to me any longer. I hate you. I will do all that I can to injure you. I will . . ."

°°°°Anger paralyzed her; the words died in her dry parched throat.

°°°°"Why, he is my son, my child; he is your brother, your preserver!" cried Goriot. "Kiss his hand, Nasie! Stay, I will embrace him myself," he said, straining Eugene to his breast in a frenzied clasp. "Oh my boy! I will be more than a father to you; if I had God's power, I would fling worlds at your feet. Why don't you kiss him, Nasie? He is not a man, but an angel, a angel out of heaven."

°°°°"Never mind her, father; she is mad just now."

°°°°"Mad! am I? And what are you?" cried Mme. de Restaud.

°°°°"Children, children, I shall die if you go on like this," cried the old man, and he staggered and fell on the bed as if a bullet had struck him.--"They are killing me between them," he said to himself.

°°°°The Countess fixed her eyes on Eugene, who stood stock still; all his faculties were numbed by this violent scene.

°°°°"Sir? . . ." she said, doubt and inquiry in her face, tone, and bearing; she took no notice now of her father nor of Delphine, who was hastily unfastening his waistcoat.

°°°°"Madame," said Eugene, answering the question before it was asked, "I will meet the bill, and keep silence about it."

°°°°"You have killed our father, Nasie!" said Delphine, pointing to Goriot, who lay unconscious on the bed. The Countess fled.

°°°°"I freely forgive her," said the old man, opening his eyes; "her position is horrible; it would turn an older head than hers. Comfort Nasie, and be nice to her, Delphine; promise it to your poor father before he dies," he asked, holding Delphine's hand in a convulsive clasp.

°°°°"Oh! what ails you, father?" she cried in real alarm.

°°°°"Nothing, nothing," said Goriot; "it will go off. There is something heavy pressing on my forehead, a little headache. . . . Ah! poor Nasie, what a life lies before her!"

°°°°Just as he spoke, the Countess came back again and flung herself on her knees before him. "Forgive me!" she cried.

°°°°"Come," said her father, "you are hurting me still more."

°°°°"Monsieur," the Countess said, turning to Rastignac, "misery made me unjust to you. You will be a brother to me, will you not?" and she held out her hand. Her eyes were full of tears as she spoke.

°°°°"Nasie," cried Delphine, flinging her arms round her sister, "my little Nasie, let us forget and forgive."

°°°°"No, no," cried Nasie; "I shall never forget!"

°°°°"Dear angels," cried Goriot, "it is as if a dark curtain over my eyes had been raised; your voices have called me back to life. Kiss each other once more. Well, now, Nasie, that bill will save you, won't it?"

°°°°"I hope so. I say, papa, will you write your name on it?"

°°°°"There! how stupid of me to forget that! But I am not feeling at all well, Nasie, so you must not remember it against me. Send and let me know as soon as you are out of your strait. No, I will go to you. No, after all, I will not go; I might meet your husband, and I should kill him on the spot. And as for signing away your property, I shall have a word to say about that. Quick, my child, and keep Maxime in order in future."

°°°°Eugene was too bewildered to speak.

°°°°"Poor Anastasie, she always had a violent temper," said Mme. de Nucingen, "but she has a good heart."

°°°°"She came back for the endorsement," said Eugene in Delphine's ear.

°°°°"Do you think so?"

°°°°"I only wish I could think otherwise. Do not trust her," he answered, raising his eyes as if he confided to heaven the thoughts that he did not venture to express.

°°°°"Yes. She is always acting a part to some extent."

°°°°"How do you feel now, dear Father Goriot?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"I should like to go to sleep," he replied.

°°°°Eugene helped him to bed, and Delphine sat by the bedside, holding his hand until he fell asleep. Then she went.

°°°°"This evening at the Italiens," she said to Eugene, "and you can let me know how he is. To-morrow you will leave this place, monsieur. Let us go into your room.--Oh! how frightful!" she cried on the threshold. "Why, you are even worse lodged than our father. Eugene, you have behaved well. I would love you more if that were possible; but, dear boy, if you are to succeed in life, you must not begin by flinging twelve thousand francs out of the windows like that. The Comte de Trailles is a confirmed gambler. My sister shuts her eyes to it. He would have made the twelve thousand francs in the same way that he wins and loses heaps of gold."

°°°°A groan from the next room brought them back to Goriot's bedside; to all appearances he was asleep, but the two lovers caught the words, "They are not happy!" Whether he was awake or sleeping, the tone in which they were spoken went to his daughter's heart. She stole up to the pallet-bed on which her father lay, and kissed his forehead. He opened his eyes.

°°°°"Ah! Delphine!" he said.

°°°°"How are you now?" she asked.

°°°°"Quite comfortable. Do not worry about me; I shall get up presently. Don't stay with me, children; go, go and be happy."

°°°°Eugene went back with Delphine as far as her door; but he was not easy about Goriot, and would not stay to dinner, as she proposed. He wanted to be back at the Maison Vauquer. Father Goriot had left his room, and was just sitting down to dinner as he came in. Bianchon had placed himself where he could watch the old man carefully; and when the old vermicelli maker took up his square of bread and smelled it to find out the quality of the flour, the medical student, studying him closely, saw that the action was purely mechanical, and shook his head.

°°°°"Just come and sit over here, hospitaller of Cochin," said Eugene.

°°°°Bianchon went the more willingly because his change of place brought him next to the old lodger.

°°°°"What is wrong with him?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"It is all up with him, or I am much mistaken! Something very extraordinary must have taken place; he looks to me as if he were in imminent danger of serous apoplexy. The lower part of his face is composed enough, but the upper part is drawn and distorted. Then there is that peculiar look about the eyes that indicates an effusion of serum in the brain; they look as though they were covered with a film of fine dust, do you notice? I shall know more about it by to-morrow morning."

°°°°"Is there any cure for it?"

°°°°"None. It might be possible to stave death off for a time if a way could be found of setting up a reaction in the lower extremities; but if the symptoms do not abate by to-morrow evening, it will be all over with him, poor old fellow! Do you know what has happened to bring this on? There must have been some violent shock, and his mind has given way."

°°°°"Yes, there was," said Rastignac, remembering how the two daughters had struck blow on blow at their father's heart.

°°°°"But Delphine at any rate loves her father," he said to himself.

°°°°That evening at the opera Rastignac chose his words carefully, lest he should give Mme. de Nucingen needless alarm.

°°°°"Do not be anxious about him," she said, however, as soon as Eugene began, "our father has really a strong constitution, but this morning we gave him a shock. Our whole fortunes were in peril, so the thing was serious, you see. I could not live if your affection did not make me insensible to troubles that I should once have thought too hard to bear. At this moment I have but one fear left, but one misery to dread--to lose the love that has made me feel glad to live. Everything else is as nothing to me compared with our love; I care for nothing else, for you are all the world to me. If I feel glad to be rich, it is for your sake. To my shame be it said, I think of my lover before my father. Do you ask why? I cannot tell you, but all my life is in you. My father gave me a heart, but you have taught it to beat. The whole world may condemn me; what does it matter if I stand acquitted in your eyes, for you have no right to think ill of me for the faults which a tyrannous love has forced me to commit for you! Do you think me an unnatural daughter? Oh! no, no one could help loving such a dear kind father as ours. But how could I hide the inevitable consequences of our miserable marriages from him? Why did he allow us to marry when we did? Was it not his duty to think for us and foresee for us? To-day I know he suffers as much as we do, but how can it be helped? And as for comforting him, we could not comfort him in the least. Our resignation would give him more pain and hurt him far more than complaints and upbraidings. There are times in life when everything turns to bitterness."

°°°°Eugene was silent, the artless and sincere outpouring made an impression on him.

°°°°Parisian women are often false, intoxicated with vanity, selfish and self-absorbed, frivolous and shallow; yet of all women, when they love, they sacrifice their personal feelings to their passion; they rise but so much the higher for all the pettiness overcome in their nature, and become sublime. Then Eugene was struck by the profound discernment and insight displayed by this woman in judging of natural affection, when a privileged affection had separated and set her at a distance apart. Mme. de Nucingen was piqued by the silence,

°°°°"What are you thinking about?" she asked.

°°°°"I am thinking about what you said just now. Hitherto I have always felt sure that I cared far more for you than you did for me."

°°°°She smiled, and would not give way to the happiness she felt, lest their talk should exceed the conventional limits of propriety. She had never heard the vibrating tones of a sincere and youthful love; a few more words, and she feared for her self- control.

°°°°"Eugene," she said, changing the conversation, "I wonder whether you know what has been happening? All Paris will go to Mme. de Beauseant's to-morrow. The Rochefides and the Marquis d'Ajuda have agreed to keep the matter a profound secret, but to-morrow the king will sign the marriage-contract, and your poor cousin the Vicomtesse knows nothing of it as yet. She cannot put off her ball, and the Marquis will not be there. People are wondering what will happen?"

°°°°"The world laughs at baseness and connives at it. But this will kill Mme. de Beauseant."

°°°°"Oh, no," said Delphine, smiling, "you do not know that kind of woman. Why, all Paris will be there, and so shall I; I ought to go there for your sake."

°°°°"Perhaps, after all, it is one of those absurd reports that people set in circulation here."

°°°°"We shall know the truth to-morrow."

°°°°Eugene did not return to the Maison Vauquer. He could not forego the pleasure of occupying his new rooms in the Rue d'Artois. Yesterday evening he had been obliged to leave Delphine soon after midnight, but that night it was Delphine who stayed with him until two o'clock in the morning. He rose late, and waited for Mme. de Nucingen, who came about noon to breakfast with him. Youth snatches eagerly at these rosy moments of happiness, and Eugene had almost forgotten Goriot's existence. The pretty things that surrounded him were growing familiar; this domestication in itself was one long festival for him, and Mme. de Nucingen was there to glorify it all by her presence. It was four o'clock before they thought of Goriot, and of how he had looked forward to the new life in that house. Eugene said that the old man ought to be moved at once, lest he should grow too ill to move. He left Delphine and hurried back to the lodging-house. Neither Father Goriot nor young Bianchon was in the dining-room with the others.

°°°°"Aha!" said the painter as Eugene came in, "Father Goriot has broken down at last. Bianchon is upstairs with him. One of his daughters--the Comtesse de Restaurama--came to see the old gentleman, and he would get up and go out, and made himself worse. Society is about to lose one of its brightest ornaments."

°°°°Rastignac sprang to the staircase.

°°°°"Hey! Monsieur Eugene!"

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene, the mistress is calling you," shouted Sylvie.

°°°°"It is this, sir," said the widow. "You and M. Goriot should by rights have moved out on the 15th of February. That was three days ago; to-day is the 18th, I ought really to be paid a month in advance; but if you will engage to pay for both, I shall be quite satisfied."

°°°°"Why can't you trust him?"

°°°°"Trust him, indeed! If the old gentleman went off his head and died, those daughters of his would not pay me a farthing, and his things won't fetch ten francs. This morning he went out with all the spoons and forks he has left, I don't know why. He had got himself up to look quite young, and--Lord, forgive me--but I thought he had rouge on his cheeks; he looked quite young again."

°°°°"I will be responsible," said Eugene, shuddering with horror, for he foresaw the end.

°°°°He climbed the stairs and reached Father Goriot's room. The old man was tossing on his bed. Bianchon was with him.

°°°°"Good-evening, father," said Eugene.

°°°°The old man turned his glassy eyes on him, smiled gently, and said:

°°°°"How is SHE?"

°°°°"She is quite well. But how are you?"

°°°°"There is nothing much the matter."

°°°°"Don't tire him," said Bianchon, drawing Eugene into a corner of the room.

°°°°"Well?" asked Rastignac.

°°°°"Nothing but a miracle can save him now. Serous congestion has set in; I have put on mustard plasters, and luckily he can feel them, they are acting."

°°°°"Is it possible to move him?"

°°°°"Quite out of the question. He must stay where he is, and be kept as quiet as possible----"

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," said Eugene, "we will nurse him between us."

°°°°"I have had the head physician round from my hospital to see him."

°°°°"And what did he say?"

°°°°"He will give no opinion till to-morrow evening. He promised to look in again at the end of the day. Unluckily, the preposterous creature must needs go and do something foolish this morning; he will not say what it was. He is as obstinate as a mule. As soon as I begin to talk to him he pretends not to hear, and lies as if he were asleep instead of answering, or if he opens his eyes he begins to groan. Some time this morning he went out on foot in the streets, nobody knows where he went, and he took everything that he had of any value with him. He has been driving some confounded bargain, and it has been too much for his strength. One of his daughters has been here."

°°°°"Was it the Countess?" asked Eugene. "A tall, dark-haired woman, with large bright eyes, slender figure, and little feet?"

°°°°"Yes."

°°°°"Leave him to me for a bit," said Rastignac. "I will make him confess; he will tell me all about it."

°°°°"And meanwhile I will get my dinner. But try not to excite him; there is still some hope left."

°°°°"All right."

°°°°"How they will enjoy themselves to-morrow," said Father Goriot when they were alone. "They are going to a grand ball."

°°°°"What were you doing this morning, papa, to make yourself so poorly this evening that you have to stop in bed?"

°°°°"Nothing."

°°°°"Did not Anastasie come to see you?" demanded Rastignac.

°°°°"Yes," said Father Goriot.

°°°°"Well, then, don't keep anything from me. What more did she want of you?"

°°°°"Oh, she was very miserable," he answered, gathering up all his strength to speak. "It was this way, my boy. Since that affair of the diamonds, Nasie has not had a penny of her own. For this ball she had ordered a golden gown like a setting for a jewel. Her mantuamaker, a woman without a conscience, would not give her credit, so Nasie's waiting-woman advanced a thousand francs on account. Poor Nasie! reduced to such shifts! It cut me to the heart to think of it! But when Nasie's maid saw how things were between her master and mistress, she was afraid of losing her money, and came to an understanding with the dressmaker, and the woman refuses to send the ball-dress until the money is paid. The gown is ready, and the ball is to-morrow night! Nasie was in despair. She wanted to borrow my forks and spoons to pawn them. Her husband is determined that she shall go and wear the diamonds, so as to contradict the stories that are told all over Paris. How can she go to that heartless scoundrel and say, 'I owe a thousand francs to my dressmaker; pay her for me!' She cannot. I saw that myself. Delphine will be there too in a superb toilette, and Anastasie ought not to be outshone by her younger sister. And then--she was drowned in tears, poor girl! I felt so humbled yesterday when I had not the twelve thousand francs, that I would have given the rest of my miserable life to wipe out that wrong. You see, I could have borne anything once, but latterly this want of money has broken my heart. Oh! I did not do it by halves; I titivated myself up a bit, and went out and sold my spoons and forks and buckles for six hundred francs; then I went to old Daddy Gobseck, and sold a year's interest on my annuity for four hundred francs down. Pshaw! I can live on dry bread, as I did when I was a young man; if I have done it before, I can do it again. My Nasie shall have one happy evening, at any rate. She shall be smart. The banknote for a thousand francs is under my pillow; it warms me to have it lying there under my head, for it is going to make my poor Nasie happy. She can turn that bad girl Victoire out of the house. A servant that cannot trust her mistress, did any one ever hear the like! I shall be quite well to-morrow. Nasie is coming at ten o'clock. They must not think that I am ill, or they will not go to the ball; they will stop and take care of me. To-morrow Nasie will come and hold me in her arms as if I were one of her children; her kisses will make me well again. After all, I might have spent the thousand francs on physic; I would far rather give them to my little Nasie, who can charm all the pain away. At any rate, I am some comfort to her in her misery; and that makes up for my unkindness in buying an annuity. She is in the depths, and I cannot draw her out of them now. Oh! I will go into business again, I will buy wheat in Odessa; out there, wheat fetches a quarter of the price it sells for here. There is a law against the importation of grain, but the good folk who made the law forgot to prohibit the introduction of wheat products and food stuffs made from corn. Hey! hey! . . . That struck me this morning. There is a fine trade to be done in starch."

°°°°Eugene, watching the old man's face, thought that his friend was light-headed.

°°°°"Come," he said, "do not talk any more, you must rest----" Just then Bianchon came up, and Eugene went down to dinner.

°°°°The two students sat up with him that night, relieving each other in turn. Bianchon brought up his medical books and studied; Eugene wrote letters home to his mother and sisters. Next morning Bianchon thought the symptoms more hopeful, but the patient's condition demanded continual attention, which the two students alone were willing to give--a task impossible to describe in the squeamish phraseology of the epoch. Leeches must be applied to the wasted body, the poultices and hot foot-baths, and other details of the treatment required the physical strength and devotion of the two young men. Mme. de Restaud did not come; but she sent a messenger for the money.

°°°°"I expected she would come herself; but it would have been a pity for her to come, she would have been anxious about me," said the father, and to all appearances he was well content.

°°°°At seven o'clock that evening Therese came with a letter from Delphine.

°°°°"What are you doing, dear friend? I have been loved for a very   little while, and I am neglected already? In the confidences of   heart and heart, I have learned to know your soul--you are too   noble not to be faithful for ever, for you know that love with   all its infinite subtle changes of feeling is never the same.   Once you said, as we were listening to the Prayer in Mose in   Egitto, 'For some it is the monotony of a single note; for   others, it is the infinite of sound.' Remember that I am   expecting you this evening to take me to Mme. de Beauseant's   ball. Every one knows now that the King signed M. d'Ajuda's   marriage-contract this morning, and the poor Vicomtesse knew   nothing of it until two o'clock this afternoon. All Paris will   flock to her house, of course, just as a crowd fills the Place de   Greve to see an execution. It is horrible, is it not, to go out   of curiosity to see if she will hide her anguish, and whether she   will die courageously? I certainly should not go, my friend, if I   had been at her house before; but, of course, she will not   receive society any more after this, and all my efforts would be   in vain. My position is a very unusual one, and besides, I am   going there partly on your account. I am waiting for you. If you   are not beside me in less than two hours, I do not know whether I   could forgive such treason."

°°°°Rastignac took up a pen and wrote:

°°°°"I am waiting till the doctor comes to know if there is any hope   of your father's life. He is lying dangerously ill. I will come   and bring you the news, but I am afraid it may be a sentence of   death. When I come you can decide whether you can go to the   ball.--Yours a thousand times."

°°°°At half-past eight the doctor arrived. He did not take a very hopeful view of the case, but thought that there was no immediate danger. Improvements and relapses might be expected, and the good man's life and reason hung in the balance.

°°°°"It would be better for him to die at once," the doctor said as he took leave.

°°°°Eugene left Goriot to Bianchon's care, and went to carry the sad news to Mme. de Nucingen. Family feeling lingered in her, and this must put an end for the present to her plans of amusement.

°°°°"Tell her to enjoy her evening as if nothing had happened," cried Goriot. He had been lying in a sort of stupor, but he suddenly sat upright as Eugene went out.

°°°°Eugene, half heartbroken, entered Delphine's. Her hair had been dressed; she wore her dancing slippers; she had only to put on her ball-dress; but when the artist is giving the finishing stroke to his creation, the last touches require more time than the whole groundwork of the picture.

°°°°"Why, you are not dressed!" she cried.

°°°°"Madame, your father----"

°°°°"My father again!" she exclaimed, breaking in upon him. "You need not teach me what is due to my father, I have known my father this long while. Not a word, Eugene. I will hear what you have to say when you are dressed. My carriage is waiting, take it, go round to your rooms and dress, Therese has put out everything in readiness for you. Come back as soon as you can; we will talk about my father on the way to Mme. de Beauseant's. We must go early; if we have to wait our turn in a row of carriages, we shall be lucky if we get there by eleven o'clock."

°°°°"Madame----"

°°°°"Quick! not a word!" she cried, darting into her dressing-room for a necklace.

°°°°"Do go, Monsieur Eugene, or you will vex madame," said Therese, hurrying him away; and Eugene was too horror-stricken by this elegant parricide to resist.

°°°°He went to his rooms and dressed, sad, thoughtful, and dispirited. The world of Paris was like an ocean of mud for him just then; and it seemed that whoever set foot in that black mire must needs sink into it up to the chin.

°°°°"Their crimes are paltry," said Eugene to himself. "Vautrin was greater."

°°°°He had seen society in its three great phases--Obedience, Struggle, and Revolt; the Family, the World, and Vautrin; and he hesitated in his choice. Obedience was dull, Revolt impossible, Struggle hazardous. His thoughts wandered back to the home circle. He thought of the quiet uneventful life, the pure happiness of the days spent among those who loved him there. Those loving and beloved beings passed their lives in obedience to the natural laws of the hearth, and in that obedience found a deep and constant serenity, unvexed by torments such as these. Yet, for all his good impulses, he could not bring himself to make profession of the religion of pure souls to Delphine, nor to prescribe the duties of piety to her in the name of love. His education had begun to bear its fruits; he loved selfishly already. Besides, his tact had discovered to him the real nature of Delphine; he divined instinctively that she was capable of stepping over her father's corpse to go to the ball; and within himself he felt that he had neither the strength of mind to play the part of mentor, nor the strength of character to vex her, nor the courage to leave her to go alone.

°°°°"She would never forgive me for putting her in the wrong over it," he said to himself. Then he turned the doctor's dictum over in his mind; he tried to believe that Goriot was not so dangerously ill as he had imagined, and ended by collecting together a sufficient quantity of traitorous excuses for Delphine's conduct. She did not know how ill her father was; the kind old man himself would have made her go to the ball if she had gone to see him. So often it happens that this one or that stands condemned by the social laws that govern family relations; and yet there are peculiar circumstances in the case, differences of temperament, divergent interests, innumerable complications of family life that excuse the apparent offence.

°°°°Eugene did not wish to see too clearly; he was ready to sacrifice his conscience to his mistress. Within the last few days his whole life had undergone a change. Woman had entered into his world and thrown it into chaos, family claims dwindled away before her; she had appropriated all his being to her uses. Rastignac and Delphine found each other at a crisis in their lives when their union gave them the most poignant bliss. Their passion, so long proved, had only gained in strength by the gratified desire that often extinguishes passion. This woman was his, and Eugene recognized that not until then had he loved her; perhaps love is only gratitude for pleasure. This woman, vile or sublime, he adored for the pleasure she had brought as her dower; and Delphine loved Rastignac as Tantalus would have loved some angel who had satisfied his hunger and quenched the burning thirst in his parched throat.

°°°°"Well," said Mme. de Nucingen when he came back in evening dress, "how is my father?"

°°°°"Very dangerously ill," he answered; "if you will grant me a proof of your affections, we will just go in to see him on the way."

°°°°"Very well," she said. "Yes, but afterwards. Dear Eugene, do be nice, and don't preach to me. Come."

°°°°They set out. Eugene said nothing for a while.

°°°°"What is it now?" she asked.

°°°°"I can hear the death-rattle in your father's throat," he said almost angrily. And with the hot indignation of youth, he told the story of Mme. de Restaud's vanity and cruelty, of her father's final act of self-sacrifice, that had brought about this struggle between life and death, of the price that had been paid for Anastasie's golden embroideries. Delphine cried.

°°°°"I shall look frightful," she thought. She dried her tears.

°°°°"I will nurse my father; I will not leave his bedside," she said aloud.

°°°°"Ah! now you are as I would have you," exclaimed Rastignac.

°°°°The lamps of five hundred carriages lit up the darkness about the Hotel de Beauseant. A gendarme in all the glory of his uniform stood on either side of the brightly lighted gateway. The great world was flocking thither that night in its eager curiosity to see the great lady at the moment of her fall, and the rooms on the ground floor were already full to overflowing, when Mme. de Nucingen and Rastignac appeared. Never since Louis XIV. tore her lover away from La grand Mademoiselle, and the whole court hastened to visit that unfortunate princess, had a disastrous love affair made such a sensation in Paris. But the youngest daughter of the almost royal house of Burgundy had risen proudly above her pain, and moved till the last moment like a queen in this world--its vanities had always been valueless for her, save in so far as they contributed to the triumph of her passion. The salons were filled with the most beautiful women in Paris, resplendent in their toilettes, and radiant with smiles. Ministers and ambassadors, the most distinguished men at court, men bedizened with decorations, stars, and ribbons, men who bore the most illustrious names in France, had gathered about the Vicomtesse.

°°°°The music of the orchestra vibrated in wave after wave of sound from the golden ceiling of the palace, now made desolate for its queen.

°°°°Madame de Beauseant stood at the door of the first salon to receive the guests who were styled her friends. She was dressed in white, and wore no ornament in the plaits of hair braided about her head; her face was calm; there was no sign there of pride, nor of pain, nor of joy that she did not feel. No one could read her soul; she stood there like some Niobe carved in marble. For a few intimate friends there was a tinge of satire in her smile; but no scrutiny saw any change in her, nor had she looked otherwise in the days of the glory of her happiness. The most callous of her guests admired her as young Rome applauded some gladiator who could die smiling. It seemed as if society had adorned itself for a last audience of one of its sovereigns.

°°°°"I was afraid that you would not come," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°"Madame," he said, in an unsteady voice, taking her speech as a reproach, "I shall be the last to go, that is why I am here."

°°°°"Good," she said, and she took his hand. "You are perhaps the only one I can trust here among all these. Oh, my friend, when you love, love a woman whom you are sure that you can love always. Never forsake a woman."

°°°°She took Rastignac's arm, and went towards a sofa in the card- room.

°°°°"I want you to go to the Marquis," she said. "Jacques, my footman, will go with you; he has a letter that you will take. I am asking the Marquis to give my letters back to me. He will give them all up, I like to think that. When you have my letters, go up to my room with them. Some one shall bring me word."

°°°°She rose to go to meet the Duchesse de Langeais, her most intimate friend, who had come like the rest of the world.

°°°°Rastignac went. He asked for the Marquis d'Ajuda at the Hotel Rochefide, feeling certain that the latter would be spending his evening there, and so it proved. The Marquis went to his own house with Rastignac, and gave a casket to the student, saying as he did so, "They are all there."

°°°°He seemed as if he was about to say something to Eugene, to ask about the ball, or the Vicomtesse; perhaps he was on the brink of the confession that, even then, he was in despair, and knew that his marriage had been a fatal mistake; but a proud gleam shone in his eyes, and with deplorable courage he kept his noblest feelings a secret.

°°°°"Do not even mention my name to her, my dear Eugene." He grasped Rastignac's hand sadly and affectionately, and turned away from him. Eugene went back to the Hotel Beauseant, the servant took him to the Vicomtesse's room. There were signs there of preparations for a journey. He sat down by the fire, fixed his eyes on the cedar wood casket, and fell into deep mournful musings. Mme. de Beauseant loomed large in these imaginings, like a goddess in the Iliad.

°°°°"Ah! my friend! . . ." said the Vicomtesse; she crossed the room and laid her hand on Rastignac's shoulder. He saw the tears in his cousin's uplifted eyes, saw that one hand was raised to take the casket, and that the fingers of the other trembled. Suddenly she took the casket, put it in the fire, and watched it burn.

°°°°"They are dancing," she said. "They all came very early; but death will be long in coming. Hush! my friend," and she laid a finger on Rastignac's lips, seeing that he was about to speak. "I shall never see Paris again. I am taking my leave of the world. At five o'clock this morning I shall set out on my journey; I mean to bury myself in the remotest part of Normandy. I have had very little time to make my arrangements; since three o'clock this afternoon I have been busy signing documents, setting my affairs in order; there was no one whom I could send to . . ."

°°°°She broke off.

°°°°"He was sure to be . . ."

°°°°Again she broke off; the weight of her sorrow was more than she could bear. In such moments as these everything is agony, and some words are impossible to utter.

°°°°"And so I counted upon you to do me this last piece of service this evening," she said. "I should like to give you some pledge of friendship. I shall often think of you. You have seemed to me to be kind and noble, fresh-hearted and true, in this world where such qualities are seldom found. I should like you to think sometimes of me. Stay," she said, glancing about her, "there is this box that has held my gloves. Every time I opened it before going to a ball or to the theatre, I used to feel that I must be beautiful, because I was so happy; and I never touched it except to lay some gracious memory in it: there is so much of my old self in it, of a Madame de Beauseant who now lives no longer. Will you take it? I will leave directions that it is to be sent to you in the Rue d'Artois.--Mme. de Nucingen looked very charming this evening. Eugene, you must love her. Perhaps we may never see each other again, my friend; but be sure of this, that I shall pray for you who have been kind to me.--Now, let us go downstairs. People shall not think that I am weeping. I have all time and eternity before me, and where I am going I shall be alone, and no one will ask me the reason of my tears. One last look round first."

°°°°She stood for a moment. Then she covered her eyes with her hands for an instant, dashed away the tears, bathed her face with cold water, and took the student's arm.

°°°°"Let us go!" she said.

°°°°This suffering, endured with such noble fortitude, shook Eugene with a more violent emotion than he had felt before. They went back to the ballroom, and Mme. de Beauseant went through the rooms on Eugene's arm--the last delicately gracious act of a gracious woman. In another moment he saw the sisters, Mme. de Restaud and Mme. de Nucingen. The Countess shone in all the glory of her magnificent diamonds; every stone must have scorched like fire, she was never to wear them again. Strong as love and pride might be in her, she found it difficult to meet her husband's eyes. The sight of her was scarcely calculated to lighten Rastignac's sad thougths; through the blaze of those diamonds he seemed to see the wretched pallet-bed on which Father Goriot was lying. The Vicomtesse misread his melancholy; she withdrew her hand from his arm.

°°°°"Come," she said, "I must not deprive you of a pleasure."

°°°°Eugene was soon claimed by Delphine. She was delighted by the impression that she had made, and eager to lay at her lover's feet the homage she had received in this new world in which she hoped to live and move henceforth.

°°°°"What do you think of Nasie?" she asked him.

°°°°"She has discounted everything, even her own father's death," said Rastignac.

°°°°Towards four o'clock in the morning the rooms began to empty. A little later the music ceased, and the Duchesse de Langeais and Rastignac were left in the great ballroom. The Vicomtesse, who thought to find the student there alone, came back there at last. She had taken leave of M. de Beauseant, who had gone off to bed, saying again as he went, "It is a great pity, my dear, to shut yourself up at your age! Pray stay among us."

°°°°Mme. de Beauseant saw the Duchesse, and, in spite of herself, an exclamation broke from her.

°°°°"I saw how it was, Clara," said Mme. de Langeais. "You are going from among us, and you will never come back. But you must not go until you have heard me, until we have understood each other."

°°°°She took her friend's arm, and they went together into the next room. There the Duchess looked at her with tears in her eyes; she held her friend in close embrace and kissed her cheek.

°°°°"I could not let you go without a word, dearest; the remorse would have been too hard to bear. You can count upon me as surely as upon yourself. You have shown yourself great this evening; I feel that I am worthy of our friendship, and I mean to prove myself worthy of it. I have not always been kind; I was in the wrong; forgive me, dearest; I wish I could unsay anything that may have hurt you; I take back those words. One common sorrow has brought us together again, for I do not know which of us is the more miserable. M. de Montriveau was not here to-night; do you understand what that means?--None of those who saw you to-night, Clara, will ever forget you. I mean to make one last effort. If I fail, I shall go into a convent. Clara, where are you going?"

°°°°"Into Normandy, to Courcelles. I shall love and pray there until the day when God shall take me from this world.--M. de Rastignac!" called the Vicomtesse, in a tremulous voice, remembering that the young man was waiting there.

°°°°The student knelt to kiss his cousin's hand.

°°°°"Good-bye, Antoinette!" said Mme. de Beauseant. "May you be happy."--She turned to the student. "You are young," she said; "you have some beliefs still left. I have been privileged, like some dying people, to find sincere and reverent feeling in those about me as I take my leave of this world."

°°°°It was nearly five o'clock that morning when Rastignac came away. He had put Mme. de Beauseant into her traveling carriage, and received her last farewells, spoken amid fast-falling tears; for no greatness is so great that it can rise above the laws of human affection, or live beyond the jurisdiction of pain, as certain demagogues would have the people believe. Eugene returned on foot to the Maison Vauquer through the cold and darkness. His education was nearly complete.

°°°°"There is no hope for poor Father Goriot," said Bianchon, as Rastignac came into the room. Eugene looked for a while at the sleeping man, then he turned to his friend. "Dear fellow, you are content with the modest career you have marked out for yourself; keep to it. I am in hell, and I must stay there. Believe everything that you hear said of the world, nothing is too impossibly bad. No Juvenal could paint the horrors hidden away under the covering of gems and gold."

°°°°At two o'clock in the afternoon Bianchon came to wake Rastignac, and begged him to take charge of Goriot, who had grown worse as the day wore on. The medical student was obliged to go out.

°°°°"Poor old man, he has not two days to live, maybe not many hours," he said; "but we must do our utmost, all the same, to fight the disease. It will be a very troublesome case, and we shall want money. We can nurse him between us, of course, but, for my own part, I have not a penny. I have turned out his pockets, and rummaged through his drawers--result, nix. I asked him about it while his mind was clear, and he told me he had not a farthing of his own. What have you?"

°°°°"I have twenty francs left," said Rastignac; "but I will take them to the roulette table, I shall be sure to win."

°°°°"And if you lose?"

°°°°"Then I shall go to his sons-in-law and his daughters and ask them for money."

°°°°"And suppose they refuse?" Bianchon retorted. "The most pressing thing just now is not really money; we must put mustard poultices, as hot as they can be made, on his feet and legs. If he calls out, there is still some hope for him. You know how to set about doing it, and besides, Christophe will help you. I am going round to the dispensary to persuade them to let us have the things we want on credit. It is a pity that we could not move him to the hospital; poor fellow, he would be better there. Well, come along, I leave you in charge; you must stay with him till I come back."

°°°°The two young men went back to the room where the old man was lying. Eugene was startled at the change in Goriot's face, so livid, distorted, and feeble.

°°°°"How are you, papa?" he said, bending over the pallet-bed. Goriot turned his dull eyes upon Eugene, looked at him attentively, and did not recognize him. It was more than the student could bear; the tears came into his eyes.

°°°°"Bianchon, ought we to have the curtains put up in the windows?"

°°°°"No, the temperature and the light do not affect him now. It would be a good thing for him if he felt heat or cold; but we must have a fire in any case to make tisanes and heat the other things. I will send round a few sticks; they will last till we can have in some firewood. I burned all the bark fuel you had left, as well as his, poor man, yesterday and during the night. The place is so damp that the water stood in drops on the walls; I could hardly get the room dry. Christophe came in and swept the floor, but the place is like a stable; I had to burn juniper, the smell was something horrible.

°°°°"MON DIEU!" said Rastignac. "To think of those daughters of his."

°°°°"One moment, if he asks for something to drink, give him this," said the house student, pointing to a large white jar. "If he begins to groan, and the belly feels hot and hard to the touch, you know what to do; get Christophe to help you. If he should happen to grow much excited, and begin to talk a good deal and even to ramble in his talk, do not be alarmed. It would not be a bad symptom. But send Christophe to the Hospice Cochin. Our doctor, my chum, or I will come and apply moxas. We had a great consultation this morning while you were asleep. A surgeon, a pupil of Gall's came, and our house surgeon, and the head physician from the Hotel-Dieu. Those gentlemen considered that the symptoms were very unusual and interesting; the case must be carefully watched, for it throws a light on several obscure and rather important scientific problems. One of the authorities says that if there is more pressure of serum on one or other portion of the brain, it should affect his mental capacities in such and such directions. So if he should talk, notice very carefully what kind of ideas his mind seems to run on; whether memory, or penetration, or the reasoning faculties are exercised; whether sentiments or practical questions fill his thoughts; whether he makes forecasts or dwells on the past; in fact; you must be prepared to give an accurate report of him. It is quite likely that the extravasation fills the whole brain, in which case he will die in the imbecile state in which he is lying now. You cannot tell anything about these mysterious nervous diseases. Suppose the crash came here," said Bianchon, touching the back of the head, "very strange things have been known to happen; the brain sometimes partially recovers, and death is delayed. Or the congested matter may pass out of the brain altogether through channels which can only be determined by a post-mortem examination. There is an old man at the Hospital for Incurables, an imbecile patient, in his case the effusion has followed the direction of the spinal cord; he suffers horrid agonies, but he lives."

°°°°"Did they enjoy themselves?" It was Father Goriot who spoke. He had recognized Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! he thinks of nothing but his daughters," said Bianchon. "Scores of times last night he said to me, 'They are dancing now! She has her dress.' He called them by their names. He made me cry, the devil take it, calling with that tone in his voice, for 'Delphine! my little Delphine! and Nasie!' Upon my word," said the medical student, "it was enough to make any one burst out crying."

°°°°"Delphine," said the old man, "she is there, isn't she? I knew she was there," and his eyes sought the door.

°°°°"I am going down now to tell Sylvie to get the poultices ready," said Bianchon. "They ought to go on at once."

°°°°Rastignac was left alone with the old man. He sat at the foot of the bed, and gazed at the face before him, so horribly changed that it was shocking to see.

°°°°"Noble natures cannot dwell in this world," he said; "Mme de Beauseant has fled from it, and there he lies dying. What place indeed is there in the shallow petty frivolous thing called society for noble thoughts and feelings?"

°°°°Pictures of yesterday's ball rose up in his memory, in strange contrast to the deathbed before him. Bianchon suddenly appeared.

°°°°"I say, Eugene, I have just seen our head surgeon at the hospital, and I ran all the way back here. If the old man shows any signs of reason, if he begins to talk, cover him with a mustard poultice from the neck to the base of the spine, and send round for us."

°°°°"Dear Bianchon," exclaimed Eugene.

°°°°"Oh! it is an interesting case from a scientific point of view," said the medical student, with all the enthusiasm of a neophyte.

°°°°"So!" said Eugene. "Am I really the only one who cares for the poor old man for his own sake?"

°°°°"You would not have said so if you had seen me this morning," returned Bianchon, who did not take offence at this speech. "Doctors who have seen a good deal of practice never see anything but the disease, but, my dear fellow, I can see the patient still."

°°°°He went. Eugene was left alone with the old man, and with an apprehension of a crisis that set in, in fact, before very long.

°°°°"Ah! dear boy, is that you?" said Father Goriot, recognizing Eugene.

°°°°"Do you feel better?" asked the law student, taking his hand.

°°°°"Yes. My head felt as if it were being screwed up in a vise, but now it is set free again. Did you see my girls? They will be here directly; as soon as they know that I am ill they will hurry here at once; they used to take such care of me in the Rue de la Jussienne! Great Heavens! if only my room was fit for them to come into! There has been a young man here, who has burned up all my bark fuel."

°°°°"I can hear Christophe coming upstairs," Eugene answered. "He is bringing up some firewood that that young man has sent you."

°°°°"Good, but how am I to pay for the wood. I have not a penny left, dear boy. I have given everything, everything. I am a pauper now. Well, at least the golden gown was grand, was it not? (Ah! what pain this is!) Thanks, Christophe! God will reward you, my boy; I have nothing left now."

°°°°Eugene went over to Christophe and whispered in the man's ear, "I will pay you well, and Sylvie too, for your trouble."

°°°°"My daughters told you that they were coming, didn't they, Christophe? Go again to them, and I will give you five francs. Tell them that I am not feeling well, that I should like to kiss them both and see them once again before I die. Tell them that, but don't alarm them more than you can help."

°°°°Rastignac signed to Christophe to go, and the man went.

°°°°"They will come before long," the old man went on. "I know them so well. My tender-hearted Delphine! If I am going to die, she will feel it so much! And so will Nasie. I do not want to die; they will cry if I die; and if I die, dear Eugene, I shall not see them any more. It will be very dreary there where I am going. For a father it is hell to be without your children; I have served my apprenticeship already since they married. My heaven was in the Rue de la Jussienne. Eugene, do you think that if I go to heaven I can come back to earth, and be near them in spirit? I have heard some such things said. It is true? It is as if I could see them at this moment as they used to be when we all lived in the Rue de la Jussienne. They used to come downstairs of a morning. 'Good-morning, papa!' they used to say, and I would take them on my knees; we had all sorts of little games of play together, and they had such pretty coaxing ways. We always had breakfast together, too, every morning, and they had dinner with me--in fact, I was a father then. I enjoyed my children. They did not think for themselves so long as they lived in the Rue de la Jussienne; they knew nothing of the world; they loved me with all their hearts. MON DIEU! why could they not always be little girls? (Oh! my head! this racking pain in my head!) Ah! ah! forgive me, children, this pain is fearful; it must be agony indeed, for you have used me to endure pain. MON DIEU! if only I held their hands in mine, I should not feel it at all.--Do you think that they are on the way? Christophe is so stupid; I ought to have gone myself. HE will see them. But you went to the ball yesterday; just tell me how they looked. They did not know that I was ill, did they, or they would not have been dancing, poor little things? Oh! I must not be ill any longer. They stand too much in need of me; their fortunes are in danger. And such husbands as they are bound to! I must get well! (Oh! what pain this is! what pain this is! . . . ah! ah!)--I must get well, you see; for they MUST have money, and I know how to set about making some. I will go to Odessa and manufacture starch there. I am an old hand, I will make millions. (Oh! this is agony!)"

°°°°Goriot was silent for a moment; it seemed to require his whole strength to endure the pain.

°°°°"If they were here, I should not complain," he said. "So why should I complain now?"

°°°°He seemed to grow drowsy with exhaustion, and lay quietly for a long time. Christophe came back; and Rastignac, thinking that Goriot was asleep, allowed the man to give his story aloud.

°°°°"First of all, sir, I went to Madame la Comtesse," he said; "but she and her husband were so busy that I couldn't get to speak to her. When I insisted that I must see her, M. de Restaud came out to me himself, and went on like this: 'M. Goriot is dying, is he? Very well, it is the best thing he can do. I want Mme. de Restaud to transact some important business, when it is all finished she can go.' The gentleman looked angry, I thought. I was just going away when Mme. de Restaud came out into an ante-chamber through a door that I did not notice, and said, 'Christophe, tell my father that my husband wants me to discuss some matters with him, and I cannot leave the house, the life or death of my children is at stake; but as soon as it is over, I will come.' As for Madame la Baronne, that is another story! I could not speak to her either, and I did not even see her. Her waiting-woman said, 'Ah yes, but madame only came back from a ball at a quarter to five this morning; she is asleep now, and if I wake her before mid-day she will be cross. As soon as she rings, I will go and tell her that her father is worse. It will be time enough then to tell her bad news!' I begged and I prayed, but, there! it was no good. Then I asked for M. le Baron, but he was out."

°°°°"To think that neither of his daughters should come!" exclaimed Rastignac. "I will write to them both."

°°°°"Neither of them!" cried the old man, sitting upright in bed. "They are busy, they are asleep, they will not come! I knew that they would not. Not until you are dying do you know your children. . . . Oh! my friend, do not marry; do not have children! You give them life; they give you your deathblow. You bring them into the world, and they send you out of it. No, they will not come. I have known that these ten years. Sometimes I have told myself so, but I did not dare to believe it."

°°°°The tears gathered and stood without overflowing the red sockets.

°°°°"Ah! if I were rich still, if I had kept my money, if I had not given all to them, they would be with me now; they would fawn on me and cover my cheeks with their kisses! I should be living in a great mansion; I should have grand apartments and servants and a fire in my room; and THEY would be about me all in tears, and their husbands and their children. I should have had all that; now--I have nothing. Money brings everything to you; even your daughters. My money. Oh! where is my money? If I had plenty of money to leave behind me, they would nurse me and tend me; I should hear their voices, I should see their faces. Ah, God! who knows? They both of them have hearts of stone. I loved them too much; it was not likely that they should love me. A father ought always to be rich; he ought to keep his children well in hand, like unruly horses. I have gone down on my knees to them. Wretches! this is the crowning act that brings the last ten years to a proper close. If you but knew how much they made of me just after they were married. (Oh! this is cruel torture!) I had just given them each eight hundred thousand francs; they were bound to be civil to me after that, and their husbands too were civil. I used to go to their houses: it was 'My kind father' here, 'My dear father' there. There was always a place for me at their tables. I used to dine with their husbands now and then, and they were very respectful to me. I was still worth something, they thought. How should they know? I had not said anything about my affairs. It is worth while to be civil to a man who has given his daughters eight hundred thousand francs apiece; and they showed me every attention then--but it was all for my money. Grand people are not great. I found that out by experience! I went to the theatre with them in their carriage; I might stay as long as I cared to stay at their evening parties. In fact, they acknowleged me their father; publicly they owned that they were my daughters. But I was always a shrewd one, you see, and nothing was lost upon me. Everything went straight to the mark and pierced my heart. I saw quite well that it was all sham and pretence, but there is no help for such things as these. I felt less at my ease at their dinner-table than I did downstairs here. I had nothing to say for myself. So these grand folks would ask in my son-in-law's ear, 'Who may that gentleman be?'--'The father-in-law with the money bags; he is very rich.'--'The devil, e is!' they would say, and look again at me with the respect due to my money. Well, if I was in the way sometimes, I paid dearly for my mistakes. And besides, who is perfect? (My head is one sore!) Dear Monsieur Eugene, I am suffering so now, that a man might die of the pain; but it is nothing to be compared with the pain I endured when Anastasie made me feel, for the first time, that I had said something stupid. She looked at me, and that glance of hers opened all my veins. I used to want to know everything, to be learned; and one thing I did learn thoroughly --I knew that I was not wanted here on earth.

°°°°"The next day I went to Delphine for comfort, and what should I do there but make some stupid blunder that made her angry with me. I was like one driven out of his senses. For a week I did not know what to do; I did not dare to go to see them for fear they should reproach me. And that was how they both turned me out of the house.

°°°°"Oh God! Thou knowest all the misery and anguish that I have endured; Thou hast counted all the wounds that have been dealt to me in these years that have aged and changed me and whitened my hair and drained my life; why dost Thou make me to suffer so to- day? Have I not more than expiated the sin of loving them too much? They themselves have been the instruments of vengeance; they have tortured me for my sin of affection.

°°°°"Ah, well! fathers know no better; I loved them so; I went back to them as a gambler goes to the gaming table. This love was my vice, you see, my mistress--they were everything in the world to me. They were always wanting something or other, dresses and ornaments, and what not; their maids used to tell me what they wanted, and I used to give them the things for the sake of the welcome that they bought for me. But, at the same time, they used to give me little lectures on my behavior in society; they began about it at once. Then they began to feel ashamed of me. That is what comes of having your children well brought up. I could not go to school again at my time of life. (This pain is fearful! MON DIEU! These doctors! these doctors! If they would open my head, it would give me some relief!) Oh, my daughters, my daughters! Anastasie! Delphine! If I could only see them! Send for the police, and make them come to me! Justice is on my side, the whole world is on my side, I have natural rights, and the law with me. I protest! The country will go to ruin if a father's rights are trampled under foot. That is easy to see. The whole world turns on fatherly love; fatherly love is the foundation of society; it will crumble into ruin when children do not love their fathers. Oh! if I could only see them, and hear them, no matter what they said; if I could simply hear their voices, it would soothe the pain. Delphine! Delphine most of all. But tell them when they come not to look so coldly at me as they do. Oh! my friend, my good Monsieur Eugene, you do not know that it is when all the golden light in a glance suddenly turns to a leaden gray. It has been one long winter here since the light in their eyes shone no more for me. I have had nothing but disappointments to devour. Disappointment has been my daily bread; I have lived on humiliation and insults. I have swallowed down all the affronts for which they sold me my poor stealthy little moments of joy; for I love them so! Think of it! a father hiding himself to get a glimpse of his children! I have given all my life to them, and to-day they will not give me one hour! I am hungering and thirsting for them, my heart is burning in me, but they will not come to bring relief in the agony, for I am dying now, I feel that this is death. Do they not know what it means to trample on a father's corpse? There is a God in heaven who avenges us fathers whether we will or no.

°°°°"Oh! they will come! Come to me, darlings, and give me one more kiss; one last kiss, the Viaticum for your father, who will pray God for you in heaven. I will tell Him that you have been good children to your father, and plead your cause with God! After all, it is not their fault. I tell you they are innocent, my friend. Tell every one that it is not their fault, and no one need be distressed on my account. It is all my own fault, I taught them to trample upon me. I loved to have it so. It is no one's affair but mine; man's justice and God's justice have nothing to do in it. God would be unjust if He condemned them for anything they may have done to me. I did not behave to them properly; I was stupid enough to resign my rights. I would have humbled myself in the dust for them. What could you expect? The most beautiful nature, the noblest soul, would have been spoiled by such indulgence. I am a wretch, I am justly punished. I, and I only, am to blame for all their sins; I spoiled them. To-day they are as eager for pleasure as they used to be for sugar-plums. When they were little girls I indulged them in every whim. They had a carriage of their own when they were fifteen. They have never been crossed. I am guilty, and not they--but I sinned through love.

°°°°"My heart would open at the sound of their voices. I can hear them; they are coming. Yes! yes! they are coming. The law demands that they should be present at their father's deathbed; the law is on my side. It would only cost them the hire of a cab. I would pay that. Write to them, tell them that I have millions to leave to them! On my word of honor, yes. I am going to manufacture Italian paste foods at Odessa. I understand the trade. There are millions to be made in it. Nobody has thought of the scheme as yet. You see, there will be no waste, no damage in transit, as there always is with wheat and flour. Hey! hey! and starch too; there are millions to be made in the starch trade! You will not be telling a lie. Millions, tell them; and even if they really come because they covet the money, I would rather let them deceive me; and I shall see them in any case. I want my children! I gave them life; they are mine, mine!" and he sat upright. The head thus raised, with its scanty white hair, seemed to Eugene like a threat; every line that could still speak spoke of menace.

°°°°"There, there, dear father," said Eugene, "lie down again; I will write to them at once. As soon as Bianchon comes back I will go for them myself, if they do not come before."

°°°°"If they do not come?" repeated the old man, sobbing. "Why, I shall be dead before then; I shall die in a fit of rage, of rage! Anger is getting the better of me. I can see my whole life at this minute. I have been cheated! They do not love me--they have never loved me all their lives! It is all clear to me. They have not come, and they will not come. The longer they put off their coming, the less they are likely to give me this joy. I know them. They have never cared to guess my disappointments, my sorrows, my wants; they never cared to know my life; they will have no presentiment of my death; they do not even know the secret of my tenderness for them. Yes, I see it all now. I have laid my heart open so often, that they take everything I do for them as a matter of course. They might have asked me for the very eyes out of my head and I would have bidden them to pluck them out. They think that all fathers are like theirs. You should always make your value felt. Their own children will avenge me. Why, for their own sakes they should come to me! Make them understand that they are laying up retribution for their own deathbeds. All crimes are summed up in this one. . . . Go to them; just tell them that if they stay away it will be parricide! There is enough laid to their charge already without adding that to the list. Cry aloud as I do now, 'Nasie! Delphine! here! Come to your father; the father who has been so kind to you is lying ill!'--Not a sound; no one comes! Then am I do die like a dog? This is to be my reward--I am forsaken at the last. They are wicked, heartless women; curses on them, I loathe them. I shall rise at night from my grave to curse them again; for, after all, my friends, have I done wrong? They are behaving very badly to me, eh? . . . What am I saying? Did you not tell me just now that Delphine is in the room? She is more tender-hearted than her sister. . . . Eugene, you are my son, you know. You will love her; be a father to her! Her sister is very unhappy. And there are their fortunes! Ah, God! I am dying, this anguish is almost more than I can bear! Cut off my head; leave me nothing but my heart."

°°°°"Christophe!" shouted Eugene, alarmed by the way in which the old man moaned, and by his cries, "go for M. Bianchon, and send a cab here for me.--I am going to fetch them, dear father; I will bring them back to you."

°°°°"Make them come! Compel them to come! Call out the Guard, the military, anything and everything, but make them come!" He looked at Eugene, and a last gleam of intelligence shone in his eyes. "Go to the authorities, to the Public Prosecutor, let them bring them here; come they shall!"

°°°°"But you have cursed them."

°°°°"Who said that!" said the old man in dull amazement. "You know quite well that I love them, I adore them! I shall be quite well again if I can see them. . . . Go for them, my good neighbor, my dear boy, you are kind-hearted; I wish I could repay you for your kindness, but I have nothing to give you now, save the blessing of a dying man. Ah! if I could only see Delphine, to tell her to pay my debt to you. If the other cannot come, bring Delphine to me at any rate. Tell her that unless she comes, you will not love her any more. She is so fond of you that she will come to me then. Give me something to drink! There is a fire in my bowels. Press something against my forehead! If my daughters would lay their hands there, I think I should get better. . . . MON DIEU! who will recover their money for them when I am gone? . . . I will manufacture vermicelli out in Odessa; I will go to Odessa for their sakes."

°°°°"Here is something to drink," said Eugene, supporting the dying man on his left arm, while he held a cup of tisane to Goriot's lips.

°°°°"How you must love your own father and mother!" said the old man, and grasped the student's hand in both of his. It was a feeble, trembling grasp. "I am going to die; I shall die without seeing my daughters; do you understand? To be always thirsting, and never to drink; that has been my life for the last ten years. . . . I have no daughters, my sons-in-law killed them. No, since their marriages they have been dead to me. Fathers should petition the Chambers to pass a law against marriage. If you love your daughters, do not let them marry. A son-in-law is a rascal who poisons a girl's mind and contaminates her whole nature. Let us have no more marriages! It robs us of our daughters; we are left alone upon our deathbeds, and they are not with us then. They ought to pass a law for dying fathers. This is awful! It cries for vengeance! They cannot come, because my sons-in-law forbid them! . . . Kill them! . . . Restaud and the Alsatian, kill them both! They have murdered me between them! . . . Death or my daughters! . . . Ah! it is too late, I am dying, and they are not here! . . . Dying without them! . . . Nasie! Fifine! Why do you not come to me? Your papa is going----"

°°°°"Dear Father Goriot, calm yourself. There, there, lie quietly and rest; don't worry yourself, don't think."

°°°°"I shall not see them. Oh! the agony of it!"

°°°°"You SHALL see them."

°°°°"Really?" cried the old man, still wandering. "Oh! shall I see them; I shall see them and hear their voices. I shall die happy. Ah! well, after all, I do not wish to live; I cannot stand this much longer; this pain that grows worse and worse. But, oh! to see them, to touch their dresses--ah! nothing but their dresses, that is very little; still, to feel something that belongs to them. Let me touch their hair with my fingers . . . their hair . . ."

°°°°His head fell back on the pillow, as if a sudden heavy blow had struck him down, but his hands groped feebly over the quilt, as if to find his daughters' hair.

°°°°"My blessing on them . . ." he said, making an effort, "my blessing . . ."

°°°°His voice died away. Just at that moment Bianchon came into the room.

°°°°"I met Christophe," he said; "he is gone for your cab."

°°°°Then he looked at the patient, and raised the closed eyelids with his fingers. The two students saw how dead and lustreless the eyes beneath had grown.

°°°°"He will not get over this, I am sure," said Bianchon. He felt the old man's pulse, and laid a hand over his heart.

°°°°"The machinery works still; more is the pity, in his state it would be better for him to die."

°°°°"Ah! my word, it would!"

°°°°"What is the matter with you? You are as pale as death."

°°°°"Dear fellow, the moans and cries that I have just heard. . . . There is a God! Ah! yes, yes, there is a God, and He has made a better world for us, or this world of ours would be a nightmare. I could have cried like a child; but this is too tragical, and I am sick at heart.

°°°°"We want a lot of things, you know; and where is the money to come from?"

°°°°Rastignac took out his watch.

°°°°"There, be quick and pawn it. I do not want to stop on the way to the Rue du Helder; there is not a moment to lose, I am afraid, and I must wait here till Christophe comes back. I have not a farthing; I shall have to pay the cabman when I get home again."

°°°°Rastignac rushed down the stairs, and drove off to the Rue du Helder. The awful scene through which he had just passed quickened his imagination, and he grew fiercely indignant. He reached Mme. de Restaud's house only to be told by the servant that his mistress could see no one.

°°°°"But I have brought a message from her father, who is dying," Rastignac told the man.

°°°°"The Count has given us the strictest orders, sir----"

°°°°"If it is M. de Restaud who has given the orders, tell him that his father-in-law is dying, and that I am here, and must speak with him at once."

°°°°The man went out.

°°°°Eugene waited for a long while. "Perhaps her father is dying at this moment," he thought.

°°°°Then the man came back, and Eugene followed him to the little drawing-room. M. de Restaud was standing before the fireless grate, and did not ask his visitor to seat himself.

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte," said Rastignac, "M. Goriot, your father-in- law, is lying at the point of death in a squalid den in the Latin Quarter. He has not a penny to pay for firewood; he is expected to die at any moment, and keeps calling for his daughter----"

°°°°"I feel very little affection for M. Goriot, sir, as you probably are aware," the Count answered coolly. "His character has been compromised in connection with Mme. de Restaud; he is the author of the misfortunes that have embittered my life and troubled my peace of mind. It is a matter of perfect indifference to me if he lives or dies. Now you know my feelings with regard to him. Public opinion may blame me, but I care nothing for public opinion. Just now I have other and much more important matters to think about than the things that fools and chatterers may say about me. As for Mme. de Restaud, she cannot leave the house; she is in no condition to do so. And, besides, I shall not allow her to leave it. Tell her father that as soon as she has done her duty by her husband and child she shall go to see him. If she has any love for her father, she can be free to go to him, if she chooses, in a few seconds; it lies entirely with her----"

°°°°"Monsieur le Comte, it is no business of mine to criticise your conduct; you can do as you please with your wife, but may I count upon your keeping your word with me? Well, then, promise me to tell her that her father has not twenty-four hours to live; that he looks in vain for her, and has cursed her already as he lies on his deathbed,--that is all I ask."

°°°°"You can tell her yourself," the Count answered, impressed by the thrill of indignation in Eugene's voice.

°°°°The Count led the way to the room where his wife usually sat. She was drowned in tears, and lay crouching in the depths of an armchair, as if she were tired of life and longed to die. It was piteous to see her. Before venturing to look at Rastignac, she glanced at her husband in evident and abject terror that spoke of complete prostration of body and mind; she seemed crushed by a tyranny both mental and physical. The Count jerked his head towards her; she construed this as a permission to speak.

°°°°"I heard all that you said, monsieur. Tell my father that if he knew all he would forgive me. . . . I did not think there was such torture in the world as this; it is more than I can endure, monsieur!--But I will not give way as long as I live," she said, turning to her husband. "I am a mother.--Tell my father that I have never sinned against him in spite of appearances!" she cried aloud in her despair.

°°°°Eugene bowed to the husband and wife; he guessed the meaning of the scene, and that this was a terrible crisis in the Countess' life. M. de Restaud's manner had told him that his errand was a fruitless one; he saw that Anastasie had no longer any liberty of action. He came away mazed and bewildered, and hurried to Mme. de Nucingen. Delphine was in bed.

°°°°"Poor dear Eugene, I am ill," she said. "I caught cold after the ball, and I am afraid of pneumonia. I am waiting for the doctor to come."

°°°°"If you were at death's door," Eugene broke in, "you must be carried somehow to your father. He is calling for you. If you could hear the faintest of those cries, you would not feel ill any longer."

°°°°"Eugene, I dare say my father is not quite so ill as you say; but I cannot bear to do anything that you do not approve, so I will do just as you wish. As for HIM, he would die of grief I know if I went out to see him and brought on a dangerous illness. Well, I will go as soon as I have seen the doctor.--Ah!" she cried out, "you are not wearing your watch, how is that?"

°°°°Eugene reddened.

°°°°"Eugene, Eugene! if you have sold it already or lost it. . . . Oh! it would be very wrong of you!"

°°°°The student bent over Delphine and said in her ear, "Do you want to know? Very well, then, you shall know. Your father has nothing left to pay for the shroud that they will lay him in this evening. Your watch has been pawned, for I had nothing either."

°°°°Delphine sprang out of bed, ran to her desk, and took out her purse. She gave it to Eugene, and rang the bell, crying:

°°°°"I will go, I will go at once, Eugene. Leave me, I will dress. Why, I should be an unnatural daughter! Go back; I will be there before you.--Therese," she called to the waiting-woman, "ask M. de Nucingen to come upstairs at once and speak to me."

°°°°Eugene was almost happy when he reached the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve; he was so glad to bring the news to the dying man that one of his daughters was coming. He fumbled in Delphine's purse for money, so as to dismiss the cab at once; and discovered that the young, beautiful, and wealthy woman of fashion had only seventy francs in her private purse. He climbed the stairs and found Bianchon supporting Goriot, while the house surgeon from the hospital was applying moxas to the patient's back--under the direction of the physician, it was the last expedient of science, and it was tried in vain.

°°°°"Can you feel them?" asked the physician. But Goriot had caught sight of Rastignac, and answered, "They are coming, are they not?"

°°°°"There is hope yet," said the surgeon; "he can speak."

°°°°"Yes," said Eugene, "Delphine is coming."

°°°°"Oh! that is nothing!" said Bianchon; "he has been talking about his daughters all the time. He calls for them as a man impaled calls for water, they say----"

°°°°"We may as well give up," said the physician, addressing the surgeon. "Nothing more can be done now; the case is hopeless."

°°°°Bianchon and the house surgeon stretched the dying man out again on his loathsome bed.

°°°°"But the sheets ought to be changed," added the physician. "Even if there is no hope left, something is due to human nature. I shall come back again, Bianchon," he said, turning to the medical student. "If he complains again, rub some laudanum over the diaphragm."

°°°°He went, and the house surgeon went with him.

°°°°"Come, Eugene, pluck up heart, my boy," said Bianchon, as soon as they were alone; "we must set about changing his sheets, and put him into a clean shirt. Go and tell Sylvie to bring some sheets and come and help us to make the bed."

°°°°Eugene went downstairs, and found Mme. Vauquer engaged in setting the table; Sylvie was helping her. Eugene had scarcely opened his mouth before the widow walked up to him with the acidulous sweet smile of a cautious shopkeeper who is anxious neither to lose money nor to offend a customer.

°°°°"My dear Monsieur Eugene," she said, when he had spoken, "you know quite as well as I do that Father Goriot has not a brass farthing left. If you give out clean linen for a man who is just going to turn up his eyes, you are not likely to see your sheets again, for one is sure to be wanted to wrap him in. Now, you owe me a hundred and forty-four francs as it is, add forty francs for the pair of sheets, and then there are several little things, besides the candle that Sylvie will give you; altogether it will all mount up to at least two hundred francs, which is more than a poor widow like me can afford to lose. Lord! now, Monsieur Eugene, look at it fairly. I have lost quite enough in these five days since this run of ill-luck set in for me. I would rather than ten crowns that the old gentlemen had moved out as you said. It sets the other lodgers against the house. It would not take much to make me send him to the workhouse. In short, just put yourself in my place. I have to think of my establishment first, for I have my own living to make."

°°°°Eugene hurried up to Goriot's room.

°°°°"Bianchon," he cried, "the money or the watch?"

°°°°"There it is on the table, or the three hundred and sixty odd francs that are left of it. I paid up all the old scores out of it before they let me have the things. The pawn ticket lies there under the money."

°°°°Rastignac hurried downstairs.

°°°°"Here, madame" he said in disgust, "let us square accounts. M. Goriot will not stay much longer in your house, nor shall I----"

°°°°"Yes, he will go out feet foremost, poor old gentleman," she said, counting the francs with a half-facetious, half-lugubrious expression.

°°°°"Let us get this over," said Rastignac.

°°°°"Sylvie, look out some sheets, and go upstairs to help the gentlemen."

°°°°"You won't forget Sylvie," said Mme. Vauquer in Eugene's ear; "she has been sitting up these two nights."

°°°°As soon as Eugene's back was turned, the old woman hurried after her handmaid.

°°°°"Take the sheets that have had the sides turned into the middle, number 7. Lord! they are plenty good enough for a corpse," she said in Sylvie's ear.

°°°°Eugene, by this time, was part of the way upstairs, and did not overhear the elderly economist.

°°°°"Quick," said Bianchon, "let us change his shirt. Hold him upright."

°°°°Eugene went to the head of the bed and supported the dying man, while Bianchon drew off his shirt; and then Goriot made a movement as if he tried to clutch something to his breast, uttering a low inarticulate moaning the while, like some dumb animal in mortal pain.

°°°°"Ah! yes!" cried Bianchon. "It is the little locket and the chain made of hair that he wants; we took it off a while ago when we put the blisters on him. Poor fellow! he must have it again. There it lies on the chimney-piece."

°°°°Eugene went to the chimney-piece and found the little plait of faded golden hair--Mme. Goriot's hair, no doubt. He read the name on the little round locket, ANASTASIE on the one side, DELPHINE on the other. It was the symbol of his own heart that the father always wore on his breast. The curls of hair inside the locket were so fine and soft that is was plain they had been taken from two childish heads. When the old man felt the locket once more, his chest heaved with a long deep sigh of satisfaction, like a groan. It was something terrible to see, for it seemed as if the last quiver of the nerves were laid bare to their eyes, the last communication of sense to the mysterious point within whence our sympathies come and whither they go. A delirious joy lighted up the distorted face. The terrific and vivid force of the feeling that had survived the power of thought made such an impression on the students, that the dying man felt their hot tears falling on him, and gave a shrill cry of delight.

°°°°"Nasie! Fifine!"

°°°°"There is life in him yet," said Bianchon.

°°°°"What does he go on living for?" said Sylvie.

°°°°"To suffer," answered Rastignac.

°°°°Bianchon made a sign to his friend to follow his example, knelt down and pressed his arms under the sick man, and Rastignac on the other side did the same, so that Sylvie, standing in readiness, might draw the sheet from beneath and replace it with the one that she had brought. Those tears, no doubt, had misled Goriot; for he gathered up all his remaining strength in a last effort, stretched out his hands, groped for the students' heads, and as his fingers caught convulsively at their hair, they heard a faint whisper:

°°°°"Ah! my angels!"

°°°°Two words, two inarticulate murmurs, shaped into words by the soul which fled forth with them as they left his lips.

°°°°"Poor dear!" cried Sylvie, melted by that exclamation; the expression of the great love raised for the last time to a sublime height by that most ghastly and involuntary of lies.

°°°°The father's last breath must have been a sigh of joy, and in that sigh his whole life was summed up; he was cheated even at the last. They laid Father Goriot upon his wretched bed with reverent hands. Thenceforward there was no expression on his face, only the painful traces of the struggle between life and death that was going on in the machine; for that kind of cerebral consciousness that distinguishes between pleasure and pain in a human being was extinguished; it was only a question of time--and the mechanism itself would be destroyed.

°°°°"He will lie like this for several hours, and die so quietly at last, that we shall not know when he goes; there will be no rattle in the throat. The brain must be completely suffused."

°°°°As he spoke there was a footstep on the staircase, and a young woman hastened up, panting for breath.

°°°°"She has come too late," said Rastignac.

°°°°But it was not Delphine; it was Therese, her waiting-woman, who stood in the doorway.

°°°°"Monsieur Eugene," she said, "monsieur and madame have had a terrible scene about some money that Madame (poor thing!) wanted for her father. She fainted, and the doctor came, and she had to be bled, calling out all the while, 'My father is dying; I want to see papa!' It was heartbreaking to hear her----"

°°°°"That will do, Therese. If she came now, it would be trouble thrown away. M. Goriot cannot recognize any one now."

°°°°"Poor, dear gentleman, is he as bad at that?" said Therese.

°°°°"You don't want me now, I must go and look after my dinner; it is half-past four," remarked Sylvie. The next instant she all but collided with Mme. de Restaud on the landing outside.

°°°°There was something awful and appalling in the sudden apparition of the Countess. She saw the bed of death by the dim light of the single candle, and her tears flowed at the sight of her father's passive features, from which the life had almost ebbed. Bianchon with thoughtful tact left the room.

°°°°"I could not escape soon enough," she said to Rastignac.

°°°°The student bowed sadly in reply. Mme. de Restaud took her father's hand and kissed it.

°°°°"Forgive me, father! You used to say that my voice would call you back from the grave; ah! come back for one moment to bless your penitent daughter. Do you hear me? Oh! this is fearful! No one on earth will ever bless me henceforth; every one hates me; no one loves me but you in all the world. My own children will hate me. Take me with you, father; I will love you, I will take care of you. He does not hear me . . . I am mad . . ."

°°°°She fell on her knees, and gazed wildly at the human wreck before her.

°°°°"My cup of misery is full," she said, turning her eyes upon Eugene. "M. de Trailles has fled, leaving enormous debts behind him, and I have found out that he was deceiving me. My husband will never forgive me, and I have left my fortune in his hands. I have lost all my illusions. Alas! I have forsaken the one heart that loved me (she pointed to her father as she spoke), and for whom? I have held his kindness cheap, and slighted his affection; many and many a time I have given him pain, ungrateful wretch that I am!"

°°°°"He knew it," said Rastignac.

°°°°Just then Goriot's eyelids unclosed; it was only a muscular contraction, but the Countess' sudden start of reviving hope was no less dreadful than the dying eyes.

°°°°"Is it possible that he can hear me?" cried the Countess. "No," she answered herself, and sat down beside the bed. As Mme. de Restaud seemed to wish to sit by her father, Eugene went down to take a little food. The boarders were already assembled.

°°°°"Well," remarked the painter, as he joined them, "it seems that there is to be a death-orama upstairs."

°°°°"Charles, I think you might find something less painful to joke about," said Eugene.

°°°°"So we may not laugh here?" returned the painter. "What harm does it do? Bianchon said that the old man was quite insensible."

°°°°"Well, then," said the employe from the Museum, "he will die as he has lived."

°°°°"My father is dead!" shrieked the Countess.

°°°°The terrible cry brought Sylvie, Rastignac, and Bianchon; Mme. de Restaud had fainted away. When she recovered they carried her downstairs, and put her into the cab that stood waiting at the door. Eugene sent Therese with her, and bade the maid take the Countess to Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°Bianchon came down to them.

°°°°"Yes, he is dead," he said.

°°°°"Come, sit down to dinner, gentlemen," said Mme. Vauquer, "or the soup will be cold."

°°°°The two students sat down together.

°°°°"What is the next thing to be done?" Eugene asked of Bianchon.

°°°°"I have closed his eyes and composed his limbs," said Bianchon. "When the certificate has been officially registered at the Mayor's office, we will sew him in his winding sheet and bury him somewhere. What do you think we ought to do?"

°°°°"He will not smell at his bread like this any more," said the painter, mimicking the old man's little trick.

°°°°"Oh, hang it all!" cried the tutor, "let Father Goriot drop, and let us have something else for a change. He is a standing dish, and we have had him with every sauce this hour or more. It is one of the privileges of the good city of Paris that anybody may be born, or live, or die there without attracting any attention whatsoever. Let us profit by the advantages of civilization. There are fifty or sixty deaths every day; if you have a mind to do it, you can sit down at any time and wail over whole hecatombs of dead in Paris. Father Goriot has gone off the hooks, has he? So much the better for him. If you venerate his memory, keep it to yourselves, and let the rest of us feed in peace."

°°°°"Oh, to be sure," said the widow, "it is all the better for him that he is dead. It looks as though he had had trouble enough, poor soul, while he was alive."

°°°°And this was all the funeral oration delivered over him who had been for Eugene the type and embodiment of Fatherhood.

°°°°The fifteen lodgers began to talk as usual. When Bianchon and Eugene had satisfied their hunger, the rattle of spoons and forks, the boisterous conversation, the expressions on the faces that bespoke various degrees of want of feeling, gluttony, or indifference, everything about them made them shiver with loathing. They went out to find a priest to watch that night with the dead. It was necessary to measure their last pious cares by the scanty sum of money that remained. Before nine o'clock that evening the body was laid out on the bare sacking of the bedstead in the desolate room; a lighted candle stood on either side, and the priest watched at the foot. Rastignac made inquiries of this latter as to the expenses of the funeral, and wrote to the Baron de Nucingen and the Comte de Restaud, entreating both gentlemen to authorize their man of business to defray the charges of laying their father-in-law in the grave. He sent Christophe with the letters; then he went to bed, tired out, and slept.

°°°°Next day Bianchon and Rastignac were obliged to take the certificate to the registrar themselves, and by twelve o'clock the formalities were completed. Two hours went by, no word came from the Count nor from the Baron; nobody appeared to act for them, and Rastignac had already been obliged to pay the priest. Sylvie asked ten francs for sewing the old man in his winding- sheet and making him ready for the grave, and Eugene and Bianchon calculated that they had scarcely sufficient to pay for the funeral, if nothing was forthcoming from the dead man's family. So it was the medical student who laid him in a pauper's coffin, despatched from Bianchon's hospital, whence he obtained it at a cheaper rate.

°°°°"Let us play those wretches a trick," said he. "Go to the cemetery, buy a grave for five years at Pere-Lachaise, and arrange with the Church and the undertaker to have a third-class funeral. If the daughters and their husbands decline to repay you, you can carve this on the headstone--'HERE LIES M. GORIOT, FATHER OF THE COMTESSE DE RESTAUD AND THE BARONNE DE NUCINGEN, INTERRED AT THE EXPENSE OF TWO STUDENTS.' "

°°°°Eugene took part of his friend's advice, but only after he had gone in person first to M. and Mme. de Nucingen, and then to M. and Mme. de Restaud--a fruitless errand. He went no further than the doorstep in either house. The servants had received strict orders to admit no one.

°°°°"Monsieur and Madame can see no visitors. They have just lost their father, and are in deep grief over their loss."

°°°°Eugene's Parisian experience told him that it was idle to press the point. Something clutched strangely at his heart when he saw that it was impossible to reach Delphine.

°°°°"Sell some of your ornaments," he wrote hastily in the porter's room, "so that your father may be decently laid in his last resting-place."

°°°°He sealed the note, and begged the porter to give it to Therese for her mistress; but the man took it to the Baron de Nucingen, who flung the note into the fire. Eugene, having finished his errands, returned to the lodging-house about three o'clock. In spite of himself, the tears came into his eyes. The coffin, in its scanty covering of black cloth, was standing there on the pavement before the gate, on two chairs. A withered sprig of hyssop was soaking in the holy water bowl of silver-plated copper; there was not a soul in the street, not a passer-by had stopped to sprinkle the coffin; there was not even an attempt at a black drapery over the wicket. It was a pauper who lay there; no one made a pretence of mourning for him; he had neither friends nor kindred--there was no one to follow him to the grave.

°°°°Bianchon's duties compelled him to be at the hospital, but he had left a few lines for Eugene, telling his friend about the arrangements he had made for the burial service. The house student's note told Rastignac that a mass was beyond their means, that the ordinary office for the dead was cheaper, and must suffice, and that he had sent word to the undertaker by Christophe. Eugene had scarcely finished reading Bianchon's scrawl, when he looked up and saw the little circular gold locket that contained the hair of Goriot's two daughters in Mme. Vauquer's hands.

°°°°"How dared you take it?" he asked.

°°°°"Good Lord! is that to be buried along with him?" retorted Sylvie. "It is gold."

°°°°"Of course it shall!" Eugene answered indignantly; "he shall at any rate take one thing that may represent his daughters into the grave with him."

°°°°When the hearse came, Eugene had the coffin carried into the house again, unscrewed the lid, and reverently laid on the old man's breast the token that recalled the days when Delphine and Anastasie were innocent little maidens, before they began "to think for themselves," as he had moaned out in his agony.

°°°°Rastignac and Christophe and the two undertaker's men were the only followers of the funeral. The Church of Saint-Etienne du Mont was only a little distance from the Rue Nueve-Sainte- Genevieve. When the coffin had been deposited in a low, dark, little chapel, the law student looked round in vain for Goriot's two daughters or their husbands. Christophe was his only fellow- mourner; Christophe, who appeared to think it was his duty to attend the funeral of the man who had put him in the way of such handsome tips. As they waited there in the chapel for the two priests, the chorister, and the beadle, Rastignac grasped Christophe's hand. He could not utter a word just then.

°°°°"Yes, Monsieur Eugene," said Christophe, "he was a good and worthy man, who never said one word louder than another; he never did any one any harm, and gave nobody any trouble."

°°°°The two priests, the chorister, and the beadle came, and said and did as much as could be expected for seventy francs in an age when religion cannot afford to say prayers for nothing.

°°°°The ecclesiatics chanted a psalm, the Libera nos and the De profundis. The whole service lasted about twenty minutes. There was but one mourning coach, which the priest and chorister agreed to share with Eugene and Christophe.

°°°°"There is no one else to follow us," remarked the priest, "so we may as well go quickly, and so save time; it is half-past five."

°°°°But just as the coffin was put in the hearse, two empty carriages, with the armorial bearings of the Comte de Restaud and the Baron de Nucingen, arrived and followed in the procession to Pere-Lachaise. At six o'clock Goriot's coffin was lowered into the grave, his daughters' servants standing round the while. The ecclesiastic recited the short prayer that the students could afford to pay for, and then both priest and lackeys disappeared at once. The two grave diggers flung in several spadefuls of earth, and then stopped and asked Rastignac for their fee. Eugene felt in vain in his pocket, and was obliged to borrow five francs of Christophe. This thing, so trifling in itself, gave Rastignac a terrible pang of distress. It was growing dusk, the damp twilight fretted his nerves; he gazed down into the grave and the tears he shed were drawn from him by the sacred emotion, a single-hearted sorrow. When such tears fall on earth, their radiance reaches heaven. And with that tear that fell on Father Goriot's grave, Eugene Rastignac's youth ended. He folded his arms and gazed at the clouded sky; and Christophe, after a glance at him, turned and went--Rastignac was left alone.

°°°°He went a few paces further, to the highest point of the cemetery, and looked out over Paris and the windings of the Seine; the lamps were beginning to shine on either side of the river. His eyes turned almost eagerly to the space between the column of the Place Vendome and the cupola of the Invalides; there lay the shining world that he had wished to reach. He glanced over that humming hive, seeming to draw a foretaste of its honey, and said magniloquently:

°°°°"Henceforth there is war between us."

°°°°And by way of throwing down the glove to Society, Rastignac went to dine with Mme. de Nucingen.

°°°°ADDENDUM

°°°°The following personages appear in other stories of the Human Comedy.

°°°°Ajuda-Pinto, Marquis Miguel d'   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Secrets of a Princess   Beatrix

°°°°Beauseant, Marquis   An Episode under the Terror

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomte de   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Beauseant, Vicomtesse de   The Deserted Woman   Albert Savarus

°°°°Bianchon, Horace   The Atheist's Mass   Cesar Birotteau   The Commission in Lunacy   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   A Bachelor's Establishment   The Secrets of a Princess   The Government Clerks   Pierrette   A Study of Woman   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Honorine   The Seamy Side of History   The Magic Skin   A Second Home   A Prince of Bohemia   Letters of Two Brides   The Muse of the Department   The Imaginary Mistress   The Middle Classes   Cousin Betty   The Country Parson In addition, M. Bianchon narrated the following:   Another Study of Woman   La Grande Breteche

°°°°Bibi-Lupin (chief of secret police, called himself Gondureau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Carigliano, Marechal, Duc de   Sarrasine

°°°°Collin, Jacques   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Derville   Gobseck   A Start in Life   The Gondreville Mystery   Colonel Chabert   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Franchessini, Colonel   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Galathionne, Princess   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Gobseck, Jean-Esther Van   Gobseck   Cesar Birotteau   The Government Clerks   The Unconscious Humoriists

°°°°Jacques (M. de Beauseant's butler)   The Deserted Woman

°°°°Langeais, Duchesse Antoinette de   The Thirteen

°°°°Marsay, Henri de   The Thirteen   The Unconscious Humorists   Another Study of Woman   The Lily of the Valley   Jealousies of a Country Town   Ursule Mirouet   A Marriage Settlement   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Letters of Two Brides   The Ball at Sceaux   Modest Mignon   The Secrets of a Princess   The Gondreville Mystery   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Maurice (de Restaud's valet)   Gobseck

°°°°Montriveau, General Marquis Armand de   The Thirteen   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Another Study of Woman   Pierrette   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Nucingen, Baron Frederic de   The Firm of Nucingen   Pierrette   Cesar Birotteau   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Another Study of Woman   The Secrets of a Princess   A Man of Business   Cousin Betty   The Muse of the Department   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Nucingen, Baronne Delphine de   The Thirteen   Eugenie Grandet   Cesar Birotteau   Melmoth Reconciled   Lost Illusions   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   The Commission in Lunacy   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   Modeste Mignon   The Firm of Nucingen   Another Study of Woman   A Daughter of Eve   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Poiret   The Government Clerks   A Start in Life   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Poiret, Madame (nee Christine-Michelle Michonneau)   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Middle Classes

°°°°Rastignac, Baron and Baronne de (Eugene's parents)   Lost Illusions

°°°°Rastignac, Eugene de   A Distinguished Provincial at Paris   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life   The Ball at Sceaux   The Interdiction   A Study of Woman   Another Study of Woman   The Magic Skin   The Secrets of a Princess   A Daughter of Eve   The Gondreville Mystery   The Firm of Nucingen   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°Rastignac, Laure-Rose and Agathe de   Lost Illusions   The Member for Arcis

°°°°Rastignac, Monseigneur Gabriel de   The Country Parson   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Restaud, Comte de   Gobseck

°°°°Restaud, Comtesse Anastasie de   Gobseck

°°°°Selerier   Scenes from a Courtesan's Life

°°°°Taillefer, Jean-Frederic   The Firm of Nucingen   The Magic Skin   The Red Inn

°°°°Taillefer, Victorine   The Red Inn

°°°°Therese   A Daughter of Eve

°°°°Tissot, Pierre-Francois   A Prince of Bohemia

°°°°Trailles, Comte Maxime de   Cesar Birotteau   Gobseck   Ursule Mirouet   A Man of Business   The Member for Arcis   The Secrets of a Princess   Cousin Betty   The Member for Arcis   Beatrix   The Unconscious Humorists

°°°°End